




















































Hansard: April 02, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 25A  MONDAY, APRIL 2, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 895 

 April 2, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would request leave of the Assembly to make an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave of the Assembly 

to make an extended invitation . . . introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

week of March 30 to April 5th has been officially proclaimed as 

Pink Revolution Anti-bullying Week in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Pink Shirt Day is coordinated through the Red 

Cross, another initiative. It’s also supported by the Ministry of 

Education and the Government of Saskatchewan. Pink 

Revolution Week kicked off in mid-March, and there was a flag 

raising ceremony on the 1st of April, over the weekend. 

 

It is supported by many organizations including the 

Anti-bullying Network, which is comprised of the Boys and 

Girls Club, the Avenue Community Centre, Youth Launch, 

restorative action program, the Saskatoon Police Service, 

Affinity Credit Union, and many, if not most, local school 

divisions. 

 

The Ministry of Education’s supporting anti-bullying efforts by 

working with education partners to develop a provincial 

anti-bullying strategy, a strategy that was pioneered under the 

previous administration. Work continues on that, Mr. Speaker. 

They encourage school divisions to work with community 

organizations on anti-bullying initiatives. They provide 

financial assistance to programs like the Kids Help Phone to 

ensure youth across Saskatchewan have access to professional 

counselling services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, all the year 

through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And today, helping us remember exactly what anti-bullying 

initiatives are all about and helping to commemorate 

anti-bullying awareness in the province, is a group of students 

that you can easily see in your gallery from their great pink 

T-shirts, Mr. Speaker. They are from M.J. Coldwell School. 

There’s a grade 6/7 class — the teacher is Ms. Dryburgh; a 

grade 7/8 class with Mrs. Bird as the teacher. We welcome the 

teacher assistants, Ms. Keewatin and Mrs. Smith. And the 

principal of the school is Mrs. Sherri Beattie. 

 

Also in the gallery are representatives of the Red Cross: Cindy 

Fuchs, the provincial director; Donna Brewster, Luc Mullinder, 

Tim Johnson, Norm Jakubowski, Diane Francoeur. Colleagues 

in the legislature, we want to express our thanks to these 

students and to the leaders of the Red Cross for reminding us of 

the importance of anti-bullying initiatives and awareness. Mr. 

Speaker, we also want to ensure that all members of this 

Assembly warmly welcome these guests to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t say how pleased I 

am to join in on the introduction here today and welcome these 

community leaders, these students, teachers, principals, Ms. 

Beattie, that have joined us here today to launch Anti-bullying 

Week here in Saskatchewan, to join in the Pink Revolution that 

certainly is driven across Canada and across North America. 

Pink Shirt Day, Day of Pink — all these important days and 

activities that bring such important recognition to something, 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that we should be working towards 

every day of the year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you’ll notice I see these wonderful pink 

shirts up through the Assembly. I see a little bit of pink through 

the Assembly and through the Chamber here today. I noticed 

the official opposition doesn’t have very much pink on today, 

Mr. Speaker. We weren’t notified or aware of the pink shirts 

coming into the Assembly here today. But what I can say, Mr. 

Speaker, is that in our hearts and in our beliefs, we wear pink 

every single day of the year, and stand for the important cause 

of bridging gaps, broader understanding, bringing around some 

learning, and that certainly we’re proud to join with government 

here today to recognize such an important day, such an 

important week, and to work towards that greater understanding 

all across our society and in our classrooms. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I should say that in the classrooms all across 

Saskatchewan is where I’m most encouraged about the changes 

in society, and it’s this very generation before us here today, 

Mr. Speaker, that I think have made the greatest strides through 

acceptance, understanding, and in fact celebration of diversity. 

 

So we’re pleased to join with government here today and to 

recognize this important work. I welcome these students from 

Coldwell, the students, the community leaders, teachers, 

parents, Principal Beattie, that are here today. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to rise today and introduce through you to the 

House four guests that are here today. One of them is Gavin 

Semple who is no stranger to the people in our province, a 

well-known businessman with business operations across 

Western Canada. He is joined by three legal colleagues. They 

are the Hon. Michel Bastarache, Peter Gall, and Lauren Wihak 

from the Heenan Blaikie law firm. They are seated in the 

gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise that the Hon. Michel Bastarache 

joined the firm’s Ottawa office in 2008 as counsel in the 

litigation group. For more than a decade, Mr. Bastarache served 

as justice of the Supreme Court of Canada, rendering rulings 

that spanned a spectrum of issues as well as a large number of 

cases related to the application of the Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. Preceding his appointment to the 

Supreme Court, Mr. Bastarache served as a judge of the Court 

of Appeal of New Brunswick. Prior to his judicial 

appointments, he was very involved in the academic, 

government, business, and legal communities. Mr. Bastarache 

has been awarded numerous honorary degrees and awards in 

recognition of his outstanding leadership in private practice, 

legal education, and public service. 

 

Peter Gall is a partner and founder of the Heenan Blaikie office 

in Vancouver. He is well known for many areas of expertise 

with a focus on labour and employment. Peter is known as a 

leader and has been recognized by his peers as one of the 

country’s best labour and employment lawyers. He has acted as 

counsel before various administrative tribunals and appeared 

before the Supreme Court of Canada on numerous occasions. 

Peter is also a professor at both Stanford and the University of 

Victoria law school and is a regular guest speaker in Canada 

and abroad. 

 

Lauren Wihak joined the Heenan Blaikie litigation group in 

Ottawa in 2010 as an associate. She has Saskatchewan roots. 

She has clerked for the Supreme Court of Canada, but more 

importantly, in my view, served, articled with the Court of 

Appeal with Justice Jackson in Saskatchewan. She grew up in 

Melville and in Regina, I think LeBoldus — is that correct? — 

and spent a summer working at the constitutional law branch of 

the Saskatchewan Ministry of Justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it brings me great pride to have these three guests 

here today. Mr. Speaker, I have told them that all members of 

the Assembly will be on their best behaviour today. There will 

not be any heckling or any difficult questions. So I would ask 

that all members join me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It also gives me great 

pleasure to welcome these guests to you and through you to the 

Assembly, particularly Mr. Semple and Mr. Bastarache, Mr. 

Gall, and Ms. Wihak. Certainly with Mr. Bastarache I’ve read 

many of his judgments and have great respect for the work he 

did in the Supreme Court of Canada. So it’s an honour to have 

him here today in our Assembly. 

 

And I agree with the Justice minister that, you know, heckling 

will certainly not be something we would dare approach today, 

particularly for them, but also for the students that are here in 

the Assembly. 

 

So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And with the members 

of the opposition, I also want to rise and welcome these guests 

to our Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly today, 

I’d like to introduce to you, in your gallery, an honoured guest 

today from the Government of Mauritius. The Hon. Shakeel 

Mohamed, the Mauritian Minister of Labour, Industrial 

Relations and Employment, has joined the House today. He and 

an entourage of colleagues are in the province of Saskatchewan 

investigating the opportunities of mutual benefit that exist 

between the island state of Mauritius and the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I think from our luncheon conversation, 

he’s fairly impressed with what he’s seen already. And we’d 

like to welcome him here and wish him much success in his 

endeavours while they visit the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Accompanying the minister are Mr. and Mrs. Denis and 

Monique Prud’homme. They’re the owners of an immigration 

recruiting and consulting business. I met Denis a number of 

years ago when he was an integral part of the Saskatchewan 

truckers’ association, and he’s moved from trucking to 

immigration, and I think he’s enjoying this job even more. 

 

And also with them today is Denis Simard, the executive 

director of L’Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise. This 

organization represents the Fransaskois community in the 

province of Saskatchewan. They’re working closely with the 

Mauritian delegation. The people of Mauritius speak English 

and French and a multitude of other languages, as I’ve learned. 

And I think that there’s a symbiotic and mutually beneficial 

opportunity here for our French community and the citizens of 

Mauritius. Would all members of the House please warmly 

welcome this group of individuals in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Je voudrais dire 

une grande bienvenue à l’Assemblée législative [Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. I would like to say a big welcome to the 

Legislative Assembly] to the delegation from Mauritius, 

particularly Minister Shakeel Mohamed. It is good to see you 

here. We welcome the opportunity to return the visit perhaps 

sometime to Mauritius soon. 

 

As well I want to congratulate the Prud’hommes on the work 

that they’re doing to bring people to Saskatchewan — and to 

keep on trucking, as might be said — and as well to Monsieur 

Simard and all the work that is done out of L’Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise, the good work that is done. 

Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I am pleased 

to introduce I think one of my two best pieces of work. That 

would be my daughter Hennessey Chartier-Ford who is in your 

gallery today. 

 

Hennessey is a grade 8 student at l’École française de 

Saskatoon and is here just . . . She hasn’t been here in a couple 

of years and thought it was time to come and spend a day here 

seeing what happens again in this Legislative Assembly. And 

Hennessey is a great student. She’s a Latin dancer. She is a 

great public speaker. But mostly she is a pretty awesome 

daughter. So with that I ask everybody to welcome Hennessey 

to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today presenting a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. We know in 

the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe 

was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was working 

at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

We know though that positive statistics show that convenience 

store and gas station robberies are down by one-third since 

1999, largely due to increased safety practices, including two 

people working together on late-night shifts. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon, many of whom are actually late-night workers — in 

fact one was actually held up just two weeks ago. I do so 

present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan people as it relates 

to education in the province of Saskatchewan. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices; that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector; 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students, for today and for our future. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhoods of Dundonald and Hampton Village, and it’s 

about the need for a new school in the area: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern for our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation 

and regulations with respect to trapping regulations, 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signed by many trappers of northern Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Pink Revolution Anti-Bullying Week 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy 

to rise today to recognize anti-discrimination and anti-bullying 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

efforts in Saskatchewan. The Minister of Education has 

proclaimed the week of March 30th to April 5th as Pink 

Revolution Anti-bullying Week. This week is a 

Saskatchewan-made initiative coordinated by the Anti-bullying 

Network, a dedicated group consisting of the Boys and Girls 

Club of Saskatoon, the Avenue Community Centre, Youth 

Launch, the restorative action program, Saskatoon Police 

Service, Affinity Credit Union, and local school divisions. 

 

We believe that all students have the right to a caring, 

respectful, and safe school environment where bullying is not 

tolerated. And because of that, Mr. Speaker, we have worked 

with our education partners — teachers, directors of education, 

and other partners — to develop an anti-bullying strategy for 

the province. We’ve also encouraged them to work with 

community partners like the Red Cross and the Anti-bullying 

Network to take action against discrimination in their schools 

and communities. It’s through initiatives like Pink Revolution 

and Pink Shirt Day that we all have an opportunity to raise 

awareness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to encourage everyone to show their 

support for diversity by wearing pink on April 4th, Pink Shirt 

Day, and by participating in similar anti-bullying events. I 

sincerely thank those individuals who have the courage to stand 

up and speak out against bullying and discrimination. Together 

we can make a difference. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

World Autism Day 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, today is the fifth annual World 

Autism Day. Iconic landmarks around the world like the CN 

[Canadian National] Tower, Niagara Falls, the Empire State 

Building in New York, the Sydney Opera House in Australia, 

and the Christ the Redeemer statue in Brazil will be lit up in 

blue to raise awareness about this growing public health 

concern. 

 

The US [United States] Centers for Disease Control and 

Prevention released new research just last week that shows 1 in 

88 children now has autism or a related disorder. That is 

compared to 1 in 155 in 2002. Some of that increase is being 

attributed to better diagnosis, but researchers attribute a sizeable 

portion to a significantly higher incidence. As the CDC 

[Centers for Disease Control] director said, “One thing the data 

tells us with certainty, there are many children and families who 

need help.” 

 

Autism Canada quite rightly says that autism is a public health 

emergency that requires governments to work together and to 

make investments in three critical areas: prevention, treatment, 

and support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that by the next Autism Awareness Day not 

only could our own legislature be lit up in blue but, more 

importantly, that we as a province will have made great strides 

in helping those affected by autism spectrum disorders. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Autism Services 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

acknowledge that today, April 2nd, is World Autism Awareness 

Day. It is one of three official disease-specific days recognized 

by the United Nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know individuals with autism require unique 

supports to ensure their well-being and successful community 

inclusion. Our government recognizes the importance of 

supporting autism intervention services. Since ’07 there have 

been successive budget increases to support enhanced autism 

interventions. In the new fiscal year, we are investing a total of 

$7.6 million in autism supports, including 1 million additional 

funding. This added funding will allow for more intensive 

therapeutic programming for pre-school children who require 

increased intensity of treatment to support their learning needs. 

In addition this funding supports specialized autism intervention 

training for professionals working in the health and education 

systems. 

 

Our government works closely with community partners to 

build comprehensive autism service systems in Saskatchewan. 

These disabilities have a profound impact on our society. We all 

have opportunities to raise awareness, to provide support, and to 

be involved in addressing autism. 

 

On this very special day, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to give 

my gratitude to Canadian researchers who are playing leading 

roles in many global research initiatives to help understand the 

causes and develop better treatments for autism. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon’s Sheepdogs Win Juno Awards 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Music fans in 

Saskatchewan are celebrating today as our favourite Saskatoon 

rock and roll revival band, the Sheepdogs, won big at the Junos 

this weekend. Beating the likes of such well-known acts as 

Nickelback, Johnny Reid, Hedley, and City and Colour, the 

Sheepdogs made a big Juno splash by taking home the awards 

for the best single, best new group, and best rock album for the 

recording entitled Learn & Burn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while all Saskatchewan residents have reason to 

cheer the success of this homegrown talent, I’m especially 

proud of the fact that the Sheepdogs’ drummer, Sam Corbett, 

grew up in my constituency, Saskatoon Nutana. And I extend 

congratulations to Sam and his sheep dad, Sheldon, and his 

sheep mom, Margi. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sheepdogs’ Juno haul is not the only reason to 

be celebrating the band’s impact on the music scene here and 

abroad. Not only did they clean up at the Junos, but they very 

recently picked up four trophies at Toronto’s Independent 

Music Awards on March 24th. I could say they were also 

featured as an emerging band at the Ness Creek Music Festival 

in 2007 and 2010, and both performances were fantastic. 

 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

It goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a phenomenal 

year for this great Saskatchewan band. I would like to take this 

opportunity to congratulate all members of the band, Ewan 

Currie on vocals and guitar, Leot Hanson also on guitar, Ryan 

Gullen on base, and Sam Corbett on drums. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

all my legislative colleagues to join with me in applauding the 

success of the Sheepdogs and to continue to support all of our 

province’s emerging musicians, cinematographers, and artists. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

2012 Juno Awards 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night was 

Canada’s biggest night in music. Ottawa hosted the 41st Juno 

Awards, honouring Canadian music and putting our Canadian 

artists in a well-deserved spotlight. 

 

Juno watchers saw the performances by Nickelback, Simple 

Plan, and Feist and many more, while 81-year-old Captain Kirk, 

also known as William Shatner, kept things fun and moving 

along smoothly. Shatner cracked jokes and performed some 

classic Canadian tunes with three backing musicians. 

 

Toronto singer, Feist, won the Artist of the Year, beating out 

the likes of City and Colour and Michael Bublé for the top 

award. Saskatoon’s favourite bar band, the Sheepdogs, were the 

big winners, taking home Single of the Year honours, New 

Group of the Year, and Rock Album of the Year. 

 

The Junos have a history of honouring iconic Canadian groups 

from the days of Gordon Lightfoot, Neil Young, and 

Lighthouse through the decades, of A Foot in Cold Water, 

Leonard Cohen, Loverboy, and of course The Parachute Club. 

Blue Rodeo was this year’s inductees into the hall of fame and 

they didn’t disappoint, with a showcase performance featuring 

Sarah McLachlan. 

 

Congratulations to all winners and a special congratulations to 

Saskatoon’s Sheepdogs for their Juno win as well as Deep Dark 

Woods and Donny Parenteau for their Juno nominations. I 

know the Regina Juno committee is looking forward to hosting 

the Junos in 2013. Best of luck topping Saskatoon in 2007. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Sod-Turning for Group Home 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in the House to talk about a very exciting event happening later 

this afternoon in Melfort. The Government of Saskatchewan 

and Plus Industries are turning the sod on a brand new group 

home for people with intellectual disabilities. The government 

is providing $400,000 in one-time capital funding, $481,000 in 

annual operational funding, and over $32,000 on an annual 

basis towards the mortgage costs of the new facility. 

 

In addition, Sask Housing is contributing $137,900 to this 

project through the Summit Action Fund. This money will go 

towards the development of four self-contained basement 

apartments for low-income residents. When completed, this 

new residence will provide Plus Industries with the capacity and 

program staff to expand programming and continue to support 

up to seven individuals from the Community Living wait-list. 

 

This investment builds on the government’s four-year 

commitment to eliminate the wait-list of 440 Saskatchewan 

people with intellectual disabilities who require programs and 

services by 2012-13. I’m pleased to report that we are well on 

our way to meeting this commitment. Services for 373 people, 

or 85 per cent of the wait-list, are already in place across the 

province, and by this time next year we should have no wait-list 

at all. 

 

This new facility will ensure that our most vulnerable citizens 

continue to receive the services they require in the community 

and help make Saskatchewan the best place to live in Canada 

for people with disabilities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Change of Command Ceremonies in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Saturday was a 

military day of celebration in Moose Jaw, as two change of 

command ceremonies took place which I was honoured to 

attend along with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow and 

the member from Wood River. 

 

At 15 Wing, retired Brigadier General Jim Hunter took over the 

command as honorary colonel from Yvette Moore. Yvette 

Moore is a renowned Saskatchewan artist who represented the 

wing in this capacity for the past four years. Her experience as a 

Moose Jaw business person and a strong supporter of the wing 

made her an excellent promoter of the Forces. 

 

The new honorary colonel, Jim Hunter, has a long military 

history and has served as wing commander for 15 Wing from 

1995 to 1998. He is currently the president and CEO [chief 

executive officer] of the Regina Airport Authority. 

 

On Saturday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Dragoons, a primary reserve regiment for the Canadian Forces, 

also performed a change-of-command celebration as Major 

Brad Hrycyna retired after serving as commanding officer since 

2003. The celebration was complete with the 

change-of-command parade and an inspection by Saskatchewan 

Lieutenant Governor, Her Honour Vaughn Solomon Schofield. 

Taking over from Major Hrycyna is Major Chris Hunter, who 

has served with the Saskatchewan Dragoons for the past 16 

years. 

 

Thank you for retiring Colonel Yvette Moore and Major Brad 

Hrycyna after their years of service, and congratulations to 

retired Brigadier General Jim Hunter and Major Chris Hunter as 

they take over their new commands in serving the Canadian 

Armed Forces. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

Federal Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the federal 

budget was released. The budget leaves more questions than 

answers as to how it benefits Saskatchewan families. Budgets 

are about priorities. Saskatchewan people want to know what 

their Premier did in advance to represent Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, how did this Premier advocate with the Prime Minister 

prior to the federal budget, and what was the Premier’s list of 

priorities for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

the member for the question. Obviously we’re still going 

through the details of the federal budget presented last week in 

Ottawa as to its impact on the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There were some specific things that we have been raising with 

the federal government in the run-up to the federal budget. 

More to the point to the member’s question, we asked the 

federal government to make some changes to employment 

insurance to improve the incentives for mobility so that people 

living in parts of the country where there was a large, 

unfortunately a large dislocation economically, a lot of people 

unemployed, that there be more incentive for them to move to 

places where there are a lot of jobs. We see an indication that 

those changes are coming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also raised the importance of one project, one 

environmental assessment that we would have rigorous 

environmental assessment, but not two of them. There is 

progress in the budget on that front as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve also been asking the federal government to start to 

increase funding for on-reserve education. We note there is 

some progress in the federal budget in this regard. We welcome 

that, and we will always work for more. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, both the Premier and the 

Minister of Finance said they were pleased with the federal 

budget. Many across Saskatchewan don’t agree, Mr. Speaker. 

They fail to see the benefits of a federal government that is 

off-loading millions of dollars onto the province that will result 

in increased costs to Saskatchewan families. Can the Premier be 

clear how a federal budget that increases costs to Saskatchewan 

families is good for our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

the Premier has indicated, you know, there is significant 

analysis that has to go on. We expressed our concern with some 

of the changes that are projected for the Ministry of Agriculture 

and some of the concerns that we have. Minister Ritz has 

indicated that those are not going to affect the Saskatchewan 

agricultural programs, and we’re pleased to hear that. 

 

There’s a continued monitoring of what’s going on with regards 

to the budget and Saskatchewan. Long-term plans need to be 

looked at because of the changes, projected changes many, 

many years from now in the eligibility for old age security. So 

those are all things that the Ministry of Finance and other 

ministers themselves from their own responsibilities will be 

looking at as we move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that this was a 

tough budget for Saskatchewan people and this government 

chose to support it. It’s tough on front-line services with over 

19,000 jobs being cut nationwide. It’s tough on health care for 

patients. It’s tough on the next generation of retirees with OAS 

[old age security] cuts, those working hard today and certainly 

deserving of a dignified retirement, this at a time when private 

and public pensions are being dismantled, and it’s tough on 

taxpayers with off-loading costs in so many areas. 

 

The Premier gave this budget a thumbs-up. Mr. Speaker, why 

isn’t he standing up for Saskatchewan people? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as any budget, there are always impacts on what 

will happen in Saskatchewan. And the Premier has highlighted 

a number of key areas that we were concerned with, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I, as Finance Minister in our last meeting with Minister 

Flaherty, was pleased to hear from him that we were going to 

continue with the commitment from the federal government on 

health transfers, social transfers. 

 

And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, as we know, in the last 

couple of years we’ve had serious problems with moisture and 

flooding and all of the additional costs. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a commitment in fact from the federal government that 

they’re going to continue with the cost sharing in many of the 

programs, whether they be related to the provincial disaster 

assistance program, PDAP, or whether they’re related directly 

to highways, agriculture, Mr. Speaker. So all of those 

commitments have been kept by the federal government. As the 

Premier’s indicated, we’re pleased with some of the initiatives 

that have been outlined, especially in the area of Aboriginal 

education. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to assess the federal 

budget and how it will impact us not only in the short term but 

in the long term as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for First Nations Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear here today again 

that it’s more excuses for the federal government and the failure 

of standing up for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I’ll shift my focus to education. Shamefully each Aboriginal 

student on reserve receives thousands of dollars less per year in 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

education funding than off-reserve students, massive 

underfunding. It’s a matter of fairness and the consequences are 

real. The grade 12 graduation rate for Aboriginal students on 

reserve is less than 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The federal budget 

came down Thursday. To the minister: did the Aboriginal 

education funding meeting her government’s expectations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

the member opposite for that question because we have had this 

a few days ago, and we are in total agreement that the federal 

government needs to do more for on-reserve education. I am not 

aware yet of how much of the additional dollars that the federal 

government announced is flowing to Saskatchewan, so right 

now we don’t know the calculation of how that will affect our 

individual on-reserve schools. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So, Mr. Speaker, they don’t know the 

numbers, but they think it’s a pretty good deal, Mr. Speaker. 

The funding provided by the federal government in last 

Thursday’s budget sounds like a lot of money, but only a small 

fraction of that comes to Saskatchewan, and it’s nowhere close 

to providing fair or equal funding. To quote Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations Vice-chief Simon Bird, “It’s a 

drop in the bucket.” 

 

Our underfunded First Nations schools struggle to retain 

teachers. Often they’re forced to use outdated technology and 

resources. It’s not right. It’s not fair. Aboriginal students on 

reserve need more than a task force that is going to present 

recommendations next year. They need meaningful action. This 

is a matter of utmost importance. Why is this minister and this 

government failing to stand up for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again 

I’m going to say that this government has recognized that there 

is a gap in the funding that goes to on-reserve schools. We have 

been . . . A number of us actually have talked to our federal 

counterparts and raised concerns on this particular issue, but we 

also recognize that prior there wasn’t a lot being done by our 

province. And we are changing that as well, Mr. Speaker, 

because we have put a lot of money, more money than the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] did, into early childhood intervention 

programs, which is extremely important for the early learners. 

We have increased our pre-kindergarten programs, many of 

them are for First Nations students — that is, our 3- and 

4-year-olds. We’ve increased that over the NDP by 85 per cent. 

 

This budget we are committing to the summer literacy camps to 

engage our northern students so there is no summer reading 

loss. We have put money towards the individual achievement 

accounts. We have put $3.8 million into First Nations and Métis 

Education Achievement Fund. Mr. Speaker, the province is 

putting a lot of money into First Nations education, along with 

our task force. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not the spin that 

Saskatchewan people are looking for. They’re looking for 

solutions in addressing the inequity that exists. Education opens 

doors and provides opportunities. For many, education can be a 

ticket out of poverty. Eric Howe reports that Saskatchewan 

could reap $90 billion in benefits and savings through health, 

justice, and social services, and another $80 billion in economic 

growth by addressing the Aboriginal education gap. 

 

On this, John Hopkins, CEO of the Regina Chamber of 

Commerce said, “It’s absolutely crucial for the long-term 

viability of Saskatchewan, there’s no question, and education is 

the key.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, deliberate underfunding of education for 

Saskatchewan First Nations, Saskatchewan citizens, is patently 

unfair, entirely unacceptable, and has direct negative 

consequences. Why does this minister accept this treatment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I 

need to say that the member opposite and this government agree 

that the federal government should be putting more money to 

our reserve schools, and we feel it’s very important to 

Saskatchewan and our First Nations students. 

 

We don’t know how much of the additional money that the 

federal government has announced will go to Saskatchewan, 

and I know that Vice-chief Simon Bird has raised some 

concerns of the amount. But I want to remind the member 

opposite that although he has criticized what we’re doing as a 

province, Vice-chief Simon Bird is a signatory to our task force 

initiative and quite positive about what this task force will be 

able to do, first to help identify First Nation’s programs that 

will help our First Nations students achieve better. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last week when speaking 

about First Nations people, the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations said, “We will ensure that education and 

employment outcomes are funded.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they aren’t. The federal budget provided 

only a drop in the bucket of what is needed. Massive 

underfunding continues. Mr. Speaker, not one, but two reports 

within the last few months have stressed the crisis and the 

immediate need to address the Aboriginal education gap. 

Shannen’s dream supports this work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Fair funding for education is no small part of ensuring brighter 

futures. Why won’t this government stand up for Saskatchewan 

students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee the 

member opposite, as far as standing up for Aboriginal students, 

there is no hesitation whatsoever from members on this side of 

the House. 

 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not only talk, it’s action. When we were 

analyzing the problem, we not only came up with a solution 

from the government side, we went to the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations], we talked to their leaders, and 

talked about the concerns that we shared. What we did last 

week, Mr. Speaker, is share in the signing of a task force, not 

only with First Nations leadership, but with the youth of 

Saskatchewan as well. One hundred First Nations youth 

witnessed that and are working towards betterment in this 

regard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Funding for Academic Health Sciences Building 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 

are now quite aware of many of the cuts and fee increases that 

are associated with the recent provincial budget. What we don’t 

know, Mr. Speaker, what some of the negative effects will be in 

the months ahead. In Saturday’s StarPhoenix, it was reported 

that in the health region for example there will be about $30 

million that they will have to come up with. We know this will 

have an effect on cuts and service delivery in the health region. 

 

It’s a similar situation on our university campuses, Mr. Speaker, 

with $100 million of debt being pushed onto the University of 

Saskatchewan alone. My question to the Minister of Advanced 

Education: what projects at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] are being funded by the $100 million of a debt 

that he is forcing the university to assume? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 

the context is important here, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve seen 

under the leadership of this government is $3.5 billion invested 

in our post-secondary system, Mr. Speaker, since we were first 

elected in 2007. Mr. Speaker, regarding the notion of debt 

financing, the members opposite know this very well because 

they came up with the mechanism in 2003, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

when this began. 

 

As far as the majority of this, Mr. Speaker, as we enter the final 

stages and phases of the Academic Health Science building, Mr. 

Speaker, so what we see is the majority of that is going to go 

towards the academic health science program, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s a program that was started, supposed to be started, 

certainly announced in 2003. It was supposed to cost about 

$120 million. But since they didn’t stage the photo op until 

2007, Mr. Speaker, we know that we’ve invested more than 

$200 million. And as the final stages and phases of this project 

continue, Mr. Speaker, it makes sense to put some additional 

resource in the university but also cover the rest off through 

debt financing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister stated that $72 

million, I believe he stated this, $72 million of debt is being 

forced on the university for the Health Sciences Building. Until 

this change, Mr. Speaker, the province had been providing the 

funding for this important project. A government news release 

in, I believe it was, September before the provincial election 

said that the government was committed to spending over $300 

million on this project. The budget documents recently tabled in 

this Assembly said that to date $215.6 million had been 

provided by the province. But now the change is, Mr. Speaker, 

that the university is forced to look for financing for the $72 

million that we know of. 

 

My question to the minister: has his government reneged on 

their funding pledge to the Academic Health Sciences building 

at the U of S? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this government has made 

that project a specific priority. It’s demonstrated, Mr. Speaker 

. . . Because while the members opposite spoke about it and 

bragged about it, they didn’t do anything about it even though, 

Mr. Speaker, it was integrally tied to the fate and future of the 

College of Medicine. So, Mr. Speaker, we made sure that we 

put dollars on the table. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, evidence of that today — both D wings and 

E wings well under construction, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what we’ve done as we enter these latter phases of that 

project, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that there are real dollars on 

the table and that the university also has options regarding debt 

financing, Mr. Speaker. That’s prudent and practical. In no way 

does it indicate any lack of commitment on this side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. What it does do is reflect and reinforce 

that where the other members opposite would only speak, we’re 

acting. We’re getting it done. We’re securing the fate and future 

of the College of Medicine for the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question was not whether the 

minister thinks that he is doing a good job on this file because 

most members of the Assembly know what the minister thinks 

on that matter. My question was specifically on the issue of 

funding. There was over a 300 million-plus commitment made 

by members opposite in September in a news release at a photo 

op on campus. The budget documents say 215 million have 

been provided. Now, Mr. Speaker, we learn that the university 

is told to go and get financing for $72 million. 

 

My question that I just asked to the minister, but I didn’t hear a 

response, to the minister: have they reneged on the funding 

commitment for the Health Sciences building? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, on September 

1st, 2007, Mr. Speaker, there was a progress report on how the 

College of Medicine was doing. And, Mr. Speaker, it was just 

quietly put out, Mr. Speaker, and it said this: in some key areas 

there was non-compliance, areas regarding curriculum 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

management, availability of faculty, Mr. Speaker, as well as, 

Mr. Speaker, the actual state and fate of the Academic Health 

Sciences building, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government stands full square behind the University of 

Saskatchewan, behind the College of Medicine, behind D and E 

wings, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been able to demonstrate that, Mr. 

Speaker. Because while the members opposite were rich in 

rhetoric, we’ve been able to ensure that these projects have 

moved forward, Mr. Speaker, therefore better securing the 

future of the College of Medicine. And that means greater 

services for people right across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite were caught with rich 

rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. We’ve just focused on real results for the 

people of the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Again, Mr. Speaker, in the response there was 

no comment about a possible change of position with respect to 

their funding commitment for this project. Forcing $100 million 

of debt onto the University of Saskatchewan’s books has major 

implications for the U of S as well as its students. Not only, Mr. 

Speaker, could it come close to maxing out the borrowing 

capacity of the university, but it could put more financial strain 

on the institution in general. 

 

This will be felt by faculty and staff and, Mr. Speaker, it most 

certainly could be felt by students when we look at tuition 

levels in the years ahead. How this debt, Mr. Speaker, for the 

100 million — the 72 million for the Health Sciences building, 

about 100 all together — how this debt is serviced and paid will 

have a direct effect on the education delivered by faculty and 

the tuition paid by students. 

 

So my question to the minister: in forcing the university to take 

on this debt, specifically with the $72 million for the Health 

Sciences building, does the minister commit to paying the 

principal and the interest for the total amount that is being 

borrowed? That is my question to the minister. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, let me quote the president of 

the University of Saskatchewan in an August 17th letter, Mr. 

Speaker, and it says this: “A decade ago, our College of 

Medicine faced existential issues regarding resources, faculty, 

and facilities, [Mr. Speaker]. The Government of Saskatchewan 

has done its part.” That is this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the member opposite and to all his colleagues and to people 

right across the province, I say our track record is rock-solid — 

$3.5 billion in post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. We see 

that manifest itself in new facilities, renewed facilities, Mr. 

Speaker. We also see real investments for our students, whether 

it’s the graduate retention program, whether it’s the new 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we back the University of Saskatchewan. We back 

Saskatchewan students. We back Saskatchewan scholars. And, 

Mr. Speaker, our track record speaks for itself. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy that the minister is 

willing to wear a Huskies bunny hug. That is a good thing. 

 

My question though is specifically around the funding and the 

payment of this debt. For the $72 million for the Health 

Sciences building, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard different things from 

the post-secondary community. I’ve heard some individuals say 

that the ministry is pledging to pay the principal and the interest 

on the 72 million. I’ve heard other people say that this is not the 

case. And it has major . . . And it is a very significant question. 

If, Mr. Speaker, the province is paying the principal and the 

interest on the $72 million, then we must ask why that debt is 

sitting on the university’s books and not the province’s. If, Mr. 

Speaker, they are not paying that, there will be even greater 

implications for tuition and the delivery of education in the 

province. 

 

My question to the minister: going through the budget 

document, I do not see an explicit statement about this $100 

million of debt. My question to the minister: why is he hiding 

this debt? Will he be upfront with the people of Saskatchewan 

today and clearly state whether, on the 72 million, he’ll be 

paying the principal and the interest, the province will? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as this government came 

into power in 2007, we saw that there had been a number of 

debts hidden, Mr. Speaker. They were infrastructure deficits, 

Mr. Speaker, and debts to the people of this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when it came to the College of Medicine, we saw that 

the College of Medicine had gone on probation, had been lifted 

off probation but, Mr. Speaker, it hadn’t been given a clean bill 

of health. 

 

There were a number of conditions that had to be met, Mr. 

Speaker. And the members opposite know this. Mr. Speaker, 

that included, Mr. Speaker, in September of 2007, just before 

that election, there was a report that quietly came out and it said 

there are a number of areas of non-compliance that still require 

attention and action. These included curriculum management, 

the availability of faculty, and of course the Academic Health 

Sciences buildings themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we did was move forward, and we continue to move 

forward, Mr. Speaker. You can see it and the people of this 

province can see it with the construction that’s under way, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We continue to support the University of Saskatchewan, the 

College of Medicine, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

continue that focus. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

Federal Crime Legislation 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The quest for a 

straight answer continues. We’ll take the quest on down to the 

Corrections ministry. Before the budget, we had the federal 

Conservative crime Bill passed, Bill C-10. How much, now that 

the provincial budget has come out and now that the federal 

budget has come out, how much is the federal Conservative 

crime Bill going to cost the people of Saskatchewan? Can the 

Minister of Corrections answer that for us? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for the question. I can advise the House and I can 

advise the citizens of the province, it is impossible to say with 

any accurate degree of certainty what the actual cost of the 

effect of Bill C-10 is going to be. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the corrections facilities that we 

have in our province are currently at or above capacity, and 

there is work going on in the Ministry of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to look at what is necessary for expansion. 

As part of that process, Mr. Speaker, I can indicate that they 

will also be looking at what the impact of this legislation is 

going to have. 

 

The effect of this legislation will be to make our streets safer. 

The things that are in this legislation were requested and asked 

for by virtually all of the provinces. They include steps and 

measures that will be taken to ensure that child sexual predators 

are removed from our streets, that people that traffic in drugs at 

or near our schools are removed from our streets. And the focus 

must be in that area, on public safety. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we will work within the Ministry 

of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing to ensure that we 

have good and adequate programs for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question please. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

interesting to hear the minister now and the minister, of course, 

before the budget. And it’s hard to get a straight answer out of 

that minister though we know he had advice for, I assume, 

about the importance of knowing what the cost of the Bill is. 

We couldn’t get an answer out of the Minister of Corrections. 

The Minister of Justice is continuing on with the bafflegab, so 

we’ll try the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On budget day we had a technical briefing as the official 

opposition. And we asked the officials at about a quarter to ten, 

what the anticipated impact of Bill C-10 would be on the 

provincial corrections system. The top Finance minister, the top 

Finance official in the province of Saskatchewan, the deputy 

minister of Finance stated that they anticipate the average daily 

count in Saskatchewan correction system goes from 1,400 to 

1,600. So an increase of 200 inmates per day in the province of 

Saskatchewan. If they can calculate how many more inmates 

there are going to be in the correctional system, Mr. Speaker, 

how much is this going to cost the people of Saskatchewan? 

And if they can’t answer that, why not? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we can pick numbers out 

of the air as long as we choose to. The reality of it is, you have 

no idea. You have absolutely no idea what judges are going to 

give probation, are going to either use other non-custodial 

measures, Mr. Speaker. The differences are very great and we 

don’t know what they are. No one does know what they are. We 

know that there’s going to be an increase, Mr. Speaker. It will 

likely be a significant increase and, Mr. Speaker, I can advise 

you as well that we will look to the federal government for a 

contribution and for them to make an investment in our 

correctional facilities as is needed. 

 

We will work through to try and ensure that we have got a 

precise, measured, proportionate approach to dealing with crime 

in our province. Mr. Speaker, we want to remove child sex 

predators from our streets. We want to deal with drug traffic, 

people that traffic in drugs. We will do our best to ensure that 

we’ve got a safe province. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 

into the debate today on Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is probably 

one of the Bills in front of us in this Legislative Assembly that 

has some pretty profound and, in the opposition’s perspective, 

some negative impact here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The two clauses in Bill No. 36, what does The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act propose to do, Mr. Speaker? Well 

first of all, it adds three politicians to our already current 58 

here in Saskatchewan, so it’s moving the number of politicians 

in Saskatchewan from 58 to 61. The second part of this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, is excluding children under 18 out of the count 

when constituency boundaries are decided. So it’s basically 

leaving people under 18 out of the election boundary count, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think I’d like to talk a little bit first about the first clause, the 

adding three more MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], Mr. Speaker, three more politicians. This is at a cost 

of over one term, Mr. Speaker, millions of dollars. I know when 

we’ve gotten up in this Assembly and said that this Bill will 

cost millions of dollars, we get many people on the opposite 

benches yelling, it’s not millions of dollars. Well I think that the 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

members on the government side of the House perhaps need to 

do a little bit of math — $700,000 over four years, Mr. Speaker, 

is in fact millions of dollars. 

 

And part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, first of all, is that this 

government . . . We’ve seen in this budget that was presented 

just a couple of weeks ago that this government plans to 

continue along its plan of cutting the civil service. So even 

though we have a growing population — and this is the 

government’s argument for increasing the number of MLAs — 

they’re cutting the civil service, Mr. Speaker, the people who 

provide the front-line services to us as citizens. So this 

government wants to cut the number of people providing direct 

services to citizens at the same time adding three more 

politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well in this budget, we also saw this government’s 

willingness to not touch its own, the Premier’s own office, 

Executive Council. So we have a government who plans to 

continue to cut the civil service in this budget alone by about 

500 individuals, but is willing to not touch Executive Council or 

the Premier’s own office. There’s no move, or no movement to 

cut Executive Council, and they also want to add three more 

politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that my colleagues and I and everybody in this 

Assembly undoubtedly spent many, many hours on the 

doorstep. And I’ve had the opportunity in the last two and a half 

years to participate in a by-election, and then following the 

by-election, obviously in the general election in 2011, and have 

knocked on thousands of doors in that time, Mr. Speaker. And 

there was not one single house — not one single house — not a 

single house where people were asking me, could you please 

increase the number of politicians? What we really, really need 

is more politicians. Nobody asked me that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I’ve spoken to my colleagues on this side of the 

House too and nobody’s heard that. So I’m not quite sure where 

this Premier and this government seems to think the notion of 

adding three more politicians comes from. As I said, I have not 

heard from one single citizen asking me the question, please 

add more politicians, Mr. Speaker. In fact the thing that I hear 

in my constituency office is, please improve government 

services. And I can tell you that cutting the civil service this 

year alone by 500 individuals is completely contrary to that, 

improving the public service, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Adding three more politicians as well . . . I know I’ve heard 

members opposite talk about their large constituencies. And you 

know what? We have two members on this side of the House 

who have northern ridings, who probably have the largest 

constituencies in the province geographically, Mr. Speaker. 

And whether we represent a rural or an urban riding, there are 

both challenges and opportunities no matter what constituency 

we represent, and our job is try to figure out the best way of 

serving and representing our constituents. What that might 

involve, Mr. Speaker, in some of these larger ridings, is 

technology. Thanks to SaskTel, we have some great 

telecommunications, the opportunity to connect via the Internet, 

by Skype. We have email. There’s many, many tools that can 

assist us in our jobs in connecting with citizens. So the reality 

is, Mr. Speaker, that there are all different kinds of ways. 

 

I know even in my own constituency, one of my challenges . . . 

I don’t have a large geographic constituency, but I do have a 

constituency where there are people who don’t always feel like 

their interests and needs are reflected in government policy. So 

one of my jobs, Mr. Speaker, is to try to engage people and 

make sure people feel like they’re part of the process. And 

again I don’t have a large geographic constituency, but I have 

other challenges, and my job is to make sure that I find ways to 

engage citizens in my community. And one of them actually 

we’ve talked about in my own constituency office is perhaps, 

outside of the Monday to Friday workday, thinking about doing 

outreach on Saturdays. Obviously we are always out and about 

in the community, but trying to think about ways of formalizing 

that so making sure people have the opportunity to feel heard. 

 

So the argument around the size of the rural constituencies I 

don’t think holds water, Mr. Speaker. As I said, there are two 

members on this side of the House who do a very fine job of 

representing their constituents despite the large geographic 

nature of their constituencies. So three more politicians is not 

something we have heard anybody anywhere ask or request 

that. In fact as I said, people are more interested in getting good 

government, good services from the people providing those 

front lines. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The other part of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is . . . Oh 

actually you know what? I’d like to continue talking about the 

adding three more MLAs. This is something that struck me 

shortly after the election. I’m a mom of two kids. And I know 

life as an elected representative and trying to balance doing a 

really great job for my constituents and still being an okay 

mother is sometimes difficult. But I can tell you, in the last two 

and a half years that I’ve had an opportunity to serve, by no 

means is this a part-time job. One could work seven days a 

week, 12 to 14 hours a day, and still not have all the work done, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I find it funny that, or a bit odd that at one point in the fall 

this Premier, who is asking for the addition of three more 

MLAs, at one point this fall had said that one of his members 

could work part-time. He was willing to let one of his members 

work part-time, Mr. Speaker, which is . . . I can tell you this is 

not a part-time job in the first place. But as I said, it flies 

completely in the face of the government’s narrative that they 

need three more, that they need three more politicians, Mr. 

Speaker. The reality is that we have a Premier who has said that 

people apparently can work part-time at this, which is 

absolutely contrary to what the government is asking for. 

 

A second part of this Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, what it does is in the count to determine who’s 

included in a constituency boundary, it excludes all those under 

18 in the count. So it takes a little snapshot, those people over 

18, one little tiny snapshot, and says those are the people who 

matter and will be used to construct the constituency 

boundaries. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my 14-year-old daughter Hennessey was 

here today in the galleries. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, she 

will be 18 at the time of the next election and will have the 

opportunity to vote. And I think it sends not a very good 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

message to Hennessey or any of her counterparts that they 

shouldn’t and don’t count in the constituency boundary 

makeup, Mr. Speaker. Our job, our goal as elected 

representatives should be to try to engage and encourage young 

people to participate. And how do you engage someone if you 

tell them that they don’t count? 

 

I think the most troubling thing is that that snapshot of time 

where those constituency boundaries are made up is just one 

little, one little snapshot in time, Mr. Speaker. So you could be 

17 at the time of the census and turning 18, and that means you 

don’t count. The reality is there are a whole host of people who 

will not be included in the makeup of the boundaries, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I don’t have the quote in front of me, but I believe at one 

point in time, the Premier had commented that elections are 

about voters, Mr. Speaker. Well the reality is, Mr. Speaker, 

elections are not about voters; they’re about citizens. Because 

there was a time here in this province, less than 100 years ago, 

Mr. Speaker, that there were citizens in this province who 

weren’t voters, but who apparently didn’t count either. We can 

talk about women who didn’t have the opportunity to vote until 

1916, so did that mean that they didn’t count, Mr. Speaker? 

Well I would beg to differ. Or in 1960 I believe, was the year 

that First Nations men and women had the opportunity to vote. 

So prior to 1960, because they weren’t included in the count 

and they weren’t voters, does that mean that the issues that were 

of the day, that had an impact on them, really didn’t have an 

impact on them? No. The reality is, elections are about citizens; 

they are not about voters. Elections are about citizens, and 

making sure people have the supports and the tools and what 

they need to live the best possible life and contribute and reach 

our fullest potential, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So leaving those under 18 outside of the, out of the count is 

completely unacceptable. I know talking to my own daughter 

about this — and she’s interested in politics; obviously she has 

a mother who is front and centre in politics right now — but 

there’s a whole host of young people who we need, we need a 

hook to help them understand that politics is about them. I 

know on the doorstep I’ve heard some people who say, oh, 

politics doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter. And our goal should 

be to try to help people understand that politics does matter, that 

everything that happens in this Legislative Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker, does have an impact on our lives. But when we tell 

people that they don’t count, and that it doesn’t matter, and that 

they don’t matter, we are sending them the message that they 

shouldn’t be engaged or interested in what’s going on, Mr. 

Speaker. So I think that that is hugely, hugely problematic. 

 

I think any group that we . . . Obviously there are many 

constituencies here in Saskatchewan that have a burgeoning 

young population, Mr. Speaker, those under 18 right now there. 

And what will this mean for those constituencies where their 

growth is that, and there’ll be individuals here who it will in 

fact be 18 in the next year, in the next two years, well before the 

next election, Mr. Speaker, and they will not have counted in 

that election? So we think on this side of the House that it’s 

absolutely unacceptable to exclude a group of people, whether 

it’s young people who are under 18, whether it’s women prior 

to 1916, or First Nations people who didn’t have the right to 

vote in Saskatchewan until 1960, Mr. Speaker. The reality is: 

elections aren’t about voters; they’re about citizens, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again I can tell you, in my two and a half years in this job and 

knocking on many, many doors, I have not heard one single 

person ask for more politicians. And, you know, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m not the only one. I know that, on the opposition, we firmly 

believe that we don’t need three more MLAs right now. We 

have one of the highest per capita . . . Saskatchewan has an 

average 17,817 voters per riding compared to 21,198 in 

neighbouring Manitoba. And then compared to Alberta, they 

have 43,919 voters per riding. British Columbia has 51,765 and 

Ontario has 120,110 voters per riding on average, Mr. Speaker. 

So to say that the workload, the load that we have, Mr. Speaker, 

as MLAs who represent individuals, is not too high when we 

look at the case relative across Canada, Mr. Speaker. So I am 

not sure where this government got the idea that we needed 

three more MLAs, but clearly it is not something statistically 

that seems to bear out, nor it is not something that people have 

been asking for at all, Mr. Speaker. Honestly I haven’t had one 

single individual in two and a half years say to me, Danielle, I 

think we need more politicians. That is not something that I 

have heard and I can tell you, neither of my colleagues have 

heard that either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if you’re concerned about a government, Mr. Speaker, who 

is cutting your civil service, in Social Services . . . I happen to 

be the critic of Social Services, Mr. Speaker, and this year, in 

this budget, the government is going to be cutting 100 positions, 

Mr. Speaker. So 100 positions in Social Services, people who 

provide front-line work, the government is willing to carry out 

that cut — that’s 100 people just in Social Services, Mr. 

Speaker; 500 across the piece in government this year — but is 

more than willing and interested in spending millions of dollars 

over a mandate of an MLA to add more politicians. 

 

As I said earlier, it’s interesting when we have gotten up here 

and said, this will cost millions of dollars, there have been 

members on the other side who absolutely . . . The heckles fly 

fast and furious when you say that, Mr. Speaker. But three 

MLAs to the tune of more than $700,000 over the course of 

four years is in fact millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, many 

millions of dollars when people need government services. 

 

In Saskatoon Riversdale, we have the occasion to . . . We have 

lots of casework, Mr. Speaker: people who have many strengths 

but there are also people who have with those strengths some 

challenges. And Social Services, in our experience, has been 

understaffed. We have people who can’t reach, my constituency 

assistant who can’t reach supervisors, who hears about well 

there’s three caseworkers who are no longer employed, so 

getting phone calls back for people who need government 

services has become increasingly difficult, Mr. Speaker. So to 

cut 100 Social Services positions — that’s just in Social 

Services — and we really feel that in Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. 

Speaker. But I know that the 500 cuts across Social Services, 

people will feel that everywhere. 

 

So hugely problematic, especially when you have a Premier 

who is unwilling to look at his own office, the Premier’s office, 

Executive Council, and not cut a single position, Mr. Speaker, 

not a single position. So we have cuts across the civil service 

except in the Premier’s own office and then this government’s 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

desire to add three more politicians to the tune of millions of 

dollars. I know it’s not what people have talked to me about on 

the doorstep, Mr. Speaker. And I know it’s not something that 

anybody else or any of my colleagues have heard either, so I am 

not sure where this comes from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again as the mom of the 14-year-old who was here today in 

the galleries, I really struggle with the fact that she will not be 

included in the count in shaping constituency boundaries. I 

think well it’ll have a negative impact on engagement of young 

people. And again, just to quote the Premier, he had made the 

comment at one time that elections are about voters. And I just 

want to say no. Elections . . . I respectfully disagree with our 

Premier, and say elections are not about voters; elections are 

about citizens. Elections are about services to citizens and 

making sure that the landscape is created for us to have the 

opportunity to reach our potential and be the best possible 

citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I just want to emphasize, I think the two different, 

the two different messages we’ve gotten out of this Premier 

where one of his new MLAs who was elected in the fall, the 

Premier at one point had given his blessing for that new MLA 

to work part-time. And the reality is this is not a part-time job. 

But this Premier is sending mixed signals: well I have an MLA 

who can work part-time; oh, but we need three more MLAs. So 

which one is it, Mr. Speaker, which one is it? 

 

And I think that the taxpayers and citizens in Saskatchewan 

think that paying for three more MLAs is just not acceptable to 

the tune of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. Millions of dollars 

it will cost us as taxpayers and citizens to have to pay for three 

more politicians when they’re not needed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I know I have other colleagues who are interested 

in wading in in this debate, Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act. I again just want to firmly say that 

we on the opposition side of the House are firmly against the 

idea of adding three more MLAs or excluding a good chunk of 

the population from the quotient to determine the constituency 

boundaries, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is the Assembly in agreement 

with the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 26 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to get up today and speak to this Bill. And I know 

every once in a while we get these come through, An Act to 

repeal miscellaneous obsolete Statutes. And I find this one very 

interesting. It seems relatively straightforward. 

 

There is five Bills that the government believes is no longer 

necessary to have, that they’re no longer relevant. And so why 

clutter the books? Let’s put them off the record. And I think that 

we always have to be looking back and seeing what things are 

there, what Bills are out there, and why are they there. And I 

know some of these from my own experience in government 

and some of the changes that were made. 

 

And so I’d like to go through a few of them and make some 

comments because sometimes when we review our Bills, our 

statutes, our speeches, you find things of interest. And so the 

first one is the collective bargaining agreement Act. And as the 

minister says, you know, that this really related to two 

collective agreements that were signed between IPSCO and 

United Steelworkers Local 5890 and Shaw Pipe Protection Ltd. 

and the Construction and General Workers, Local 180. And so 

they were done, and things were moving on, and so there’s no 

point in having this in play any more. So that one seems 

relatively straightforward. And we understand that, from talking 

to some of the parties involved, that we are ready to . . . that 

there’s no point in having that on the books any further. So that 

one makes some sense. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The second one, Mr. Speaker, and I find this one very 

interesting and I do want to take a moment and just reflect on 

the minister’s comments. And it’s regarding The 

Communications Network Corporation Act. And it was created 

in 1990. In fact this is something that was created from the 

former Conservative government. It seems to be on one hand 

straightforward, but I think that, particularly since the budget, 

there is a lot of conversation about what it really means to the 

film industry. And we saw SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] being sold to Bluepoint Investments 

on June 30th, 2010, and we understand the sale price was 

something like $350,000. And now we understand that another 

company is looking for and willing to pay some $3 million, but 

even that now isn’t some record. 

 

But I do want to read this one quote here. And this is what the 

Minister of Justice said, and I quote. And, Mr. Speaker, the date 

here is very important. The date was March 5th, 2012, when he 

said this. Mr. Speaker, I quote. And this is page 273 from 

Hansard in case anybody wants to follow along. And I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan continues 

to support the film and television industry through the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit, the 

Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage, and Saskatchewan 

Film and Video Development Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only three, two and a half weeks later, this 

government delivers a budget that effectively kills the film 

industry by eliminating the Saskatchewan film employment tax 

credit. How can that happen in one month? You have the 

Minister of Justice saying that they support the film industry 

tax. This is a prepared speech by one of the ministers of the 

Crown. And then you have another minister, the Minister of 

Culture, who is out there saying, we can’t have it. We can’t 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

support it. We can’t support it. It’s just not sustainable, is the 

word he would use. 

 

And this is a matter of two and a half weeks. You have one 

minister saying one thing, a senior minister of cabinet saying 

that they support the film and television industry through the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit. And I’d be curious 

to know how many backbenchers agree with the Minister of 

Justice. And yet just barely three weeks later, they kill it. They 

kill it. It’s a good thing he got that speech on record before 

budget because clearly this government, things change day by 

day. On one hand you have the Minister of Justice saying, we 

support the film industry by the tax credit, and then just barely 

weeks — not even three weeks later — out it goes the door. 

 

Now maybe the Minister of Justice didn’t go to any of the 

budget meetings. Maybe he didn’t get the memo from the 

Minister of Culture, we don’t actually support that industry. 

We’re cutting these things. How can that be? How can that be? 

This is really interesting that barely three weeks later . . . March 

5th you have the Minister of Justice saying we support the film 

industry. We support, and I’ll read it again, “the film and 

television industry through the Saskatchewan film employment 

tax credit.” That’s what he said. I’m not making it up. It’s right 

here in his speech. Stood over there and said it. And here you 

have the Minister of Finance cutting it and the Minister of 

Culture supporting it for a week in questions, saying it’s the 

thing you’ve got to do because it’s just not working. It’s just not 

working. And he would stand, the Minister of Culture would 

stand up and say, you know what? We believe in this budget, as 

precarious as it is. 

 

And today we tried to get in some questions around corrections, 

where these folks have failed to plan for that because they were 

so determined in how they would construct that budget. But, 

Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker, that we have a government that 

has lost its way in one month, in a matter of three weeks — 

would say that it supports the industry through tax credits and 

then three weeks later they cut it, they cut it. Unbelievable. 

Unbelievable. I don’t know if the Minister of Culture heard. I 

don’t know if that minister heard what the Minister of Justice 

was saying because here you have one saying one thing and one 

saying the other one. Clearly they must have known. They must 

have known what was going down, down the tubes, when it 

came to the budget time. And I wonder how many people over 

there on that side of the House feel the same way, feel the same 

way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have some real questions about this because 

it really indicates how out of touch this government is and how 

closely they are tied to their ideology. And they would say one 

thing one day, and then the next day, a few weeks later, pull the 

carpet out from underneath people. This is really amazing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know, I know we will have a lot of people 

who are very interested in this quote from the Minister of 

Justice who seems to be out of step in this very session in this 

very month, saying one thing that does not line up, does not line 

up with the government policy. So I know people will be saying 

at home, isn’t this a little inconsistent? How does a minister get 

up and say one thing, get up and say one thing, when three 

weeks later they’ll be pulling the rug out from underneath the 

feet of those people who are working in the film industry? 

Clearly they must have known something was happening here. 

So here we have a minister who seems to be out of step, seems 

to be out of step with other ministers, and he’s promoting this. 

So I do have some questions about this. And I know when we 

go to committee there will be a lot of questions about, how 

could he stand up in the House early in March and say in his 

ministerial speech that they support, that they support the film 

industry when, just barely days later, they cut it, they cut it? 

 

And we know for the implication for people that it was the 

beginning of the end of the road for film industry when they 

sold SCN, but they had packaged it as saying, well we’re going 

to have some local content, some local content. And now we 

see that hope disappearing, disappearing very quickly. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, I know a lot of people have a lot of questions and 

will have a lot of questions about that for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next Bill that I wanted . . . or next Bill, or part 

of that Bill refers to The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs 

Act. And I know that this was one that again we have some 

questions about and our critic for Agriculture raised a lot of 

good questions. And this Minister of Justice . . . And I’m just 

wondering if this Bill was a little premature because there’s a 

lot of questions we have. And I don’t have the answers with me. 

But again, like today in question period when we had questions 

about corrections, this government seems to be willing to go 

full steam ahead when they don’t have all the information. 

 

He talked about how this Bill will also repeal The On-farm 

Quality Assurance Programs Act. It came into effect in 1998 to 

provide a way for on-farm food safety programs to be 

recognized in Saskatchewan, but he said it’s no longer 

necessary as the Canadian Food Inspection Agency has 

developed policies and protocols for a national-led OFFS 

[on-farm food safety] program. And so as this quality assurance 

program’s never been used, they’re recommending its repeal. 

And so now I think that . . . And that’s just a brief one, two 

paragraphs that he talked about it. 

 

But we know in the federal budget there were a lot of concerns 

about the Canadian Food Inspection Agency and what the 

implications of the budget was going to be. Were there going to 

be cuts to the CFIA [Canadian Food Inspection Agency]? There 

were concerns that as many as 200 jobs were going to be lost. 

We know that that federal budget lost 19,000 jobs federally. It 

had a huge impact on the services that Canadians were coming 

to expect, and particularly with the Canadian Food Inspection 

Agency who do amazing work, really important work. And we 

saw that, and we see it many times over. 

 

But we can think of one particularly tragic experience with the 

listeria at one of the food packing plants in Toronto where it 

caught all Canadians off guard one summer a few summers ago. 

And it was particularly hard on seniors and people who are in 

low-income circumstances because they tend to budget their 

food money very tightly, and in order to get some protein, they 

often turn to prepared meats for their nutrition, for their protein. 

And they were hit hard. And in fact, I understand in fact the 

class action lawsuit, and I believe it’s Maple Leaf Foods, is now 

being resolved, and people are now being paid out their 

settlements. And we’re all hoping that works out well. It’s hard 

though for those who suffered most from that experience. 

 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

And so when we see the kind of job cuts that are happening at 

the federal level and the implications for the Canadian Food 

Inspection Agency, I’m just wondering if it’s a little premature 

for us to be talking about the on-farm quality assurance 

program when we really don’t know what will take its place. It 

may be right to cut it, but what’s going to take its place? And I 

don’t think that this government has really thought this through 

because, as the budget has come through, we’re still waiting for 

more details. Is the CFIA going to be able to deliver an 

adequate program to ensure the quality assurances there on 

farms when they’re doing their work? This is very, very 

important. 

 

And I know there’s other parts of the Bill that talk about the 

special payment. The dependant spouses Act dealt with a 

circumstance with workers’ compensation. I understand from 

the minister that’s all gone through. Again an unfortunate 

circumstance. So that’s the fifth one. 

 

And the one before that, The Soil Drifting Control Act, an 

interesting piece of legislation that came into force in 1941 that 

gave farmers the right to petition the RMs [rural municipalities] 

to make sure that there was adequate protection from soil that 

was drifting because of poor farming practices. And now it’s 

quite an old piece of legislation. I’m not familiar with it, but it 

clearly remains an issue in terms of new issues on the farm in 

terms of climate change and new challenges that farmers have. 

 

But I do think the two pieces that I don’t think are quite 

obsolete yet, the SCN, The Communications Network 

Corporations Act, particularly as I said earlier . . . And I think 

that again, Mr. Speaker, if people have just tuned in, that I was 

surprised just minutes ago when I was reading the Hansard — 

and it’s March 5th, 2012, page 273 — when the Minister of 

Justice says in his prepared remarks, and I will read it again 

because people may have just tuned in, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan continues 

to support the film and television industry through the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit, the 

Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage, and the Saskatchewan 

Film and Video Development Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only days later we had the Minister of Finance 

deliver a budget that actually cut the Saskatchewan film 

employment tax credit. And if it wasn’t through the good work 

of the many people who value the Saskatchewan film industry, 

they were able to secure a three-month extension. But for many 

it was, as I said earlier, pulling the rug out from below them. 

And they had a Minister of Culture who did nothing, nothing at 

all to stand up for those people in that industry. 

 

So to read this, to read this three weeks, two and a half weeks 

later — a complete one-eighty. Like this is quite something else 

that the Minister of Justice would say this, and just behind him, 

the Minister of Culture. I’m not sure if they were on the same 

page. This is something, quite something else. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So I would say The Communications Network Corporation Act, 

it’s not quite yet obsolete. There’s lots of questions we have 

about it. SCN, while it was sold at a fire sale price of $350,000, 

now we apparently understand that there’s a price out there that 

they might be able to sell for 3 million. But that’s up in the air 

now because part of the issue was around the ability to deliver 

local programming, and there is a big question about that now 

with the tax credit gone. 

 

So I think this section of the Bill may be a little premature to be 

talking about because it’s an issue that’s still very much alive in 

the minds of many people in Saskatchewan who have a view 

that Saskatchewan is much more than simply resource-based 

economy. That’s a strong part of it, but we also love and enjoy 

our arts, and we wish that people can stay in our province to 

make sure that all people are valued here in Saskatchewan 

through their contributions. 

 

And clearly we see some inconsistencies here that I think that 

this government will have to explain. And I think that when 

they say on one hand, as this minister says on March 5th, that 

they support the film and the television industry through the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit, and then just barely 

two and a half weeks later the Minister of Finance cuts it, they 

must have known, they must have known that something was 

up. And as I said as well earlier, that we’ll have lots of 

questions about that because how can the minister say that? 

And when this Bill goes to committee, there will be many, 

many, many questions about that. 

 

And as well we’ll be talking a lot about the Canadian Food 

Inspection Agency. Will they be able to deliver their services to 

farmers to make sure that the on-farm, that there’s quality 

controls for the on-farm programs? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know I’m just about wrapping up my 

remarks on this Bill, but I do find it very interesting. And I 

think, in the turn of events just in the last week or two, that this 

Bill, while it was seeming to be pretty straightforward, not 

much concerns about it, but we do have a couple of concerns. 

And one will be about how can the Minister of Justice say early 

in March they support the film industry through the 

Saskatchewan film and tax credit, and then just a few days later 

cut it? I think there’s some inconsistency that the Minister of 

Justice will have to explain how he can say that. And of course 

we’ll be looking at the CFIA. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that the debate on Bill No. 

26, An Act to repeal miscellaneous obsolete Statutes be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 24 — The 

Advocate for Children and Youth Act be now read a second 

time.] 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

interest that I rise today to speak to this Bill, Bill No. 24, the 

Act respecting the Advocate for Children and Youth. And to 

begin, Mr. Speaker, I just want to review a few of the comments 

provided by the minister when he introduced this Bill back on 

December 14th. And he indicated that the main focus of the 

Bill, it’s a new Act and it’s going to replace the previous 

Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act. So we have a new 

name for the advocate and it’s now the Advocate for Children 

and Youth. And the Bill makes specific reference to the 

difference and definition between a child and a youth. I’ll get 

into that in a minute. 

 

And also the fact that this office was originally part of the 

Office of the Ombudsman, and in 2000 . . . It was created in 

’94, and the Ombudsman had responsibility for the 

administration of the office of the advocate at that time. But in 

2000, the Ombudsman’s oversight of the advocate’s office was 

removed from the legislation. So because of that, there’s now 

no need for the Ombudsman and the advocate to be governed 

by the same statute. So the minister indicated that the separation 

of the statutes will give us public clarity about services 

available and reduce public confusion about the roles and 

responsibilities of these two very independent officers. So 

overall I think that’s a valuable distinction to be made, and I 

think this is a moving forward on the evolution of these two 

particular offices. 

 

The second part of the legislation is the jurisdiction of the 

Advocate over publicly funded health entities. So in this case, 

the Bill is now defining the advocate’s authority to include 

regional health authorities and health care organizations and 

affiliates and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s important because children also come into contact 

with those organizations in the same way that they do with 

other institutions, and it’s important for them to be able to have 

access to the advocate in the event that their rights are being 

damaged or harmed in any way. So the minister indicated that 

the advocate will have a mandate to start working on this 

interesting and complicated area of children’s rights, which is 

the research relating to the rights of children and youth. So 

that’s an additional point in that legislation. 

 

And finally another major point that he indicated was to allow 

these agencies to share information voluntarily with the 

advocate. So ministries and agencies are now able to go forward 

and share information to help promote simpler and quicker 

resolution of disputes. Right now he indicated that only 5 per 

cent of complaints are resolved using the formal investigation 

process. And that’s probably reassuring, Mr. Speaker, that 95 

per cent of the complaints are able to be resolved using 

negotiation or mediation and conciliation. So this will aid the 

agencies and the ministries as well as the advocate themselves 

and the children involved in the disputes in order to have a 

more timely resolution and probably a less formal resolution, in 

which case I think alternate dispute resolution always, not 

always but often lends to a better result. 

 

And one of the reasons that mediation and negotiation helps 

with a better result is that it’s non-adversarial. And in 

negotiation and in mediation, the goal is always to find a 

solution that suits both sides, whereas in the adversarial and 

formal process there is often just a winner and a loser. And in 

mediation and negotiation and conciliation, there is an 

exploration into the win-win for all the parties. So these types 

of improvements in legislation help make a better resolution for 

the parties that are involved in the dispute. And certainly if it’s 

codified in legislation, it gives ministries and government 

agencies and the other institutions that are involved in these 

disputes the ability to find a result that suits everyone as well as, 

of course, the children themselves. 

 

Another part of the Bill that is very helpful for children and 

youth and particularly children who are in custody is that they 

clearly have access to the advocate. And once I get into the 

specifics of the Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can talk a little bit 

about some of those terms. But it’s helpful for those youth who 

are in custody to know that there’s someone out them for them. 

So I think that’s a good addition to this type of legislation. 

 

I guess the term youth itself, the minister indicated why that’s 

being separated from children, and that’s because the youth that 

are identified from ages 12 to 18 don’t consider themselves 

children. And I don’t think we, in society, would consider a 

16-year-old a child. We would consider them a youth. So that 

language change will help youth who are incarcerated feel that 

they are also included in the Bill. It’s not just children. It’s 

children and youth, and that they’ll have access to a voice as 

well and understand that the advocate services are available. 

 

Finally I note that in his comments the minister indicated he had 

gone through detailed consultations with the Children’s 

Advocate and the Ombudsman and in various ministries that are 

involved. I don’t know here whether he actually consulted with 

youth or children. That’s not clear from his comments, although 

they’re the ones who are the recipients of the actions of this 

Act. So I would hope that he did actually consult with children 

and youth as well as the officials that are indicated having been 

consulted with. I don’t know the answer to that question, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And the minister has not given us any 

information there, so that might be something that we could get 

more information on. 

 

At any rate, the Bill is set up in probably four main parts, three 

of which are more of interest in terms of the content. As I 

indicated early in my comments, in this case a child is a person 

under 18 years of age and would include a person 18 years of 

age or older who’s getting services pursuant to the Youth 

Criminal Justice Act and a couple other Acts. So those maybe 

that were incarcerated as a youth, this Bill would also be 

available to them. So a child is all the way to age 18, and then 

there’s a distinction, the definition of youth, and in that case the 

youth is someone who’s at least 12 years of age or under 18, or 

those over 18 that I mentioned earlier. So child encompasses the 

whole range, and youth is part of the range from 12 years of age 

up. And as the minister indicated, the goal there is to ensure that 

children who are 12 years or older feel that this advocate is 

available to them as well because they may not consider 

themselves a child especially if you are 17 or 18 years old. 

 

So the part two talks about the office of the advocate itself. And 

all we know now is that the name is changed from Children’s 

Advocate to advocate for children and youth, so that’s 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

consistent throughout the Bill. And there’s various clauses that 

deal with the appointment of the advocate and salary and all the 

sort of administrative clauses that are typically found in these 

types of pieces of legislation. 

 

The part III is of interest, I guess, substantively to the 

Legislative Assembly and to the public, and that is mainly the 

powers and duties of the advocate. So what can this advocate 

do, and what can they not do? So there’s some directions in 

clause 14(2). In the first place the advocate shall — so this is a 

directive clause from this Legislative Assembly telling the 

advocate that they shall — “become involved in public 

education and advocacy representing the interests and 

well-being of children and youth.” So that’s the first directive 

from this Assembly to the advocate. 

 

The second thing that they must do, the advocate must: 

 

receive and investigate any matter that come to his or her 

attention from any source concerning: 

 

a child or youth who receives services [and this is the 

extended definition] from any ministry, agency of the 

government or publicly-funded health entity. 

 

They must also receive and investigate any matter that comes 

from “any source.” And that’s an important phrase, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: “any source.” It doesn’t matter where it comes from. 

They have to investigate concerning any complaint concerning 

“a group of children or youths who receive services . . .” So not 

just an individual, but a group. And then thirdly: “services to a 

child, group of children, youth or group of youths by any 

ministry, agency of the government or publicly-funded health 

entity.” So there’s three areas where the advocate must do the 

investigation. 

 

And a first step for the advocate, if a matter does come to his 

attention or her attention, is to try and resolve those matters 

through the uses of negotiation, conciliation, mediation, or 

non-adversarial approaches. And as I indicated earlier, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, those generally produce better results for all 

the parties involved. There’s been a lot of research done on 

alternate dispute resolution. And in fact, I’ve taken a fair bit of 

training in that area and have seen the effect of effective 

conciliation or mediation as an alternative to dispute resolution 

rather than a formal adversarial approach. So certainly when it 

comes to children and youth, I think this is an appropriate 

approach. 

 

Then there’s a . . . [inaudible] . . . clause, and that’s clause 

14(3). In this clause, the advocate “may.” So this is one where 

it’s within the discretion of the advocate. And in that clause, 

there’s two points. First of all, the advocate can “conduct or 

contract for research to improve the rights, interests and 

well-being of children or youths.” And that was something that 

the minister indicated in his comments is that this is a new 

feature, is the ability of the advocate to do research relating to 

rights of children and youth. So that’s always a good piece to 

have as long as it’s properly funded. And again we don’t know 

how the funding’s going to roll out for this new duty or power 

of the advocate. 

 

The advocate can also make recommendations to any minister 

responsible for service to children or youths. So this gives the 

advocate a bit more directive ability to deal with ministers that 

are involved with the services relating to children or youth. And 

again I think that’s a power that’s useful and that I hope the 

advocate will exercise accordingly, provided the budget is 

available. 

 

Another section that’s of interest in terms of the substantive 

portion of the Bill is section 16. And this is how children and 

youth are going to have access to the advocate. And I think 

that’s a very important piece to be successful here, and there’s 

some concerns that I have about this section. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The definition of facility here “. . . means a facility, foster 

home, group home or other home or place in which a child or 

youth is placed . . .” So this is where children have been put 

somewhere that they didn’t choose. They’ve been placed, and 

there’s services being provided to them. So in this case: 

 

If a child or youth . . . asks to communicate with the 

Advocate, that request shall be forwarded to the Advocate 

immediately by the person in charge of that facility. 

 

[And if they write] . . . a letter addressed to the Advocate, 

the person in charge of the facility shall forward the letter 

immediately, unopened, to the Advocate. 

 

And the facility shall also provide means that permit that “. . . 

child or youth to communicate in private to the Advocate orally 

or by any other method.” And they have to inform each child 

that’s placed in those facilities of their rights to communicate in 

private, of the services provided by the advocate, and how to 

communicate with the advocate, and contact information for the 

advocate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my concern here is this is all fine to put it in 

the legislation, but there’s no indication here how this will be 

monitored. And so I think we’ll have to look on this side of the 

House to find out how indeed these promises being made to 

these youth are going to be kept. And certainly I’m hopeful that 

there will be some sort of monitoring by the Ministry of Justice 

to ensure that these promises are being kept. In particular, you 

know, I expect that the ministry will go into these facilities and 

speak with the children that are either in custody or have been 

placed and find out if they were indeed given that information 

when they were placed there and whether or not they’d ever 

been denied access to the advocate. 

 

It’s good to see it here in the Bill, but I always worry about 

implementation. Will there be services? Will there be funding 

provided to the Ministry of Justice to ensure that these clauses 

are being effectively fulfilled and that the promises to these 

children and youth are being kept? And we don’t see that here 

in the Bill. It’s difficult to find out. And certainly when cuts to 

the public service . . . We’re seeing cuts to Social Services. A 

number of people are being cut there, so those folks won’t be 

able to do this work. We don’t know how many staff . . . Well 

there will be cuts throughout the public service, so we don’t 

know exactly how the impact will be on the Ministry of Justice. 

But I always worry when we make promises like this in 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

legislation but there’s no indication how the implementation of 

these promises will be carried out. 

 

So it’s something we’ll watch with interest if and when this Bill 

is passed and it becomes law to make sure that the promises to 

the children given in this section are indeed available. Because 

if they’re not, if it’s not fulfilled, then this whole Act is 

meaningless. There’s no point to it if the children don’t have 

access and feel that they have access. It’s not so much just 

telling them that, but it’s also the actions of the institution 

facility workers because they have great power over these 

children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And these children are very 

vulnerable and I think would feel hopeless and helpless in many 

ways. So depending on the way the promise is delivered even 

could have an impact on how that child feels, whether they truly 

have access to an advocate or not. And many of these children 

have never had an advocate in their life, so I think there would 

even be education included in how they will . . . education 

provided to those children and youth so that they understand 

there is somebody out there for them, and not for somebody 

else, but for them specifically. 

 

So I think again we’ll have to watch and see how this Bill 

unfolds. And it looks good on paper, and so we’ll keep an eye 

on it as it goes along once it’s passed and becomes law. 

 

The next part of the Act is the part relating to jurisdiction and 

procedures. And so there’s some interesting clauses in this 

section as well, in this part. First of all, section 18 indicates that 

the advocate’s decision is final, which is, I guess, interesting in 

a way although it doesn’t carry any weight or any force. All the 

advocate can do is make the recommendation and that the 

recommendation is final. But it does tell us that there’s no 

appeal. 

 

So section 18 says basically that the advocate can exercise the 

powers and carry out their duties:  

 

. . . notwithstanding anything in any other Act that 

provides: 

 

that any decision, recommendation, act or omission that 

the Advocate is investigating is final; 

 

that there is no appeal with respect to any decision, 

recommendation, act or omission that the Advocate is 

investigating. 

 

So it’s a fairly strong power when the buck stops there. That’s 

the end of the line for the person raising the concern. And in 

some ways no review is . . . Well wherever the buck stops, 

that’s of utmost importance to the person whose rights are been 

aggrieved. And so this is a very important power that the 

advocate has been given, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s 

important that, you know, the advocate takes that very seriously 

as it’s a strong responsibility and a strong power for the 

advocate. 

 

Something curious in section 19. It indicates there that there’s: 

 

Nothing in this Act authorizes the Advocate to investigate: 

 

any decision, recommendation, act, order or omission of 

the Legislative Assembly [which is us], a . . . [council] of 

the Legislative Assembly, the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, the Executive Council or a committee of the 

Executive Council.  

 

And I think this is a fairly standard clause in these kinds of 

governmental Bills where there’s a process set up for 

investigation. Usually these kinds of agencies are — Legislative 

Assembly and the Executive Council — are often excluded 

from investigation. Just, you know, in the case of children and 

youth, maybe we could have made an exception in this case 

because these are the most vulnerable people in our society. 

 

And even when this legislature or Executive Council . . . And 

I’ve talked earlier about the powers of Executive Council to 

make regulations for example. Those kinds of things are great 

powers. And when you have vulnerable members of our society 

coming up against decisions made by powerful bodies like this 

one, the balance, as you can imagine or as you know, is quite 

distinct. And so we always need to move the legislation towards 

the protection of the vulnerable body, and in this case it’s 

children and youth. So it’s just a question I had when I looked 

at that particular subclause.  

 

And again, nothing authorizes the advocate to investigate, and 

this is section 19(1)(d): “any decision, recommendation, act or 

omission of any lawyer for the Crown in relation to any 

proceeding.” So lawyers are also exempted from investigation. 

And that may be of concern to some members of the public, but 

certainly it’s interesting that . . . Basically I suspect the lawyers 

are trying to protect solicitor-client privilege, but it’s just 

interesting that lawyers are exempted from the authority to 

investigate as well. 

 

The idea of privileged communication is described in section 

21, and in that they talk about designated facilities. So this 

would be facilities, publicly funded health entities of the 

regional health . . . defined in The Regional Health Services Act, 

The Mental Health Services Act, or The Youth Drug 

Detoxification and Stabilization Act. So this is the part where 

the minister indicated that it’s bringing in the jurisdiction of the 

advocate over publicly funded health entities. So this is 

something new for the advocate’s role. 

 

And in this section (2) it says: 

 

. . . if a letter is written by or on behalf of a restricted 

complainant or resident in care and is addressed to the 

Advocate, the person in charge shall forward the letter, 

unopened, to the Advocate.”  

 

So it’s the same as it was in the other facilities. The 

responsibility of the institution is to forward that letter 

unopened. 

 

And it goes on in (3) to talk about in every institution where . . . 

This is about restricted complainants. So when they’re in 

custody or confined, the institution must provide “. . . establish 

procedures and . . . means that permit each restricted 

complainant to communicate in private with the Advocate.” So 

similar as we heard in the other section. And they have to also 

inform that restricted complainant of their rights to 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

communicate in private, the services that the advocate provides, 

and how to communicate with the advocate. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, my concern is that it looks good in 

writing, and that’s something that I think is a positive step. The 

question I have that’s not answered by this legislation is, how 

can we be sure those facilities are doing what they’re supposed 

to do? 

 

I know I work . . . In the business that I run, it’s a tourism 

business in northern Saskatchewan, and we often get funding 

from Service Canada for youth to have a summer job. And one 

of the things we must do as employers is inform those people 

when they start working of the health concerns, work-related 

health concerns or dangers in the workplace. So if there’s . . . 

You know, if they’re operating a chainsaw, we have to make 

sure they’re properly trained and that their health and safety is 

protected. And it’s our duty as the employer to inform those 

youth of the responsibilities. 

 

Same thing here. The facilities are expected to inform the youth 

and the children of the access to the advocate and how to get a 

hold of them and what the advocate does. It’s not clear to me 

how that will be monitored. And I guess the comparison I use of 

my experience is that never once was it sort of followed up 

whether or not we did actually inform our youth employees of 

their workplace health and safety issues. We did it but never . . . 

I don’t know that Service Canada ever followed up with anyone 

to make sure that those provisions are being followed. 

 

Again when you have cuts to public service, these kinds of 

follow-up processes are often left to the wayside. And I’ve seen 

it in my experience of a public servant in terms of cuts, and 

particularly in the federal level where cuts to . . . The 

department that I advised was Indian and Northern Affairs, and 

cuts there really impacted the ability of the public servants left 

to do the job effectively. They did the best they could, and often 

programs and services were simply vanished because there was 

no ability for the staff that were left to carry out those 

obligations. 

 

So in this case, I don’t know if the cuts to the Ministry of 

Justice or whoever will be the ministry responsible for this, I 

assume it’s the Ministry of Justice, will they be able to do 

follow-up to ensure that the provisions of this Bill are being 

followed? Because if they don’t, nobody will. And these youth 

are going to become disillusioned, and the advocate’s role is 

going to be, I think, damaged as a result. 

 

So we don’t know, and I guess it will have to be in policy 

whether or not the Ministry of Justice decides to follow up on 

whether the children and youth are being given access and the 

information that the Bill mandates that they will. There’s no 

sort of consequences in here that I can find. 

 

So again, I don’t know what would happen if the advocate 

wasn’t doing their job. Presumably the advocate might be 

replaced, I would hope, but there’s nothing stipulated in the 

Bill. And that’s of concern. 

 

Clause 22 talks about the refusal to investigate. So in this case, 

the advocate has a number of things where they can refuse to 

investigate. Most of them seem quite appropriate to me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but it’s the first one that raises an eyebrow for 

me and that’s section 22(1)(a). So it says: 

 

The Advocate may refuse to investigate or cease to 

investigate a matter if: 

 

(a) it relates to a decision, recommendation, act or 

omission of which the person referring the matter had 

knowledge for more than a year before the complaint is 

received by the Advocate. 

 

Now in that case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m quite concerned. 

Because if it’s a child who had the complaint, or is the person 

referring the matter, and they were four years old at the time 

that complaint arose, but it took them several years to actually 

realize it and bring it forward as a real complaint, the advocate 

could refuse to investigate. That’s of a lot of concern actually. 

Children don’t always understand what’s going on and it’s very 

difficult for them when their rights are being infringed to maybe 

even know it, and secondly often feel shame or embarrassment 

or fear to speak about it to anyone — particularly if they’re in 

custody in a foster home or in some other place where they’ve 

been placed. So I just worry that this one-year limit is going to 

prohibit access to the advocate for some valid and legitimate 

complaints or matters that need investigation. So I wish the 

ministry would take a closer look at that and perhaps think 

about a way to ensure that young children, who aren’t able to 

bring their investigation or refer their matter for more than a 

year, are also allowed to have access to an investigation. 

 

The other areas that are listed for refusal to investigate in this 

section are realistic and very practical. If the advocate believes 

it’s frivolous or vexatious or trivial, or if the advocate is of the 

opinion that the balance between public interests and the 

interests of the person are such that it shouldn’t be investigated, 

or if it doesn’t warrant investigation, or if the person referring 

the matter doesn’t have sufficient personal interest in the 

subject matter of the complaint, so these are the kinds of things 

where they could refuse to investigate or cease an investigation. 

And those seem to make a lot of sense. So that seems to be an 

appropriate section, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next thing about the process is found in section 24, and 

that’s the notice to conduct the investigation, so there’s a 

number of procedural directions there in that clause. And then 

clause 25 talks about the conduct of the investigation itself. So 

in this case every investigation has to be conducted in private, 

and I think that’s imperative for the rights of these children to 

ensure that they’re safe and that there’s no repercussions. So 

that’s very, very important, that it be conducted in private. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The advocate can also go ahead and order hearings and can 

obtain information from any person they consider appropriate. 

So there’s some freedom there for the advocate to do the 

inquiry that the advocate feels is necessary. And I guess the 

other thing is under section 25(3), the advocate is not required 

to hold a hearing, and nobody has a right to be heard by the 

advocate as well. You can’t demand that the advocate listens to 

you. 

 

There’s section 26, describes the power of the advocate to 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

require information and examine persons. So in that case, any 

person who’s able to give information can be called to provide 

information, and there’s ability for the advocate to exercise 

those powers even if the person mentioned is an officer 

employee of a ministry or an agency of the government or 

publicly funded health entity or a board member, or if a 

document is under the custody of those aforementioned 

organizations and institutions. The advocate can examine 

people under oath. And it doesn’t matter — it could be a public 

officer or any person who refers a matter or any other person 

who the advocate thinks is able to give information related to 

the investigation. So there’s a broad range of power here for the 

advocate to conduct the investigation. 

 

Again, deliberations of Executive Council are not required, in 

this case, to be produced. And I’m just reminded of the 

comments of my colleague before me about the . . . I would like 

to have been in cabinet when we were discussing the film tax 

credit, because we heard that the Minister of Justice, on March 

5th, announced to us that the film tax credit was a good thing 

and that it was part of what this government supported. And yet 

less than three weeks later we heard that it’s not, and that the 

Minister of Culture decided that it isn’t important. So we have 

this interesting flip-flop, and if the advocate could call an 

investigation into this, we might find out exactly what did 

happen in Executive Council when that sudden one-eighty 

occurred in the last few weeks. Certainly I think the public 

would be interested in hearing that as well, but unfortunately we 

don’t have a Bill that causes us to produce those kinds of 

deliberations either. But quite interesting to think about the 

discussion that must have gone on at Executive Council when 

the decision was made, and again whether, you know, the 

advice of backbenchers was sought when that decision to 

eliminate the tax credit was made. It’s not clear to us that 

there’s unanimous support for this decision by the Minister of 

Culture, but that’s not something I think we’ll ever hear. At any 

rate, in this case the advocate doesn’t need to require 

information given if it would involve disclosure of deliberations 

of Executive Council. Those deliberations are protected 

throughout federal-provincial legislation. So there’s no surprise 

there. 

 

The report then is the next section — that’s section 28 — and at 

this point the advocate has completed the investigation and now 

they’re prepared to make a report. There’s a number of 

circumstances that are outlined in the first part of the section 

28(1) that tells how the report should be made. And in this case, 

if the advocate believes that the decision was contrary to law, 

was unreasonable, unjust, oppressive, improperly 

discriminatory or in accordance with a rule of law, based on a 

mistake of law or simply wrong, then that will be the report that 

they give. And then in that case the advocate, under subsection 

(2), has to report the opinion and the reasons for it to the 

appropriate minister and to the relevant ministry and make any 

recommendations that the advocate considers appropriate. 

 

So here’s the end of the advocate’s power, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

He or she has done the investigating. They’ve received the 

complaint, done the investigation, called in all the information 

that they feel is appropriate. They’ve now decided there was 

something either contrary to law or wrong or for the other 

reasons, and that a right has been exercised improperly or on 

irrelevant grounds. Then they give the report to the appropriate 

ministry or agency of the government or publicly funded health 

entity to make recommendations, and that’s the end of the 

advocate’s story. 

 

There’s no power in here for the advocate to force that agency 

or ministry to act according to the recommendations. It’s just 

simply the recommendations are given, much like the auditor or 

probably any other independent investigators. So that’s the way 

these types of decisions and hearings end up, is it’s just in 

recommendations to the offending agency. 

 

Finally there’s a few extra clauses I’ll speak to. One is section 

29 and that’s where the advocate makes a recommendation. 

They can request the ministry to give notice of steps that are 

taken. So that’s one final power of the advocate. It’s not really a 

power; it’s just a request. But they certainly can request the 

offending agency to give them notice of the steps that they have 

taken to give effect to the recommendations. And if no action 

has been taken — this is clause 29(1)(a) — the advocate can 

consider the comments that have been given and submit a report 

of the matter, including their report to continue the 

recommendation to the Lieutenant Governor in Council, and 

they can mention the report in the next annual report to the 

Legislative Assembly. So if that ministry or entity or publicly 

funded health entity has not taken the recommendations or 

acted according to the recommendations, then the advocate has 

the power or the ability to refer that to the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council, and once that’s done then they can report it in their 

next annual report to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

So based on those comments — and I’ve only touched on a few 

of the clauses that are in this new Bill — it appears that there’s 

some improvements for the child and youth advocate, that 

indeed the adding youth itself is a positive, definitional change 

so that children who are 16 and in custody realize that the 

advocate is there for them as well as children, that a 16-year-old 

might not consider him or herself a child. Secondly, that the 

provisions for communication and providing information to 

those children and ensuring that they’re aware of their rights 

and that the advocate is there for them. The onus is strong on 

the facility where they’ve been placed, and I guess my main 

concern with that is whether or not the Ministry of Justice is in 

a position to ensure and do monitoring of the implementation of 

these clauses. Are those entities doing what they’re supposed to 

do? And if they’re not, then we’re failing the children. 

 

So I worry, with all the cuts to the public service, whether there 

will be able public servants available with funding and support 

from the ministry to ensure that they can do the follow-up and 

make sure these Bills are being implemented. Because again, 

these are the very most vulnerable people in our society. These 

are children often who have been sidelined and ostracized from 

the mainstream through circumstances no fault of their own, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they are the most marginalized, often 

the most impoverished, and least able to advocate for 

themselves. 

 

And that’s why the advocate was established in the first place. 

But if the entities that are holding them aren’t following the 

provisions in this Bill, I fear for those children and the further 

damage that is done to them when we’re, you know, there’s an 

advocate there for them and they’re not able to access them, or 

not given the information about how to do that, and that that be 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

respected and followed by the people who have custody of 

these children. 

 

So given that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been my pleasure to 

comment on this Bill No. 24, An Act respecting the Advocate 

for Children and Youth. And I know that other of my colleagues 

are going to want to comment on it as well, so at this point I 

would move to adjourn the debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 24, The Advocate for 

Children and Youth Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 25 — The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

weigh in to discussion and debate here this afternoon as it 

relates to Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman Act, 2011. This Bill 

brings forward various refinements and changes to how the 

Ombudsman operates. It sets forward distinct legislation and 

makes various changes. 

 

What I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, is the correspondence that 

we’ve received with the Office of the Ombudsman, the 

Provincial Ombudsman, to shed some light on the changes that 

have been made. This is the approach we tend to move forward 

with when we are analyzing legislative changes, making sure 

that we understand in fact what the consultation process looked 

like for this government in deriving their legislation, what drove 

that legislation, what the intended consequences are, and 

making sure that we’re understanding any unintended 

consequences that may have been an oversight through the 

consultation process of government. 

 

Certainly when we’re speaking about the Ombudsman in 

Saskatchewan, this is an office and a role that’s incredibly 

important to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the strength of 

that office and the strength of that role is a very important 

service to Saskatchewan people. It’s important that we look to 

what this means. It’s a matter of providing and making sure that 

this office is able to provide fairness back to Saskatchewan 

people and also has the resources needed to resolve disputes 

and to investigate problems, wrongdoing, challenges as they 

exist in Saskatchewan. 

 

The scope of the Provincial Ombudsman has been broadened 

through this legislation. As I say, there’s been some refinements 

in language. There’s also been some distinction brought with 

the piece of legislation that was mentioned by my colleague 

from Nutana who was speaking just about Bill No. 24. And this 

separates, in fact, by legislation the Children’s Advocate and 

the Provincial Ombudsman, both incredibly important roles. 

 

So as it relates to any Act and any resources and any plans of 

the Provincial Ombudsman, we recognize the importance of 

that role. We thank the Ombudsman and their staff for 

providing Saskatchewan people this mechanism to fairness and 

of review and of investigation that they provide. And certainly 

that’s the lens for which we look at legislative changes, making 

sure that this strengthens the office, supports the office, 

supports the work of that office, and in doing so, supporting 

Saskatchewan people as they seek resolution or concerns as it 

relates to potential wrongdoing or wrongdoing of ministries — 

government ministries and agencies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The legislation was initially or this office was initially enacted, 

as I understand, in 1973 and of course works in a process to 

evaluate complaints, to investigate complaints, and work toward 

resolution of complaints. These are all fundamentally important 

roles to provide access to citizens of the province, something 

we fully support to this day. 

 

We recognize that there is an important function for both the 

Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate in Saskatchewan. 

And this brings forward and establishes distinct and separate 

legislation for those two entities, those two bodies, those 

independent officers of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly. That’s something that we support. Not only do we 

support it. Through consultation, we understand that this is 

something that those independent officers themselves have been 

advocating for, and that they fully support the changes as it 

relates to separating those Acts and providing separate and 

distinct legislation for the roles and the entities as they are 

independent offices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know the minister suggests that there’s six different changes 

that are brought forward in this legislation. We will be 

analyzing some of those here today. We are analyzing those 

with stakeholders all across Saskatchewan, those directly 

impacted by legislative changes, and we’ll be doing so in the 

committee process as well, Mr. Speaker, all with an eye to 

making sure that we are supporting the important work of the 

Ombudsman, and all with an eye to making sure that 

Saskatchewan people are provided this very important avenue, 

this important mechanism to resolving concern or challenge of 

wrongdoing by government ministry, staff, or agencies, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We recognize that in part of this legislation there is some 

modernization of language, some refinement in language within 

this legislation, and some updating of language to be more 

respectful to the current environment that we live in. That’s 

important, and something we see as sort of housekeeping, but 

it’s important to see those sorts of changes made to legislation, 

something certainly that we support. 

 

There’s a significant change to this legislation as it relates to the 

scope of the Provincial Ombudsman, and specifically that 

relates to health care in Saskatchewan and support for patients 

that are dealing with health care in the province. And this Bill 

clearly defines publicly funded health entities and what that 

includes, and it includes the regional health authorities, the 

health care organizations, affiliates, and as well the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

that this be clearly defined through legislation that these 

publicly funded health care organizations and entities are in fact 

an agency of government and certainly within the scope of the 

Ombudsman. 

 

[15:45] 

 

If we think about the health budget in general, Mr. Speaker, and 

what it occupies — the lion’s share of resources of the 

provincial budget — and as well the significant importance of 

high-quality health supports to Saskatchewan people and the 

large number of Saskatchewan residents and families that are 

interfacing with the health system or publicly funded aspect of 

that system, we need to make sure that the mechanisms exist for 

patients and for families to pursue fairness when there’s either 

been perceived wrongdoing or wrongdoing. This is 

fundamentally important, and certainly entrenching this within 

legislation for the Provincial Ombudsman is important and 

something that we support. 

 

It’s an important access and avenues, as I say, in a healthy, 

well-functioning democracy to make sure that any member of 

its citizenry have access to a mechanism such as the Provincial 

Ombudsman in seeking justice or seeking clarity or having 

resources to investigate and review decisions and treatment of a 

government agency or board or staff. And certainly when we 

look at health care in Saskatchewan, it’s important that health 

care be a part of that. So certainly as it relates to including 

health care and publicly funded health entities into the scope of 

the Provincial Ombudsman and enshrining that in legislation 

and providing that protection back to Saskatchewan people, is 

something that’s fundamentally important, and something that 

we support. 

 

Questions exist about making sure there’s adequate resources 

for both that office, for the work, the good work that’s going to 

be done on behalf of Saskatchewan people on this front. And 

that’s important because it’s important that we not only extend, 

by way of this mechanism, the support to Saskatchewan people 

in reviewing a circumstance or in having a fair hearing, but it’s 

important that we make sure that that is then a reality as well. 

So to make sure that the adequate and appropriate resources for 

the proper investigation, for the proper review to be done in a 

timely fashion, it’s fundamentally important for the proper 

functioning of this office but also to be properly serving 

Saskatchewan people. And it’s something that we have many 

questions on yet as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, and making 

sure that the resources are there to do the work that we 

anticipate for Saskatchewan people. 

 

We see as well some changes in this legislation that bring 

forward the ability for the office and the Provincial 

Ombudsman to provide and conduct investigations where 

requested by non-governmental agencies. And I guess the 

question here, or the specific part that’s important here, is the 

where requested part. So when requested or where requested, 

the office and the Ombudsman has the ability now to engage in 

these investigations, these reviews, possibly seeking resolution 

of those circumstances and doing that for non-governmental 

bodies. And that’s certainly a change. And this Act enables that 

office and its specific expertise and knowledge and skills and 

human resources that it’s established, the procedures and 

process that it’s established, which are a fine example of 

serving Saskatchewan people, can now apply this mechanism 

and this support to other . . . that lend that expertise and 

supports to other agencies. 

 

And there’s a process through this legislation that sets up a fee 

for service for that activity. We have questions about that 

process, making sure that that fee process is both fair to the 

Ombudsman’s office, to make sure that it brings forward the 

kinds of resources needed to deal with what we might 

anticipate, as some of the agencies or organizations that may 

look to the Ombudsman’s office, to provide that function and 

that role, but also to make sure that it’s a fair and well 

understood process back to those organizations, that what’s 

being put forward does indeed make sense. But certainly 

expanding some of the scope, potential scope of the 

Ombudsman when requested for non-governmental 

organizations seems to merit sense and utilization of that 

technical expertise and those well-defined processes that 

certainly have served Saskatchewan people on so many fronts 

in an admirable way. Certainly I can see why offering that to 

non-governmental agencies, Mr. Speaker, is important. 

 

When we think of the kinds of organizations and groups that 

may be now looking to the Provincial Ombudsman to provide 

some supports, some investigation, the kinds of organizations 

we’re speaking of may be municipalities, urban and rural, Mr. 

Speaker, may be school boards, may be community-based 

organizations, Mr. Speaker, rural governments as I highlighted. 

The list would really go on. 

 

But this is an important function, and in many ways having the 

mechanism of the Provincial Ombudsman and having that fair 

review and that independent review and that investigation 

speaks to providing fairness to Saskatchewan people. But it also 

provides integrity back to the organization delivering service, 

whether that be government, whether that be an agency of 

government, or whether that be non-governmental agencies. 

And when the public is interfacing with organizations of 

government or some arm of government, it’s incredibly 

important that they have an avenue that’s trusted, that’s 

independent to make sure that concerns or wrongdoing are both 

heard and dealt with, Mr. Speaker. And that’s where this role 

has been so important. And certainly this is where we can see 

where many organizations, Mr. Speaker, will likely look to the 

trusted Provincial Ombudsman’s office that certainly has 

integrity in this process to support them when they go to 

conduct such a review when allegations are brought forward or 

where resolution is required, where investigations are required, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill moves further to provide privileged, confidential 

communications between individuals that are incarcerated in 

our facilities across Saskatchewan with the Provincial 

Ombudsman. And certainly that’s of value and of importance. I 

think what we look to here, Mr. Speaker, is making sure that the 

adequate resources are being put into those facilities and into 

the hands of those individuals, and as well the plans are in place 

to make sure that that’s extended in the direct fashion that this 

Act intends. And certainly we see a government that’s reducing 

and cutting resources and cutting staff in so many different 

areas of government but yet endeavouring to do some additional 

work in an area such as this. 

 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

We need to make sure that we see the plan, that we see the 

resources and that it’s well understood. And so part of this will 

require that plan to be shared — back through this committee 

process, back to the legislature — those procedures to be 

established to inform certainly those individuals that are in 

those facilities, how is that going to occur as far as the 

communication to inform those individuals of this right? But 

also how are they going to inform them of how to access this? 

And then what are the plans to ensure that that access exists and 

exists in a structural way — that isn’t set up once but then 

neglected through time — but set up, entrenched in procedures 

within those facilities and that access provided to the 

individuals for whom it’s intended? 

 

We are looking as well that this makes some changes around 

the ability to obtain information from government agencies, 

brings forward legislative authority or, as I understand, some 

enshrining of that right and the importance of it. And certainly 

that information is fundamental to a fair review both for the 

individual, the complainant who’s brought forward the concern 

of wrongdoing, but also for the organization or for the ministry 

or for the agency that is in question. 

 

So that’s incredibly important and something that we will be 

continuing to examine — making sure that the changes that are 

within this Bill are in fact all that’s required to make sure that 

the Ombudsman office has the access to the information that it 

requires within the scope of organization and boards and 

agencies that it’s responsible for and that it reviews, but also 

making sure, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a process and a 

procedure, if you will, set up within government, within 

ministries, within organizations of government, within entities 

of government, within agencies of government to be able to 

share that information in an expeditious fashion, in a fashion 

that allows circumstances to be dealt with in an expedient way 

and making sure that there’s nothing there to impede the 

important review of the investigation from the perspective of 

the Provincial Ombudsman’s office. 

 

And this gets to again the question of concerns around some of 

the failure to plan that we see in different aspects of this 

government but also some of the potential consequences of 

many of the cuts that we see to the front-line civil service all 

across Saskatchewan. And what we need to instill is a 

confidence to Saskatchewan people that this isn’t just lip 

service that’s being provided by way of changes to an Act but 

in fact there’s going to be effective change in government in 

how it can communicate and how it will communicate with the 

Ombudsman. 

 

So we’re glad to see this enshrined in legislation — that access 

to that information — in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people, in the best interests of fairness, Mr. Speaker. But we 

also need to make sure. And we’re going to be looking and 

seeking clarification as to the plans and procedures of 

government and of those agencies to ensure that they’re 

consistent with this Act. 

 

What we don’t want to have is changes on one front where 

we’re providing authorities to the Ombudsman’s office, as we 

should be, but then not moving forward with how government’s 

operating, how agencies are operating, how entities are 

operating that will need to provide that important information 

back to the Provincial Ombudsman to undertake the very 

important work. 

 

What we do recognize is that many of the changes that were put 

forward are supported by the Provincial Ombudsman, that 

independent office. That’s important for us to know that. It 

provides us a level of confidence in some of the changes that 

are brought forward. 

 

I know one of the changes that wasn’t requested was the 

exclusion, Mr. Speaker, of access to the reports and the 

information around health quality reports. So while we’ve 

expanded the scope or the government’s expanded the scope of 

the Provincial Ombudsman office to review health care matters, 

there’s an exclusion of those Health Quality Council and health 

quality committee reports and information. And we have many 

questions on that front about why this exclusion, why this 

exclusion exists when it wasn’t something that was requested 

by the Ombudsman. And certainly that access to information is 

so fundamentally important to the thorough and independent 

review that goes on when a matter is before the Ombudsman. 

 

You know, I guess the one thing that we can keep in mind, 

although it’s not as strong as what it would be if it was included 

through legislation, but is that while the Ombudsman’s office 

isn’t entitled to that information, there is nothing that precludes 

the entities in health quality committees from sharing that 

information when needed, when requested by the Provincial 

Ombudsman. And certainly I think there is significant merit in 

having access to that information to the independent 

Ombudsman, to this independent office, but also it would be 

important to have a co-operative relationship in light of the fact 

that it’s not enshrined through legislation. 

 

But those are the kinds of questions that certainly we’ll be 

raising, Mr. Speaker, as we move into committee with the 

minister, as to why, when many of the changes were supported 

by the Ombudsman in providing the kind of support that’s 

needed to strengthen that office and the very important role it 

fulfills to Saskatchewan people, why would this change occur, 

or why would this be enshrined in legislation in a manner that 

excludes access from the Ombudsman to those important health 

care reports. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Quite frankly if the Ombudsman and that important office is 

tasked with the role of reviewing health care matters, it would 

only seem to make sense, Mr. Speaker, that they’d have access 

to that information to support a full review in making sure that 

justice and fairness exists for Saskatchewan people. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to certainly 

thank the Provincial Ombudsman and the staff of the 

Ombudsman’s office for the work that they provide, the role 

they fulfill to Saskatchewan people in ensuring an avenue and 

an important mechanism that allows Saskatchewan people to 

seek resolution to a potential wrongdoing or of wrongdoing, to 

be able to bring injustice to light and to see that it’s resolved, 

and to make sure that that fair treatment is there for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The reality is that government or some agency of government 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

certainly interfaces or touches the lives of Saskatchewan people 

and families in significant ways, Mr. Speaker, whether through 

health care or whether through the significant lists of entities 

and roles and functions of government. And it’s imperative that 

an independent process exists to make sure that Saskatchewan 

people have full support in raising concerns as it relates to their 

treatment or decisions of government or boards or entities 

related to government. 

 

So we certainly want to thank those in the office, thank them for 

the important work they do, let them know that we’re going to 

continue to ask questions on this front to make sure that the 

legislation before us is in their best interests, that there’s not 

possibly some refinements or amendments that could be made 

to serve Saskatchewan people better. We’ll continue on in that 

consultative process and seeking questions and clarity on many 

fronts. 

 

But at this point in time as it relates to Bill No. 25, The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011, I would now move to adjourn debate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 27 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi 

de 1995 sur l'éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to 

rise today in the debate on Bill No. 27. It’s always interesting as 

a legislator to rise and participate in Bills relating directly to 

education matters. I do this fully conscious of the fact that I’m 

rising in this House opposite certain individuals who had 

something to do with my education, Mr. Speaker. So it’s always 

sort of a bit of a double jeopardy there in terms of how it 

worked out, and will I be graded fairly on the speech after the 

fact? So we’ll see how it works out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But Bill No. 27 and its consequential cousin, Bill No. 28, of 

course they’re sort of a package deal. But Bill No. 27, the 

primary objective contained, the primary objective at the start of 

the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the measure of starting the school year 

2012-2013 after the Labour Day long weekend. Now who can 

argue with that, Mr. Speaker? Who would have trouble with a 

longer summer? We in Saskatchewan of course look forward to 

the summer months and, you know, prolonging summer. Who 

could argue with that? 

 

Well we don’t have so much problem with the substance of 

that. We think that’s a fair enough proposition. We do have 

some concerns with how this came about. Certainly when the 

measure was brought forward in the campaign, it was provided 

under the auspices of a survey conducted by Saskatchewan 

Tourism and responded primarily to an economic imperative as 

opposed to an education imperative. And again, that’s not the 

end of the world even of itself, Mr. Speaker, but we do think 

that when you’re proposing something that fairly substantially 

changes the way that a sector in this province does their 

business, it’s usually a good policy to consult them on it. 

 

And I certainly look later on in the legislation, some of the 

additional changes that regard other aspects in the legislation 

and the fairly extensive work that was undertaken with the 

LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents] and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 

and SASBO [Saskatchewan Association of School Business 

Officials] and the Saskatchewan School Boards Association, 

you know, that is as it should be. 

 

But certainly the marquee provision in this legislation concerns 

changing the first day to be following the Labour Day weekend. 

And on that, there was a fairly unanimous, there was a fairly 

unanimous opinion registered on the part of the education sector 

that teachers and school boards and administrators and people 

that are out there on the front lines of the education system on a 

day-to-day basis hadn’t been consulted of this change. 

 

And again, the substance of the change itself, Mr. Speaker, not 

so much the problem. But as you find out very quickly in 

politics, it’s not so much what you’re doing but how you are 

doing it can be a problem as well. So policy is one thing, 

process is another. And on this, the process was, I think, found 

to be wanting. That is further compounded by the fact that there 

are a number of things that have been punted to regulation in 

this legislation. 

 

And so again, Mr. Speaker, there are some things that we know 

in terms of the specific provisions of the legislation that are 

public here on the floor of this Assembly, and there are other 

things that have been punted to further consultation with the 

sector. Again, we’re glad to see consultation with the sector and 

the people that are tasked with the daily work that takes place in 

the education sector, that very important work. But again, Mr. 

Speaker, as regards something as fundamental as this, it would 

have been good to see better consultation on the part of the 

government with the sector. 

 

So it came back to the sector after having said, and the Labour 

Day provision was announced, that it was replying to the 

Tourism Saskatchewan survey. And there’s the CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] radio story from the time where it 

cites it as being a primarily economic measure and helping 

families to better plan their summers and their summer 

vacation. Again, all perfectly worthwhile pursuits, Mr. Speaker, 

but again, if you’re going to be working with the sector and 

your word is going to be worth its salt, then you should be out 

there having consulted with something like this. 

 

It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, you know — and again 

there’s some questions that will be worked out as this carries 

forward — but what happens with the days of instruction, what 

happens with that envelope that is being set out in the 

legislation with the amendments to section 163 wherein the 

earliest instructional day being the first day following Labour 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

Day and the latest instructional day being June 30th, what 

happens with the days of instruction in that envelope, we’ll be 

very interested to see. It’s also interesting, and again we had 

welcome guests from the Fransaskois community here today, 

but the assurance made by the minister in her December 14th 

speech stating: 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that boards of 

education and the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises will 

continue to set specific timelines for the opening and 

closing dates of schools. They will also set the school 

hours of operation and the general schedule of operation 

for the school year. Boards will also retain the autonomy 

to allow teachers to begin working earlier to prepare . . . 

[their school work]. 

 

Again we’ll see how that shakes out in practice, Mr. Speaker. 

But again the attention that is paid after the fact to the 

autonomy of those organizations is interesting to see. But the 

proof, as always, Mr. Speaker, is in the pudding, and we’ll see 

how this shakes out. 

 

Other regulations that will be attendant to these changes in 

legislation, again there is some ongoing work that was done 

with the sector vis-à-vis meetings with the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation; the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association; the League of Educational Administrators, 

Directors and Superintendents; or the Saskatchewan 

Association of School Business Officials. There’s some 

ongoing work that kicks up a number of provisions that might 

be better, somewhat concerned as being of a housekeeping 

nature. 

 

So as regards questions of, oh, the education councils that had 

been part of the legislation previously, some work around the 

teacher classification and certification boards, the work again 

with the sectors around what is square by the Copyright Act of 

Canada, the work that is ongoing around the sources of 

financing, which again has been part of a longer piece of work 

and I’ll have more to say about that under the discussion around 

Bill No. 28. And again how the sector relates to things like The 

Tabling of Documents Act. And again the appointment of 

auditors and the ability to choose for each of the school boards 

in that regard. And again some of the — this being of greater 

consequence, Mr. Speaker — the way that school boards are 

able to finance their activities. 

 

So again we’ve moved from a situation where we see the 

government already asserting a fairly significant amount of 

power in what has traditionally been a balanced relationship 

between the province and local school boards, something which 

has had its frustrations over the years, goodness knows, but 

something which is the tough work that needs to be done if 

you’re going to square off the concerns around the autonomy of 

the local boards and the ability of local boards to respond to 

local circumstance and set priorities but at the same time 

balancing off the educational offerings within a provincial 

system. 

 

And I guess we’ve seen over the years of this government 

certainly, you know, there were more funds available, so more 

funds being extended to the sector, and that’s something that is 

right and proper. But something that we’ve seen is a change in 

the power relationship. And moving from what had been one 

somewhat balanced between the local school boards and the 

province, and running everything out of the Education ministry, 

versus the authority of the local school boards. Previously of 

course the local school boards had recourse to the tax base. And 

also, you know, again by which if you don’t control the 

financial levers, arguably you do not have autonomy. Or if you 

don’t have some recourse around access to the property tax base 

in pursuit of local initiatives and local priorities, can you 

genuinely call yourself an autonomous board? 

 

And I think there’s an argument to be made that we have seen 

that balance shift from one where there was more balance 

between the two sort of entities in the power equation to a 

situation where there’s much more power now concentrated in 

the hands of the provincial government. And again there’s, I 

think, a price to be paid for that in terms of local autonomy and 

response to local initiatives. Hopefully we’ll get to a place 

where that brings about greater transparency in terms of who 

pays what. 

 

And you know, I think there’s an analogy that can be made to 

the health regions, Mr. Speaker, where for many years we saw 

members opposite talk about decisions that had been made by 

SAHO, the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, 

or by individual health districts as some kind of a buffering 

thing. Or that if you brought out SAHO spokespeople, that it 

was a question of, I think the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone liked to talk about, bringing out the oven mitts. 

 

Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see how the Saskatchewan 

Schools Boards Association, how LEADS, how the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], how SASBO, we’ll see 

how they fit into the circumstance now, Mr. Speaker. Again 

time-honoured representatives of the sector that have a fairly 

complex and sophisticated understanding of the sector and the 

needs of the sector, and we’ll see how they respond to this 

change in the power balance. Because of course the funding 

formula has been a long time coming, and again there’s still 

transitional monies put up in this budget this year, Mr. Speaker, 

and how something like Bill No. 27 is fully realized. We’ll see 

how that goes once it’s up and operational in and of itself. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But there are questions that are very worthwhile asking, Mr. 

Speaker, and questions with which, you know, as relates to the 

requirements for borrowing on the part of local school boards. 

Certainly we’d heard from the Regina Public School Board 

concerns around the inability of the Regina Public School 

Board to access the less-expensive interest rates that the 

provincial government is able to afford itself. Again if the 

provincial government has increasing control, does it make 

sense to be foisting greater interest costs on the individual 

school boards as they set out to borrow for things like capital? 

We think there’s an argument to be made that that does not 

make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as far as the work that’s been ongoing on the part of the 

members opposite, we saw a new funding system being 

promised for years. It is finally here, but even then, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a transitional aspect to it that is still working 

through the system. School boards have still, you know . . . 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

They’re out conducting their analysis, which is on the one hand 

a bit surprising, given how long this work has been undergoing, 

but on the other, as concerns records of certain members 

opposite when it comes to the conduct of affairs in the 

educational sector, not terribly surprising, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again the change to starting after Labour Day, again we’ll 

see how that works out in the details. But on the face of it, the 

idea of a longer summer in Saskatchewan, obviously we 

understand the attraction of that, Mr. Speaker. But the way that 

it was done and the way it was brought forward raises some 

definite concerns as to how this government approaches the 

sector. 

 

Other changes in the legislation that relate to different aspects 

of how the sector is financed and how it relates to the new 

funding formula, also cause for concern, Mr. Speaker. But again 

in terms of how these things roll out, we shall see how it plays 

over time. The number of things that have been kicked off to 

regulations as well, the proof will be in the pudding. But 

already we know the school boards in the sector are doing their 

analysis. And how that relates to Bill No. 27, we shall see. But 

again if past is prologue, we will have some cause for concern. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got some other related topics that I’ll 

reprise under the consideration of Bill No. 28. But at this time, 

as regards Bill No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 2011, I 

would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 27, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 28 — The 

Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well hello again, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to rise 

in the debate on Bill No. 28, The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011. Again this is tied in with the 

amendment to Bill . . . or that were contained under Bill No. 27 

and sort of following the train of it or move parallel to it. 

 

Certainly one of the things that this piece of legislation is seized 

with is the way that the educational sector relates to safeguards 

that have been in place previously in the former educational 

financing system. Again, Mr. Speaker, we’re very interested to 

see how this plays out in terms of an evolution we see under 

way or development we see under way, where in that balance 

that had previously existed between individual school boards 

and the provincial government, and we see where that is tilted 

definitely to more control on the part of the provincial 

government. And of course fundamental to that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the control that is exerted over the financial levers and access to 

the property tax base. 

 

And again there are some good things on the one hand, Mr. 

Speaker, but on the other, we’ve got a set of changes that, 

despite some transitional funds being available to implement 

the system or transition into the system, we see those having 

come along quite a bit later than they were promised to the 

sector and to Saskatchewan people. How this relates to the 

financing that is available to individual school boards, and 

whether or not there are aspects of this that really make sense in 

terms of sending individual school boards out to do ever greater 

borrowing in the private money markets, and in terms of 

denying them access to the preferential rate, interest rate that 

the province has, and again there’s a fine line, there’s a balance 

to be struck in that kind of financing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’d like to see the argument being made instead of 

something being put forward that we think would appear to be 

more footed or based in off-loading to the sector that will 

amount to putting various of the school boards into a box. And 

then the idea of autonomy being converted into, well they can 

now decide what to cut as opposed to what to finance from their 

own source revenue. 

 

Very clearly the control in the sector now rests with the 

province. And we’ll see how the sector, we’ll see where it’s at 

over 10 years, Mr. Speaker, in terms of whether or not people 

look to the local school boards when it comes to matters of 

educational policy as they have traditionally, Mr. Speaker, or 

whether or not they’ll clue into the fact that it’s now the 

province that in so many ways calls the shots for the sector. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that balance had already been there, 

had been there over years in the system. But we see this as a 

shift in that balance to one that very much has the province 

calling a lot of the shots. And again the kind of financial 

oversight that is offered or being amended under this Bill No. 

28, we shall see how this plays out. 

 

But again, I guess in some ways it simplifies the process, Mr. 

Speaker, because we won’t have individual school boards to 

look to when it comes to the setting of educational policy or, 

you know, really developing local agendas or renewal agendas 

or pick your locally determined set of objectives. That will now 

be much more in the hands of the Education minister, and I’m 

not sure that’s necessarily a good thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think something that we valued over decades in 

the province of Saskatchewan is that balance struck between the 

provincial system and local autonomy. Again, I know that that 

can make for some frustrating negotiations and that it’s never, 

those kind of back and forths are never as easy as they might 

look on paper. But we’ll see for real how this plays out, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I guess it’s worth noting, it’s always good to know who 

calls the shot or makes the decision, Mr. Speaker. But in so 

many ways, what these pieces of legislation represent is the 

assertion of provincial, much more provincial control over the 

education sector. And again we’ll see how this plays out, how 

this authority is shouldered on the part of those who will seize 

it. But if anything, Mr. Speaker, it makes it easier to know 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

where to address compliments or concerns as regards the sector. 

 

And again, the bottom line in all this is that education is one of 

the great levellers in our society, Mr. Speaker. It’s one of those 

great ways up the socio-economic ladder. If you don’t have an 

education system that is serving kids well, is serving families 

well, then you don’t have much as a society. And if these 

changes in fact move to improve that situation and provide for a 

better education of children in Saskatchewan and provide for a 

greater educational attainment for a more equitable system, then 

you know, we’ll see. 

 

I’ll be very interested to see how these changes play out over 

that longer haul, not just the year of the transition, Mr. Speaker, 

but whether or not these changes stand the test of a decade or 

so, and whether or not the kids that are in kindergarten right 

now or in pre-kindergarten right now, how will they be served 

come a decade on. Will they be better equipped to take on the 

modern economy? Will our system provide for both excellence 

and equity, Mr. Speaker, in a greater way, in a better measure? 

Or will we be continuing to . . . Will we see a system where all 

the shots are called from the Education ministry and local 

autonomy is just a historical artifact? We’ll see how this works 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I guess that is what I wanted to contribute to this debate 

around Bills No. 27 and 28. Again very important pieces of 

legislation and not just about the sort of marquee measures 

around, you know, making summer longer or the kind of flashy 

things like that. But again how we structure our system and how 

we bring the dollars to bear to educate kids in this province is of 

huge importance. And there are some very fundamental changes 

being proposed here that one of the challenging things about 

them is that we shall see. It won’t be tomorrow that we’ll see 

how they work out, Mr. Speaker, but we will see over this 

educational season and subsequent years to come how these 

work or do not work and how they serve kids learning or not, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28, 

The Education Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 28, The Education 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 29 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 29 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to once again rise to speak to this Bill No. 29, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Bill basically is describing some new rules that are being 

proposed to handle maintenance enforcement orders both within 

the province and extra-provincially. So the Bill is set up to 

allow the maintenance enforcement office, which was 

established in 1986, to work with other maintenance 

enforcement offices across Canada in order to be more efficient 

and move along the collection of these maintenance 

enforcement orders. 

 

In particular the minister noted in his comments back on March 

5th when he introduced the Bill that 91 per cent of payments 

that were due were collected, which is a remarkable 

accomplishment by that office, And I highly commend those 

civil servants for the work that they do. As I will often comment 

here, I’m concerned about cuts to the civil service because these 

are important jobs that these people are carrying out. And every 

time a vacancy is not filled or a job is cut, it means a lot of extra 

work for the people that are left behind and the additional stress 

of worrying about how the work’s going to get done or what 

work can’t be done and realigning priorities. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The work of the maintenance enforcement office is very 

important work for a lot of people and certainly some of my 

constituents. Indeed I have constituents that were in just last 

Friday worrying about maintenance enforcement orders. So I 

know that they’re there, and they’re doing good work for the 

government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The purpose of this Bill is that the minister indicated that there 

was a review done recently and so there’s some improvements 

that are being proposed at this time. The Bill adds a new 

provision to the court to allow suspension of certain 

enforcement actions for a period of six months. So that’s one of 

the things the minister indicated that was a good move. 

 

The second one is it allows them to enforce a maintenance order 

against assets located in Saskatchewan in cases where the payor 

lives somewhere else and the maintenance order is being 

enforced in other jurisdictions. So it provides some of that 

provincial, extraprovincial continuity that helps the people that 

are the owners of the order or the people, the spouse or the 

parent that’s responsible for the custody of the child. So it’s 

definitely one that smooths out that process and allows things to 

operate a lot more efficiently interprovincially. 

 

And then finally, I think there’s provisions on the 

confidentiality provisions in the Act, how information is going 

to be released. 

 

So there’s quite a few changes in the Act, and I’ll just take a 

couple of minutes now, Mr. Speaker, to look at some of those 

changes. Of course the idea of having an ability of a court to 

intervene in a spousal arrangement or custody arrangement is 

well established in our country. And it’s one that I think has 

been controversial in many ways, and it’s very difficult when 

people are splitting up and separating for these custody 

arrangements to be dealt with. And there’s been a number of 

cases go all the way to the Supreme Court of Canada on this 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

and what the rights of the children are, what the rights of the 

spouses are, and what kind of obligations are to be provided for 

by the non-custodial parent. 

 

Obviously we don’t get orders for maintenance when people are 

together. It’s only at the point of separation that we see the 

court intervening in these kinds of relationships. And at that 

point, you know, the obligation of the non-custodial parent is 

crystallized in law. So you know, it’s interesting to think that if 

a couple stayed together and one partner wasn’t providing for 

their children, there’s no ability for the court to intervene, but 

certainly once the divorce or the separation takes place, the 

courts under the current law can step in and assist the custodial 

parent to ensure that there is support paid for the children by the 

other partner or the parent of the children. 

 

There’s a whole procedural process for getting these custody 

orders or maintenance enforcement orders in place and that’s in 

the existing Bill. So this Bill is just amending The Enforcement 

of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, and there’s a few new 

definitions that show up. They took away the word garnishee 

and garnishment out of this Bill, and the reason given for that is 

it allows this Bill to be more, more similar and well, more 

similar than other provincial Bills that deal with maintenance 

enforcement. So that’s one of the main changes you will see, is 

the substitution in that case wherever it said garnishment, you 

will see seizure of account, and where it used to say garnish, it 

would be seizure. So that seems to be one of the prevailing 

changes in the Bill. 

 

There’s a new section that’s being added regarding interest and 

how interest is calculated on late payments. So that’s something 

that probably was seen as an omission in the previous Bill, so 

that gives an ability for a calculation of interest on arrears in the 

case of arrears. 

 

The other changes that we see, there’s a number of changes in 

regarding seizure from outside of Saskatchewan. So in the case 

where the director of the maintenance enforcement office is 

looking for seizure outside of Saskatchewan, they can serve a 

notice of seizure directed to any person that’s alleged to be 

indebted to the payor if the person seeking seizure files a 

maintenance order with the director as well as a document that 

purports to be issued by the appropriate authority and the 

reciprocating jurisdiction, and if that document appears to look 

like a seizure notice, and it’s issued with respect to support, 

alimony, or maintenance. So that’s how the director can serve a 

notice of seizure here. As long as they see one that’s 

comparable in another jurisdiction and it meets the rules in this 

section, then they can issue a notice of seizure here in 

Saskatchewan. So that’s helpful. 

 

I guess one other comment that I do want to make is in section 

53(1), and these are some key changes that are being proposed 

by this Bill. I just need to find that section. 53(1) is added . . . 

And there it is. It’s added to authorize the court to order 

suspension of enforcement measures, but it places restrictions 

on the order. So the preliminary clause says, if the director has 

commenced a default hearing under section 51, then the payor 

can apply to the court for an order suspending enforcement 

measures on any conditions the court considers appropriate, but 

it cannot exceed six months. 

 

So this is a big change for the Bill in that in some cases where 

the debtor, the parent paying support or the spousal support, is 

not able to meet his obligations or her obligations . . . So what 

this does is allows the director some discretion in the 

enforcement of the order. And before they’ll seek seizure or 

garnishment, they are allowed to give an extra six months. 

 

It’s I guess a notion of fairness in some ways, Mr. Speaker, but 

obviously it will impose a hardship on the custodial parent if the 

period is, or the order is suspended for six months. But the court 

is required to be satisfied that it is for valid reasons. And we all 

know that things happen, and for whatever reason someone may 

not be able to meet their obligations for . . . You can imagine a 

host of situations where that might rise. So in that case, the 

court now has some discretion there to enforce, or suspend I 

guess, the obligation to pay for a period not exceeding six 

months. 

 

There’s a number of other changes in this particular Bill that are 

fairly administrative and semantic. So at this point, I think we 

can say that we’ve concluded our comments for the time being, 

and I am going to propose that we move this Bill to committee, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 29, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands deferred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 30 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 30 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

pleasure I rise today to speak to Bill 30, the fairly lengthy name, 

An Act respecting consequential amendments resulting from the 

enactment of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

The minister, when he rose in the House to speak to this on 

March 5th, indicated that it amends 11 English-only Acts that 

refer to garnishments pursuant to The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. And as you will recall, on the 

previous Bill, I was speaking to the notion that the word 

“garnishment” has been removed in order to provide 

consistency with other enforcement Acts across Canada as the 

reason and the motivation for these changes. So there’s a 

number of Bills that are being amended as a result of the 

changes to . . . the proposed changes in Bill 29 that we just 

spoke to. 

 

The Automobile Accident Insurance Act is now amended, and 

they just strike out the word “garnishment” from the relevant 

sections in that Act. 

 

In The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act, they repeal the 

section that refers to the previous Act. And they’re going to 

substitute a new section 81, and this is a prohibition against 

discharging an employee for seizure proceedings. So if 

someone’s had a garnishment or now a seizure of their account, 

any employee, they cannot be fired for that reason. So this is 

just cleaning up the language in that clause. 

 

The Labour Standards Act, there’s a section 81 that is also 

being amended, and again just striking out the word 

“garnishment” and putting in “notice of seizure.” 

 

And clause 53 of The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act is 

now amended again striking out “garnishment,” substituting 

“seizure.” 

 

The Pension Benefits Act, similar changes to that one. 

 

And The Provincial Court Act is also amended and the word 

“garnishment” is struck and the word “seizure” is substituted. 

 

Under The Public Employees Pension Plan Act, we have the 

same kind of changes in section 23(2) of that Act where 

“garnishment” is struck and the word “seizure” is substituted. 

 

The section 8 of The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act is repealed 

and a new section is substituted that again talks to seizure. I 

assume the one that’s being repealed refers to garnishment. 

Also not just the income plan Act, but The Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Act is amended again striking out “garnishment” 

and substituting “seizure.” 

 

The superannuation or supplementary provisions Act is 

amended, and again striking out “garnishment” and substituting 

“seizure.” 

 

So you see the impact of this maintenance enforcement orders 

on a number of pieces of legislation. Obviously it affects 

people’s pensions, income plans, and superannuation plans as 

well. And even the final amendment under this consequential 

Act is the amendment of The Workers’ Compensation Act, 

again to strike out “garnishment” and substituting “seizure.” 

 

So you could see the pervasive effect of the maintenance 

enforcement orders Act really on society and across our 

legislative agenda. These are important . . . The maintenance 

enforcement office is an important office in Saskatchewan, and 

it provides a service for again people that can be in vulnerable 

situations, particularly people who have custody of their 

children and require support from the other parent to ensure that 

the children receive the best that they can, given the financial 

circumstances that they find themselves in. 

 

So it’s an interventionist role on the part of government, but it’s 

one that’s necessary. And although I know there are difficulties 

on both sides when you need to resort to the maintenance 

enforcement office, quite a few people are able to resolve those 

disputes and provide for their children without having to resort 

to that office, and that’s good. As I spoke earlier, it’s always 

better to negotiate and mediate and find some sort of win-win 

situation for families when these types of situations arise. But in 

many cases that just isn’t the case, Mr. Speaker, so in those 

situations this kind of office is necessary. And it may seem 

harsh or arbitrary by some people who have orders filed against 

them, but by and large I think the goal of these Acts and this 

type of legislation is to protect children and ensure that children 

are looked after, even in the cases where there may be spouses 

or parents who aren’t able or aren’t willing to uphold their 

responsibilities to those children. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, the changes on this particular Bill 

seem fairly straightforward and necessary. So at this point I 

would like to move this Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 30, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Bill No. 31 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 31 — The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des 

jugements canadiens be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill, An Act to 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

amend The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 2002 and 

to make related amendments to The Enforcement of Foreign 

Judgments Act, is a further Bill in the suite that I’ve been 

speaking to in Bill 29 and Bill 30, and in this case it’s about 

protection orders. So it’s not so much about enforcement orders 

any more; it’s about protection orders where people have an 

order that’s been given by a court to protect them from someone 

else. And again it’s about personal safety, and certainly about 

public safety and the need for protection from certain 

individuals who simply will not stay away, basically, from the 

person for whom the order has been given. 

 

This is a terrible, threatening situation in many cases and quite 

often involves domestic disputes, Mr. Speaker, and very 

unfortunate circumstances that people find themselves in when 

there’s a breakdown and an inability on the behalf of one person 

to stay away from another person. Certainly we’ve seen some 

very notable public cases of that. I know that Anne Murray was 

one of the victims of these types of things. And we see it in the 

news from time to time where people are simply being pursued 

by an individual in a way that’s not healthy or safe, and they are 

able to apply to the courts to get that type of order to protect 

themselves. Not always are the orders sufficient, and tragedy 

can ensue, but in most cases I think the orders provide some 

level of comfort to the people who are suffering from this kind 

of situation, and it’s the best we can do, I think, as a society to 

help protect these people. 

 

This Bill, in this case, is attempting to provide for recognition 

and enforcement of foreign protection orders in the same 

expedited manner that we now have for out-of-province 

Canadian protection orders. So we’ve sorted out our house as 

far as Canada goes and on a national level, but this Bill is 

attempting to do it on a foreign level. So they’re trying to, we’re 

trying to make sure that the foreign protection orders are treated 

in the same way. 

 

Apparently this is the first province, Saskatchewan will be the 

first province to introduce this Bill. It has been recommended 

by the Uniform Law Conference of Canada. And the minister 

reminded us in his comments on March 5th that in 2008, The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act was amended to 

provide for special rules to enforce the national level of 

protection orders, and the Canadian civil protection order was 

defined to mean an order that was made in any Canadian 

jurisdiction. That prohibited a lot of activity including where 

one person could intimidate, threaten, coerce or harass another 

person. 

 

So these are just foreign civil protection orders that will cover 

the same subject matter in an order made by a foreign court. 

 

Again the minister pointed out that these amendments and the 

previous amendments from the Canadian protection orders Act 

were just implementing recommendations from the Uniform 

Law Conference of Canada. So they concluded, that conference, 

that where a Canadian court has determined an individual needs 

protection, it should be immediately enforceable insofar as that 

is possible. And so they wanted to make sure that that language 

was there because it often extended . . . There could be a delay 

in time before the order was enforceable in the other jurisdiction 

and that would put the individual at risk for sure. There’s no 

financial or property ownership consequences in these cases. 

And in an emergency situation with an individual potentially at 

risk, the choice of recognizing orders from a foreign state over 

formalistic approach enforcement requirements is consistent 

with the principled victims-first approach to this issue. And I 

think that’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker. The victims are the ones 

that need to be protected, and if you get formalistic procedures 

that hold up the process to get the order enforceable, then the 

sheriff’s hands are tied, the police hands are tied, and the victim 

is going to be in jeopardy because of that. So I think that’s an 

appropriate change and one that will provide for safety and, as 

the minister indicated, a victims-first approach. 

 

So they’re also amending the Act by coordinating the new 

procedural option with the existing process for the enforcement 

of foreign judgments. So the minister’s indicated that in his 

view there’s a balance of interest here protecting an individual 

at risk and the possibility of violence arising from failure to act. 

And it strongly tilts it towards expedited recognition and 

enforcement of foreign protection orders. 

 

So the Bill itself is fairly straightforward. There’s a change to 

part III of the existing Act. And what it says is, there’s now a 

definition for foreign civil protection order. And it’s a fairly 

lengthy definition, but it talks about as a foreign judgment or a 

portion of a foreign judgment that’s made by a court in a 

foreign state. And here’s the requirements: that kind of order 

has to prohibit a specified individual from being in close 

physical proximity to the person or following them from place 

to place. They cannot contact or communicate with them. They 

cannot attend at or within a certain distance of a specified place. 

So it could also indicate a location, like a home, for the person 

that’s being harassed. And they cannot engage in molesting, 

annoying, harassing, or threatening conduct at a specified 

person. So as long as that foreign order has these components in 

it, then it becomes a foreign civil protection order as defined in 

Saskatchewan law, and then there’s a definition for foreign 

judgment as well. So in this case, it’s not just the protection 

order, but it could also be a foreign judgment which would be 

defined in The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act, and that 

Bill is being amended as well as The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Act. 

 

The next clause that’s added is a deeming of the order, so in this 

case a Canadian civil protection order or a foreign civil 

protection order is deemed to be an order of the Court of 

Queen’s Bench. So that brings it within our Saskatchewan law, 

and at this point it’s now enforceable by sheriffs and by police 

authorities. 

 

So the next section we have is the enforcement by law 

enforcement authorities. And that tells us, now that it’s 

enforceable by Queen’s Bench, then it’s also one that can be 

enforced by law enforcement authorities, and the same thing 

goes for a foreign civil protection order. So this is for both of 

them — the Canadian civil protection order and the foreign 

protection orders. 

 

There’s another clause, clause 10.4 will allow these orders to be 

registered and enforced, and there’s clause 10.5 is the immunity 

clause. 

 

So those are the basic changes to this particular Bill, and I think 

they’re in order. And it appears that again the Ministry of 



April 2, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

Justice is doing good work in relation to the improvement of 

our legislative suite in relation to maintenance enforcement 

orders and enforcement of judgments, including protection 

orders and civil protection orders. 

 

So I don’t have any further comments at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, in relation to this Bill, so I would like to move it to 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 

31, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2011 be read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 32 — The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011/Loi 

de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires 

interterritoriales be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I am 

rising with great pleasure to speak to this Bill. It’s Bill 32, The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act. We have 

some extensive comments by the minister on this one. And I 

have had an opportunity to speak to it previously, so I don’t 

have a lot more to say today, but I just wanted to review how 

this Bill came about. And as the minister indicated, there is a 

national organization — it’s an interjurisdictional support 

sub-committee — and they’ve been making recommendations 

to these types of legislation for quite some time now. And this 

is sort of a fulfillment of the recommendations of the national 

organization that is looking at these support orders. 

 

So basically it’s like the other Bills I just spoke to, where we 

have civil protection orders or maintenance orders. Now we’re 

talking about interjurisdictional support orders. So it’s requiring 

courts to apply, first and foremost, the law of Saskatchewan 

when considering an application for interjurisdictional support, 

and this is for child support. And always the law of 

Saskatchewan will prevail because the child is then entitled to 

support under Saskatchewan law. 

What we’re trying to get at here under the interjurisdictional 

support orders process, it’s not clear if the order itself or the 

court file, not clear from the order or from the court file if it was 

made pursuant to federal or provincial legislation because, as 

you know, divorce proceedings are governed by federal law and 

applicants can start a variation application for their support 

order and find out they did it under the wrong Act. So this will 

just require the court to state in the order what legislation that it 

was made, and it will help eliminate the need for multiple 

applications to be made or filed with the court. 

 

So in this case, during an interjurisdictional support order 

application, the court in the reciprocating jurisdiction can 

request additional information from the applicant and then they 

can amend the court order subsequently. And this would reduce 

the time period for providing that information from 18 to 12 

months because 18 months is a very long time for these types of 

orders. 

 

They also add a new provision in the amendments to establish 

location services in order to allow other jurisdictions to request 

a search for a person in Saskatchewan prior to sending an 

application to the ISO [interjurisdictional support order] unit. 

So Saskatchewan’s ISO unit, or interjurisdictional support 

orders unit, gets applications from other places but they can’t 

confirm whether the respondent is living in Saskatchewan. So 

in that case, the ISO unit can determine that they don’t live in 

Saskatchewan and the application would then be sent back to 

the originating jurisdiction if it continues to search for the 

respondent. And that’s basically the changes that these 

amendments will do. They’re replacing ordinarily resident with 

habitually resident to be consistent with the Hague Convention, 

but other than that, Mr. Speaker, there aren’t a lot of changes in 

this Bill. And I think is something that again goes to 

consistency and it goes to the work that the lawyers and the 

bureaucrats over at the Ministry of Justice are looking after. 

 

And again I just want to commend them for the work that they 

do because we know that they’re important people in the 

bureaucratic process. So at that point, I don’t have any further 

comments and I would like to move this Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2012 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 895 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 895 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 895 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 896 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 897 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 897 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 897 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 897 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Pink Revolution Anti-Bullying Week 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 897 

 World Autism Day 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 898 

 Autism Services 

  Jurgens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 898 

 Saskatoon’s Sheepdogs Win Juno Awards 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 898 

 2012 Juno Awards 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 899 

 Sod-Turning for Group Home 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 899 

 Change of Command Ceremonies in Moose Jaw 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 899 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Federal Budget 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 900 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 900 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 900 

 Funding for First Nations Education 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 900 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 901 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 901 

 Funding for Academic Health Sciences Building 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 902 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 902 

 Federal Crime Legislation 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 904 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 904 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 904 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 907 

 Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 910 

 Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 915 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 918 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 920 



 

 Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 922 

 Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 922 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 923 

 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 923 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 925 

 Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 925 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 925 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


