




















































Hansard: October 26, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 2A  FRIDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1569 

 October 26, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, sir, in the west gallery are some guests 

that have joined us here today for the proceedings of the House. 

I’d like to introduce, seated in that gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mrs. 

Bryna Barclay who is the Chair of the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board. We also have Suzanne Bell, the CEO [chief executive 

officer] of SaskFilm and film commissioner for the province of 

Saskatchewan; Mr. J.P. Ellson, CEO of SaskMusic; and Mr. 

Shawn McGrath, writer, producer, and owner of Far Field 

Media in Regina and a board member for SMPIA 

[Saskatchewan Motion Picture Industry Association], the 

Saskatchewan media production industry association. 

 

These folks, along with a number of others, Mr. Speaker, have 

been involved in a consultation process with the government, 

and we’re delighted with their presence here today and their 

involvement in that process. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss, I believe 

Mrs. Barclay’s better half is also in your gallery — I just see 

him up there — Mr. Justice Ronald Barclay, the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner who’s also here today, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to join 

with the minister in welcoming the guests from the creative 

industries: Suzanne Bell, J.P. Ellson, Mrs. Bryna Barclay, and 

Shawn McGrath. I understand that there’s creative consultations 

going on, and I just want to . . . very glad that the government is 

consulting on the creative industries, but I would suggest that 

it’s a better idea to do it before you cut a program that’s so 

important to the culture and arts section. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask everybody to 

welcome the folks from the creative industries here today. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker it is an honour this morning to introduce a 

gentleman seated in the front row of your gallery. I would like 

to introduce the Minister of State Responsible for Finance in the 

federal parliament, Mr. Ted Menzies. 

 

Ted has been elected to the House of Commons in Ottawa for a 

number of times. He was first elected in 2004 and then 

re-elected, I believe, three times. He was made parliamentary 

secretary to the Minister of Finance back in 2007, and then in 

January of 2011 he was made Minister of State for Finance. A 

tremendous background in terms of involvement in Alberta, and 

has been involved with the Alberta financial services 

corporation, international communities as well like the Lions 

Club International. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to 

join with me in giving a very warm welcome to Minister Ted 

Menzies. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to bring 

the greetings from the official opposition to Mr. Menzies. I 

assume that you’re not here on a consultation mission to help 

our provincial government, but we’re very happy to have you 

here bringing the federal and Alberta perspective to 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

today to introduce three guests seated in your gallery. It’s my 

constituency assistant, Janet Hanson, and her daughter Jessica 

Montgomery and their friend Meghan Nicholls. Please welcome 

them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, sitting 

in your gallery is a group of individuals that are here, and 

they’re coming today and I want to honour them. Chief Bart 

Tsannie from Hatchet Lake and his council are here. Jean, Paul, 

Judy, Sharon, George, it’s good to see you here and welcome. 

They also have with them their senator, Angus Tsannie. Also an 

elder, Melanie, welcome.  

 

Also they have a youth with them, and I’d like to introduce 

them as well, Mr. Speaker. And to that, Nick, it’s nice to have 

you here, Gabriel. Also travelling with them is the band 

manager, Alex Maurice. He’s here with the group. And also 

sitting up there is Brandy, welcome to the legislature. But I also 

want to acknowledge, Brian Hardlotte is the vice-chief with 

PAGC [Prince Albert Grand Council]. Welcome Brian. Also a 

newly elected vice-chief is Joseph Tsannie. Welcome, 

congratulations. He’s the new PAGC vice-chief. Welcome. It is 

an honour to have you here.  

 

And I ask all my colleagues to join me. Today they are here; 

they want to raise some concerns and they want some answers. 

So I just want to welcome to the Legislative Assembly. It is 

your Assembly and welcome and I hope we do justice to your 

issues. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to join with the 

member opposite in welcoming the people, these people from 

Hatchet Lake and surrounding area to their Legislative 

Assembly. It is their Legislative Assembly. 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

I look forward to meeting with them this afternoon. In fact, 

we’ll be having a meeting around 2:30, I believe, to deal with 

some of the issues that they have regarding infrastructure and 

roads in the area, Mr. Speaker. So I look forward to answering 

any of their questions at that time and perhaps maybe even a 

question or two from the opposition before that time, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d like all members on the government side to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very proud to stand up today and recognize the people of 

Hatchet Lake and people of northern Saskatchewan. It’s a long 

journey here, Mr. Speaker, and these are primarily Dene 

speakers. So what I’d like to do, and very, very quickly in my 

short Dene abilities, I want to welcome them in their own 

language. And it’s customary to do so, and it’s very short, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, we also have a band manager along 

with the senators and the vice-chief and of course the elders and 

the delegation, is a friend of ours from my constituency, Alex 

Maurice. And Mr. Maurice was a mayor. He was a member of 

the armed forces. He was a boxer, a businessman. And 

yesterday his mother celebrated her 98th birthday. So happy 

birthday to Pelagie Maurice. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 

 

So in the translation, I’m very happy that you’re still very rich 

in the sense that your mother’s still with us. And I think it’s 

only important that we recognize the Dene visitors, the Cree 

visitors, and the people that travel a great distance to visit this 

Assembly, which is their Assembly. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

recognizing the Dene and the Cree and the support cast for the 

people of northern Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of the Assembly, I would like 

to welcome in the west gallery the two CAs [constituency 

assistant] of Carrot River Valley, Cindy Warner and Shelley 

Meyer. As everybody in this Assembly knows, the CAs do the 

major portion of the work while the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] is away, and that can especially be said 

in Carrot River Valley. I want to thank them and welcome them 

to their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 

to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I would like to 

welcome a couple of ladies that have made the trip down here 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook. They are in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and the first is Sally Gunderson who is the 

constituency assistant for the Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency. 

I’m very thankful for the hard work and effort that you bring to 

your job every day, and it makes it a true joy for me to work 

with you as we work here. 

 

Also travelling with Sally is a lady that has been hounded by 

her MLA for the past year to come down and observe routine 

proceedings here in Regina, and I would like to introduce my 

wife, Krista, that’s come down. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also seated in 

your gallery is my friend from Nigeria, Ola Ebenezer. I met Ola 

about six years ago at a Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association meeting in Malaysia and we’ve kept in contact. 

And this is his fourth visit to Saskatchewan. Ola always says he 

likes snow, and I’m very happy to accommodate him. There’s a 

foot and a half of snow waiting for him back in Biggar on the 

weekend. So please join me in welcoming Ola to our Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce 

an independent officer of the legislature, Mr. Ron Barclay, 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery. Mr. Barclay is the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner. I’d like members to welcome him here 

today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to present a petition calling for greater protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. We know that by 

positive statistics that convenience store and gas station 

robberies are down by one-third since 1999, largely due to 

increased safety practices, including two people working 

together on late-night shifts. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

immediately enact Jimmy’s law, to ensure greater safety 

for retail workers who work late-night hours. 

 

I do so present. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition in reference to 

SaskTel cell coverage. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Undertake as soon as possible to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation along with the 

adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; Buffalo 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation and the community of Turnor Lake including 

the neighbouring communities in each of those areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

the people from Canoe Lake, Cole Bay, Jans Bay, and I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, that 

is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of the leadership and community of Wollaston Lake. I 

will be serving this petition. There are many signatures that 

support this from the community, hundreds of names. 

 

And the prayer reads: 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan stop turning their 

back on the people from northern Saskatchewan and start 

investing in public highways in the North. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the construction of the 

road to Wollaston Lake, which was started under the 

previous NDP government, has shown little to no progress 

and must be completed quickly. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the leadership and 

community members of Wollaston Lake. I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to inform the Assembly that we 

have two returning Pages. They are Breanna Goertzen and 

Rikki Gusway who will be working with us this session. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Foster Families Week 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to rise in the House today to recognize the dedicated and caring 

foster families across the province during Foster Families 

Week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, foster parents provide so much more than food 

and shelter. They provide those intangible things that can’t be 

measured or counted, yet really do count the most. Foster 

parents provide a home and a family and love and security. It is 

through these things that children are shown support and caring 

— the most important things of all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know first-hand that being a foster parent is so 

much more than a job. It is a calling. It is a 24-hour-a-day, 

7-day-a-week calling to care for our most vulnerable citizens. It 

is a calling to make a difference. 

 

As foster parents, both Marj and I have found enormous 

gratification in helping children who are feeling dejected and 

lost. Our most recent foster son has lived with us for over three 

years now and he is now enrolled as a first-year university 

student at the University of Regina. We are incredibly proud of 

him and what he has worked to overcome. 

 

I want to thank all foster parents across the province for making 

a real difference in the lives of Saskatchewan children and 

youth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Saskatchewan Elections 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this has been an eventful week 

for Saskatchewan democracy as we’ve seen voters cast their 

ballots in the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

elections and in the municipal elections as well. On behalf of 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] Official Opposition, I want to 

congratulate all of the candidates for putting their names 

forward. As all of us in this Chamber well know, it is no easy 

thing to stand for election, and everyone should be appreciative 

of their efforts. 

 

I was in Saskatoon earlier this week and heard the speeches of 

all the candidates for election at the FSIN’s [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] general assembly, and I want to 

congratulate Chief Perry Bellegarde on being elected chief of 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

Congratulations also to Dutch Lerat for being acclaimed as the 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

third vice-chief. As well, I want to make a very special note of 

Kimberly Jonathan’s election to vice-chief, becoming the 

FSIN’s first ever elected female vice-chief. 

 

In the municipal elections we have many new and returning 

community leaders. That list includes the re-elected mayor of 

Saskatoon, Don Atchison, and new mayors Michael Fougere of 

Regina, Greg Dionne of Prince Albert, and Deb Higgins of 

Moose Jaw who made history as well by becoming the friendly 

city’s very first female mayor. 

 

The official opposition looks forward to listening to and 

working with all of these servants of the people in the months 

and years ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Warman Becomes Saskatchewan’s Newest City 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today 

to offer my congratulations to Warman, Saskatchewan’s newest 

city. Tomorrow residents of Warman will make their city status 

official with a signing ceremony and celebration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Warman is one of Canada’s fastest growing 

communities. In the 2006 census the population of Warman was 

almost 5,000 people — 4,764. Just five years later, Warman’s 

population increased by almost 50 per cent to over 7,000 

residents. And, Mr. Speaker, this government is working to 

make sure that Warman continues to be ready for growth. A 

new middle year school is under construction and will be ready 

to be opened in the fall of 2013. A newly redesigned Highway 

305 is funded. This new highway will meet the growing traffic 

and economic opportunities in Warman. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has increased revenue sharing to Warman by 192 

per cent since 2007. 

 

The population growth in my area is a combination of 

Saskatchewan people coming back home, folks moving here 

from across Canada, and immigrants from around the globe. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we welcome them all. I would like to extend 

congratulations to the newly elected, first ever city council and 

to all residents of Saskatchewan’s newest city. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

2012 Provincial Métis Awards 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

inaugural awards of the Wiichihiwayshinawn Foundation took 

place last Saturday, October 20th, here in the city. 

 

The foundation was formed last December and it works to 

empower Métis people and promotes the achievement of Métis 

youth. The event was very successful, Mr. Speaker, featuring a 

performance of fiddling by Nathan Baker and a healing session 

by the Rainwater Singers. Christine Ginter was the keynote 

speaker of the evening and Ms. Ginter spoke of her own life and 

how positive role models helped her overcome difficulties. She 

said you should never underestimate the positive influence that 

we can have on our children and in our communities. The 

foundation honoured her with the award of the Gabriel Dumont 

Award. 

 

There are other awards, Mr. Speaker, including the Social 

Justice Louis Riel Award which went to Leo Daigneault. The 

Central Urban Métis Foundation won the Community and 

Social Development Award. The Youth Award went to Dallas 

Boyer. Leah Dorion won the Arts Award. Jon Lagimodiere won 

the Journalism Award. Keon Francis Flamont won the 

Entrepreneur Award. Dr. Carrie Bourassa won the Science and 

Wellness Award. And the Most Honourable Métis Woman went 

to Jeanne Pelletier. Finally, Senator Nora Cummings received 

the Portrait of Honour and Lifetime Achievement Award. 

 

Congratulations to all the winners and thank you to the 

organizers of the Wiichihiwayshinawn Foundation for 

recognizing the important work that these individuals do in the 

Métis community. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Growth for Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 16th our 

government released The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: 

Vision 2020 and Beyond. Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Plan 

for Growth is our government’s map to keep this province 

growing. It is a plan that will build on the strength of 

Saskatchewan’s people, resources, and innovation to sustain 

Saskatchewan’s place among Canada’s economic leaders. 

 

Our government has set some ambitious targets in the plan for 

growth such as 1.2 million people living in the province by 

2020, investing $2.5 billion in infrastructure over the next three 

provincial budgets, reducing the gap between Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal students by 50 per cent by 2020, and cutting the 

provincial debt in half from its 2007 level by 2017. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s plan for growth has been called 

pragmatic, visionary, ambitious, and achievable by Leader-Post 

columnist Bruce Johnstone. We cannot afford an ad hoc, poorly 

thought-out approach to our province’s future. Mr. Speaker, 

unlike members opposite, our government is not afraid to set 

goals through focused and disciplined targets. Mr. Speaker, our 

government will continue to work hard to make Saskatchewan 

the best place to work, to live, and to raise a family. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Autism Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I’m 

very pleased to acknowledge that October is Autism Awareness 

Month in Canada. This is a very valuable opportunity for us to 

learn more about autism spectrum disorder and to build a better 

understanding of this complex condition that has a growing 

impact on many Canadian families. Mr. Speaker, our 

government recognizes our role in the importance of building a 

comprehensive service system for individuals affected by 

autism and their families. 

 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

We have already taken action. Over the last six years our 

government has allocated successful budget increases to support 

enhanced autism interventions. Mr. Speaker, we are investing 

over $7.5 million into targeted autism services and supports this 

year. This is an increase of $1 million in additional funding 

over 2011-2012. This added funding allows for more intensive 

therapeutic programming for preschool children who require 

increased intensity of treatment to support their learning needs. 

 

I would especially like to recognize the Autism Society Canada 

which is celebrating its 35th anniversary this month. This 

organization has been spearheading the promotion of Canadian 

Autism Awareness Month and autism education and prevention. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite everyone here to join with 

me in celebrating Autism Awareness Month. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Civic Elections 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to pay tribute to all candidates all across this great 

province in the recent civic elections and especially to 

congratulate all the successful candidates who are now 

Saskatchewan’s mayors and reeves, councillors, and school 

board trustees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is really looking forward to 

working with the many new rural and urban councils in the 

upcoming years. We’ve worked very hard to develop a strong 

relationship with all municipalities all over the province in the 

last five years. Through different initiatives, particularly 

increased revenue sharing through a full percentage point of 

PST [provincial sales tax], our government feels that 

municipal-provincial relationships are indeed at their strongest 

point in decades. 

 

Municipalities can continue to expect this kind of support from 

their provincial government. In the coming fiscal year, for 

example, municipalities will see over $264 million in revenue 

sharing — more than double the amount they received in 

2007-2008. It’s remarkable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is growing, and in order for our 

province to continue to grow, we will need strong 

municipal-provincial relationships. I ask all members to join me 

in congratulating the successful candidates in the civic 

elections, and we look forward to working with them to grow 

our province together in the years to come. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Throne Speech and Performance of Government 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Last week the Sask Party announced their 

booklet of ideas to a select crowd at a $100-a-plate dinner in 

Saskatoon, or a luncheon in Saskatoon. And yesterday they 

delivered the plain and uninspiring version in the Throne 

Speech. 

 

Neither had anything new for the middle class. In their booklet 

and repeated in the Throne Speech, there’s nothing for small 

business and no concrete actions to improve First Nations 

education or employment. Instead, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

has plans for more spin and PR [public relations] on projects 

they’ve already announced, sometimes up to six times. The 

Premier needs to stop the re-announcements and recycling of 

old ideas. 

 

My question to the Premier: when will he reveal concrete plans 

to help Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s interesting the hon. member refers to the select 

crowd that was there for the presentation of the growth plan. 

The member will know that that speech was webcast, so the 

select crowd included all humans who have the Internet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Moreover I could tell you that the growth plan was put on our 

website, and the website hits increased significantly, Mr. 

Speaker. The plan is widely available and was made widely 

available that day. He also references a booklet, Mr. Speaker. 

What the province is calling a plan for growth and lauding in 

most corners of Saskatchewan, the hon. member refers to as a 

booklet. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we did a little searching. We found 12 NDP 

booklets from their time in government — 12 plans for growth, 

so to speak, from the NDP. Mr. Speaker, there was one in 2000. 

After they presented it, the population dropped 7,672. There 

was one in 2001. They released another booklet. The population 

dropped 2,816. They announced another one in 2002. We lost 

2,489. They announced another plan, another booklet in 2005; 

3,752 people, that’s what our population dropped by, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank goodness the people of the province stopped 

them from printing any more booklets or there would be no one 

left in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the last year, the Premier has 

had too many unpleasant surprises for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Only after the election did they roll out their 

surprises for millions of dollars for more politicians or a death 

blow to the film industry. Only after last year’s Throne Speech 

did they demand seniors pay more for their prescription drugs. 

Only after last year’s Throne Speech did they roll out their 

plans for what could be the most extreme labour legislation in 

the country. 

 

Yesterday’s re-announcements leave middle-class families, 

students, small business people, and countless others waiting. 

To the Premier: how much longer will Saskatchewan people 

have to wait until the Sask Party starts to work for them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the good news is they haven’t 

had to wait at all. From the day this Party took office, we’ve 

been working on various issues the hon. member is raising. 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

In our first term, he fails to mention, 114,000 low-income 

Saskatchewan people were dropped completely from the tax 

rolls of this province, Mr. Speaker. In that first term, Mr. 

Speaker, we delivered, for the middle and lower class, the most 

significant provincial income tax relief in the history of the 

province. We delivered, for all people in the province, property 

tax relief, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He references students. We have, Mr. Speaker, just in the last 

session, kept a promise and introduced the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship. Mr. Speaker, we continue to fund 

post-secondary education in this province so that tuition is 

affordable. The graduate retention plan allows students to earn 

it all back if they will stay in the province. These measures are 

for everybody in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have taken those actions 

and those measures, and we are building on them today, is 

reflected in the configuration of the House you see today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that this government is 

starting to sound like a tired, old government. The only real 

plan for the Premier and his Sask Party government is to rehash 

their 2003 platform of privatization. This sends chills 

throughout the province, worse than the onset of winter, that the 

Sask Party would turn back the page to their ideas for 

privatization at any cost. They’re dressing up and rebranding 

their failed P3 [public-private partnership] secretariat once 

again. And one has to wonder if the reason that they would 

contemplate selling Crowns and pushing privatization has to do 

with the financial state of the province. 

 

So my question to the Premier is very straightforward: does this 

Throne Speech provide nothing because this government has 

run out of money? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting 

just how out of touch this nimble nine is across the way, Mr. 

Speaker. We have had a growth plan presented in the province. 

There are three pages I have, I could read from them, of groups 

in Saskatchewan — individuals and groups not just in the 

business community but the municipal sector, Mr. Speaker, 

school boards — commentators who are saying precisely the 

opposite about the growth plan that’s formed the basis of the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. These are the facts. These are the 

facts of the debate that we’re about to enter with respect to the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

The hon. member references privatization, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

going to probably have a bit of a debate for example on 

whether, if the province needs new liquor stores, should the 

taxpayers’ dollars be put into building those . . . put into bricks 

and mortars for liquor stores or should we invest in hospitals, 

schools, and highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know where that tired old ideology will lead them, Mr. 

Speaker. But they might want to stand up today and get a little 

bit with the times, connect with the people of the province, all 

these groups who like the growth plan, participate in the debate 

in a meaningful way. Maybe, Mr. Speaker, maybe, just maybe 

their lot would improve politically in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week the 

Premier confirmed he is drafting legislation for the sale of one 

of our province’s Crowns, Information Services Corporation. 

It’s a glaring omission from last year’s Sask Party election 

platform, last week’s booklet, and yesterday’s Throne Speech. 

And the Sask Party plan for selling the profitable ISC 

[Information Services Corporation] comes without any mandate 

from the people. There’s no public willingness to sell our 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And when it comes to ISC, there isn’t 

industry support either. The Saskatchewan Land Surveyors 

Association wrote the Premier last week and said, “Our 

association strongly opposes this contemplation by this 

government.” 

 

To the Premier: for three elections he says he’s not selling the 

Crowns. Why now is he going to do exactly the opposite? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I was a little afraid that this new piece of carpet 

wouldn’t get much wear, but I guess that’s changed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is talking about ISC, and 

there has been some talk through the media as to an evaluation 

that our government is in the process of conducting regarding 

ISC. Mr. Speaker, no decisions have been made at all. 

 

What I have found really interesting over the last week or so 

that when people have approached me about ISC, they haven’t 

asked necessarily, are you selling it or not? They have asked, 

what is it? Mr. Speaker, ISC is our land titles. It also handles 

corporation registry, Mr. Speaker. It handles personal property. 

It also handles vital statistics. And this is very, very important, 

Mr. Speaker. If any decision, and there has been no decision 

made yet, but if any decision is ever made to move ISC to a 

different format, Mr. Speaker, such as a public offering, vital 

statistics would not be part of that offering. Vital statistics 

would move back into probably the Ministry of Health, and that 

information would be secure for sure within this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we just want to be clear with the 

record. Under the NDP, ISC was not sold. The NDP supports 

the Crowns to provide good services to the people. The Sask 

Party’s plans on privatization are finally coming to light. ISC 

made $15 million in profits for this province last year. The 

Saskatchewan Party wants to get rid of these dollars that help 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

fund vital services for people. In the words of the land 

surveyors, Mr. Speaker, “The ramifications of this sale of ISC 

will adversely affect the people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

To the minister: why would the Sask Party privatize the Crowns 

like ISC when they turn a profit for the people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, our government has entered into an 

evaluation of ISC. No decisions have been made, Mr. Speaker, 

as we move forward. But I find it interesting, the opposition line 

of questioning. Should we not enter into an evaluation of the 

company? Did they enter into an evaluation of the company, 

Mr. Speaker? Well in fact they did, Mr. Speaker. In 2003 they 

had ISC evaluated, and in 2006 they also went through an 

evaluation of ISC, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what was even more interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

is one of the last bills that that government passed was the 

Crown protection Act. In the Crown protection Act, there was a 

glaring omission, Mr. Speaker: ISC was not in the Crown 

protection Act. So you got an evaluation of the company, an 

exclusion from the Act, Mr. Speaker. What was the intent of the 

former government? Can the member opposite tell us why they 

excluded ISC from the Crown protection Act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s unfortunate we 

get no answer to the question, but rather a question back. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have clearly spoken. It’s 

common sense in our province that the Crowns provide 

excellent service, and they do so for the benefit of everyone. 

Yet the Sask Party thinks otherwise. They’re the only people in 

the province who would rather sell off a profitable enterprise 

like ISC instead of investing in the services that help everyone 

in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, among other things, ISC handles land titles. If a 

private sector monopoly runs this service, costs will go up for 

everyone. The Sask Party will be directly responsible for higher 

costs to sell a farm or register a business. The Sask Party is 

letting their ideology trump common sense. To the minister: the 

people of Saskatchewan didn’t vote for the privatization of 

Crowns, so why would the Sask Party sell ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And as I said, no decision has been made as to the direction that 

we would be going with ISC. But we have conducted an 

evaluation; that’s very public. And we’ll be moving forward, 

looking at that evaluation when it comes in, Mr. Speaker, and 

making that decision. 

 

But I find it interesting that the members opposite would talk 

about price increases under ISC, Mr. Speaker. When they were 

government and ISC was put into place, Mr. Speaker, in the 

early days of ISC, you could take a house that was worth 

$300,000. Mr. Speaker, what the fees were through land titles at 

that time were 280. Once the NDP got done with it, it was over 

$1,000, Mr. Speaker. That’s an increase of 275 per cent for fees 

under that NDP government for ISC, Mr. Speaker. Under our 

government, we have actually dropped the fees, in the last four 

years, that ISC charges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there was any change in ISC, certainly the fee 

piece would be addressed, Mr. Speaker, because we would want 

to make sure that there is some assurances for Saskatchewan 

residents as we move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Northern Roads 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the chief and council are here 

from Wollaston Lake. The Sask Party government announced in 

2008 a road would be completed by this fall. Mr. Speaker, that 

has not happened. 

 

The former NDP government announced an all-season road 

would be built, but the Sask Party has done next to nothing in 

the last five years. The chief and council are very concerned. 

Mr. Speaker, the leadership, community members want their 

government to take action on this road. 

 

To the minister: why has the Sask Party failed to build a road to 

the community of Wollaston Lake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as through introductions, we know members from 

the communities just mentioned are here. I am certainly looking 

forward to sitting down and meeting with a number of them this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to look at the services that they need, 

Mr. Speaker, as we move forward. 

 

We also know that the roads, certainly some of the roads in the 

northern part of our province, haven’t kept up. It hasn’t been 

over the last necessarily four or five years, Mr. Speaker. But the 

NDP, it’s interesting the member opposite — and he’s standing 

there, well he’s sitting there laughing, Mr. Speaker — we 

haven’t got it done in four years, Mr. Speaker, or five years. 

Who was the government for 16 years when that road didn’t get 

built, Mr. Speaker? Obviously the two representatives, the two 

MLAs from the North didn’t have much of a voice at the 

cabinet table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — They talk about record revenue. Mr. 

Speaker, the government doesn’t have any common sense. The 

chief and council of Wollaston Lake want their community 

members to be treated the same as all of Saskatchewan people. 

Wollaston Lake needs this road to have a safe supply of food 

and goods for the families in their community. Mr. Speaker, if 

the barge is down, the community is cut off. That means that 

there is no road access for food and fuel. 

 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, the road is also about safety for the community. In 

fact a teacher died in 2010 falling through the ice road. This is 

unacceptable. Will the Minister of Highways commit today to 

build this road for the people of Wollaston Lake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I 

look forward to hearing their concerns as we meet this 

afternoon. But I will say that, Mr. Speaker, over the past year, 

just in the northern area of our province, we’ve put in a little 

over $42 million to deal with maintenance and capital costs, 

Mr. Speaker. Over the last four years, Mr. Speaker, four and a 

half years, we’ve put in over $200 million into the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can all probably agree that more needs to be 

done, absolutely. But I will tell you that $200 million over the 

last four and half years, it far outweighs any of the dollars that 

the NDP put in. That was when they had a member, a minister 

of Highways from their area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear. It’s 

very clear. Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear. I want to be very clear. 

Here’s a press release that talks about the road to Wollaston 

Lake being completed in the construction year of 2012 under 

this government. It was their announcement. Will the minister 

recommit the money today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we put in over 

200 million over the last four and half years. More needs to be 

done. We’re going to be obviously hearing those concerns 

raised again today, I’m sure, from the group, Mr. Speaker. But 

again, we have put money in. We need to do more. 

 

We just announced the extension of 914, Mr. Speaker. That will 

be a huge benefit for that northern region. It’s an investment of 

over $30 million by our government as we move forward, Mr. 

Speaker. So it’s not that there hasn’t been money put into the 

North; maybe there needs to be more. I’m looking forward to 

hearing their concerns. 

 

We know that the forest industry had certainly gone through a 

slump for many, many years. That seems to be picking up and 

with that, increases traffic volumes, Mr. Speaker. That certainly 

helps justify more expenditure into the North. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

First Nations and Métis Employment 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For three consecutive 

months, Statistics Canada has reported a year-over-year drop in 

the number of First Nations and Métis people employed in our 

province. Last month, the statistics were alarming: 21.3 per cent 

unemployment for First Nations people off-reserve; 10 per cent 

unemployment for Métis people. And this is compared to 4 per 

cent unemployment for non-Aboriginals. We will never be all 

we can be when we leave these whole swaths of people outside 

of what’s happening in the province, Mr. Speaker. This 

negatively affects the entire province and prevents 

Saskatchewan from reaching its full potential. 

 

My question to the minister: when can we expect real action 

from the Sask Party government when it comes to employment 

for First Nations and Métis people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, since this government took 

office, great things have happened to the economy of 

Saskatchewan. It’s our government’s intention to keep this 

economy growing, moving forward. The Premier’s speech the 

other day is a perfect example of that. Mr. Speaker, we want all 

sectors of this economy to move forward, all people in this 

province. 

 

Absolutely I’m concerned about the numbers that the member 

opposite just stated. But let’s look at the real numbers, Mr. 

Speaker. What’s happened under this government, not just 

some recent fluctuations, Mr. Speaker, but what’s happened 

under this government with First Nations employment versus 

what was happening under the members opposite: October to 

December 2007, the number of First Nations employed, Mr. 

Speaker, 34,000. In September of this year, Mr. Speaker, 

39,600. Thousands more First Nations people employed under 

this government than when those members opposite were 

running the economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for three consecutive months, 

year-over-year declines for First Nations and Métis 

unemployment . The minister talks about all people, Mr. 

Speaker, but their actions tell a very different story. It was two 

and a half years ago, Mr. Speaker, that that Sask Party 

government cut, eliminated the Aboriginal employment 

development program. It’s been a year and a half since they 

launched their task force, Mr. Speaker, a task force that was 

supposed to report back months ago. Mr. Speaker, meanwhile, 

we have months of declining employment for First Nations and 

Métis people. 

 

My question to the minister: how many months of declining 

First Nations and Métis employment will it take for the Sask 

Party government to take urgent action? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, since taking office, we’ve 

made record investments in post-secondary and skills training 

for First Nations people. A perfect example of that, Mr. 

Speaker, is in the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies, a post-secondary institution that’s done 

phenomenal work for First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

We’ve dramatically increased funding there, 25 per cent 

increase in funding since 2007. Mr. Speaker, the Gabriel 

Dumont Institute, 34 per cent increasing in funding since 2007 

when those members opposite were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think just intuitively, the people of this province 

can look around, look at the economy today, compare it to the 

economy when those members were in government and 

everyone was fleeing the province. Mr. Speaker, absolutely 

there’s some cycles that happen in the economy. We’re 

concerned about those numbers. We’ll be monitoring. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve got more work to do, but we’ve made a great 

start. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can brag all he wants, 

but his actions tell a different story. It was that government, Mr. 

Speaker, that scrapped, that eliminated the Aboriginal 

employment development program. Representatives have 

travelled a great distance from Wollaston Lake here today, Mr. 

Speaker, because they are concerned. Because, Mr. Speaker, 

they want to have their voice heard. They don’t want hollow 

promises and parroting of rhetoric from the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker. They want a government that admits its mistakes and a 

government that takes urgent action. 

 

My question to the minister on behalf of the people who are 

here from Wollaston Lake: will he admit, will he admit that it 

was an error to cancel the Aboriginal development program, 

and when will he take urgent action as opposed to the missed 

deadlines we’ve seen from the task force, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, this government has done a 

great deal of work. We have a record number of apprentices, 

apprenticeship training for First Nations people. We’ve made 

record investment in adult basic education and literacy 

programs, Mr. Speaker. Obviously we’re concerned about that. 

We’re doing what we can. First Nations people in this province 

are going to have a great role to play in the future of this 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it somewhat surprising that the member 

opposite, who’s a leadership candidate for the NDP, is raising 

this issue of First Nations employment and yet he hasn’t stated 

where he’s at on the federal leader’s position on the so-called 

Dutch disease. Because, Mr. Speaker, what would that do, what 

would that do to things like uranium mining in northern 

Saskatchewan which is a massive employer of First Nations 

people? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite ought to make his 

position clear. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that kind of deflection from the 

minister is pathetic, frankly, Mr. Speaker. And frankly, it is 

insulting to the people. It is insulting to the people who 

travelled hundreds of kilometres to come to the legislature to 

speak about the priorities for their community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Members from Wollaston Lake want to be full participants in 

Saskatchewan’s future. They want, Mr. Speaker, to be 

contributing to the economic and social fabric of the province. 

They travelled here to have their voices heard. As they’ve 

stated, Mr. Speaker, they desperately need a road to their 

community. And they need this government to take urgent 

action on the issue of employment for First Nations and Métis 

people. 

 

My question to the minister: when will he stop with the 

deflection, take this issue seriously, Mr. Speaker, and take 

urgent action on the issue of First Nations and Métis 

employment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, we do take this issue very 

seriously, and our solution to this problem is very simple, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to grow the economy for everyone in the 

province. Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Premier’s growth speech 

was all about the other day. Mr. Speaker, this government is 

fully committed to that. 

 

That member used the word pathetic. Do you know what’s 

pathetic, Mr. Speaker, is those members opposite trying to hive 

off a sector of our population and playing fast and loose with 

people’s emotions. Mr. Speaker, this government has done great 

things for First Nations employment. There’s thousands more 

First Nations people working in this province. And as this 

economy moves forward, there’ll be thousands more First 

Nations people working in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member opposite is just simply playing 

politics, trying to get some airtime for his leadership campaign, 

which I understand is not doing very well. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to table the reports 

of the statement of votes volumes I and II for the 26th 

provincial general election. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Resignation of Deputy Chair of Committees 

 

The Speaker: — I would also like to inform the House before 

orders of the day that the member for Regina Wascana Plains 

has resigned her position as Deputy Chair of committees on 

May 25th, 2012. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask for 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding the 

appointment of a new Deputy Chair of committees. 

 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

a leave to move a motion regarding the Deputy Chair of 

committees. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

move: 

 

That the member for Saskatoon Eastview be appointed to 

preside as Deputy Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the Government 

House Leader: 

 

That the member for Saskatoon Eastview be appointed to 

preside as Deputy Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask for 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding sitting days. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding House days. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Sitting Days 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

when this Assembly does adjourn on Thursday, November 

8th, 2012, it shall stand adjourned until Tuesday, 

November 13th, 2012, at 1:30 p.m.; and further, 

 

That in accordance with rule 3(2), the 25th and final day 

of the fall period of the revised parliamentary calendar 

shall be Thursday, December 6th, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

when this Assembly does adjourn on Thursday, November 

the 8th, 2012, it shall stand adjourned until Tuesday, 

November 13th, 2012, at 1:30 p.m.; and further, 

 

That in accordance with rule 3(2) the 25th and final day of 

the fall period of the revised parliamentary calendar shall 

be Thursday, December the 6th, 2012. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for leave of 

the Assembly to move a motion regarding the absence of a 

member from the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding the absence of a member 

from the House. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That leave of absence be granted for the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone for Monday, October the 29th to 

Thursday, November the 1st inclusive, to attend the 

Global Seminar on the Role of Parliaments and Extractive 

Industries in Vienna, Austria on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone on Monday, October 29th to 

Thursday, November the 1st inclusive, to attend the 

Global Seminar on the Role of Parliaments and Extractive 

Industries in Vienna, Austria on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I feel so 

honoured and privileged to be the first to rise today to address 

the Speech from the Throne, a speech that clearly outlines this 

government’s vision for this province and also its commitment 

to a plan to achieve that vision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can hardly believe that it’s been a year since our 

first Throne Speech of the twenty-seventh legislature of the 

province of Saskatchewan, a speech which also outlined our 

vision and our commitment to good governance for this 

province. After one year in my term as MLA for The 

Battlefords, it’s been a very exciting year for me, a challenging 

year in some ways. And I would like to just take this 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank firstly my Premier and also 

my colleagues for all of their encouragement and advice and 

assistance over this past year. It’s been a great year. 

 

I look back over my inaugural speech last fall and one of the 

questions I had in that speech was, would I ever cease to 

wonder at the marvel of this building and this Assembly? And I 

think I can answer my own question now. I don’t think I ever 

will. I look forward every day that we come to this building, to 

this place, to represent the members of our constituencies. And 

it is an honour for me to be here every day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to continue by thanking the constituents of The 

Battlefords. They’ve also been very supportive of me. They’ve 

shown confidence in me in electing me as their representative. 

They brought me questions, concerns, advice, and suggestions, 

and it’s greatly appreciated. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I may just continue before I get back to 

my address to the speech, I would like to extend my special 

thanks to two ladies who have been very helpful to me over the 

past year. They’re doing a tremendous job of running my 

constituency office. They are Lillian Robinson and Gail Heintz. 

They take care of constituent questions, their complaints, their 

concerns, and they do it very professionally. But also, I think 

more importantly, they do it with compassion, with the utmost 

concern for what is important to our constituents. 

 

My biggest thank yous go out to my family and to my wife. 

Linda has been my strength always, but especially over the past 

year she has been there for me in the good times and the 

not-so-good times. Thank you very much for being there, 

keeping me grounded, and helping me chill out a little bit when 

I sometimes get a little wound up too tight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a time when so many jurisdictions are facing 

massive deficits, huge cutbacks, this government has brought in 

a balanced budget that has continued to provide the citizens of 

this province with upgraded highways, reduced wait times for 

surgery, school repair replacement, has increased benefits for 

seniors and those with handicaps, and as well has reduced our 

debt. 

Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne outlines our plan to 

continue to grow this province. We will continue to grow it, Mr. 

Speaker, not for the sake of growth itself, but for all of the 

benefits and the opportunities that that growth can provide, 

benefits such as in my own constituency of The Battlefords 

where we have just celebrated the official opening of two of the 

components of our new CUplex [Credit Union complex]. The 

Dekker Centre for the Performing Arts has just been opened. It 

is an ultra-modern theatre that I am sure will be enjoyed by 

citizens for many generations to come. The aquatic centre is an 

oasis for fun in the water with the pool, two waterslides, a wave 

pool, a lazy river, and much, much more for the entertainment 

of all the people of The Battlefords. Tomorrow we officially 

open the curling rink, and shortly thereafter we will open the 

fourth component of our CUplex. The field house will be 

completed. Our citizens greatly appreciate the $7 million that 

this government was able to contribute to that project. 

 

[11:00] 

 

This Throne Speech also talks about investing in infrastructure. 

And again in The Battlefords, we’ve been able to take 

advantage of this government’s funding for two major projects 

in the town of Battleford. These projects were the urban 

connector through the town, where our provincial contribution 

was $7 million; the new water treatment plant upgrade which 

was an investment of $2.3 million from this government. This 

plant now has the capacity to provide safe drinking water for 

2,000 more people in our town. That will bring us up to our 

population of 6,000 people. 

 

These are the types of projects that growth can help us afford. 

Mr. Speaker, that is why we continue to talk about sustained 

growth for this great province. And, Mr. Speaker, let’s not 

forget about the $5 million that has been allocated in our last 

budget to begin planning for our new Saskatchewan Hospital in 

North Battleford. But we are also very aware that we not only 

need new infrastructure, but we must also continue to budget 

for the huge infrastructure deficit that we inherited. We have 

heard loud and clear from all constituencies from all corners of 

our province that we must renew and rebuild Saskatchewan’s 

infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last five years we invested more than $5 

billion to improve or expand highways, schools, health care 

facilities, and municipal infrastructure. And we can also add to 

this massive expenditures in both SaskEnergy and SaskPower. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, last spring during a committee 

meeting, the Minister Responsible for SaskPower shared with 

us a rather interesting statistic. And that was that there are 

considerably more power poles in this province than there are 

people. I found that quite interesting. And as you know, much 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you for that. And as you 

know, much of our power grid was built in the ’50s and ’60s. 

And we know wooden poles only last so long. So we know we 

have a lot of work to do, not only to build the new grids for our 

increased population growth, but to replace some of the existing 

system. As one of my colleagues commented after that meeting, 

he said the power poles are something like you politicians that 

were born in the ’50s: you’re well past your best-before date. 

But let me assure you, Mr. Speaker, that is certainly not the 

case. 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

Another part of our plan for growth in Saskatchewan is building 

our workforce. We have outlined our plans to continue to attract 

former residents to return home. We will engage the federal 

government to increase the cap on immigration nominees from 

4,000 to 6,000 annually. We know that we must continue to 

improve educational outcomes for First Nations and Métis 

people. We must close the achievement gap between First 

Nations and non-First Nations students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week I had the opportunity to attend the 10th 

anniversary celebrations for Sakewew High School, our local 

First Nations school. This school has become a model for First 

Nations education right across Canada with excellent 

graduation rates. In fact, one year they actually graduated more 

students than any other First Nations school in the country. Mr. 

Speaker, this is the kind of success story we need if we are to 

fill our employment needs of the future. 

 

I was pleased that this Throne Speech highlighted our continued 

concerns for those in this province who are the most vulnerable. 

We have recently increased the Saskatchewan assured income 

for disability program by $2,400, and we will continue to add to 

this amount by adding an average of $1,800 more by 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the phenomenal growth we have experienced in 

recent years has led in part to increased housing costs. We are 

aware that this creates problems for low- and moderate-income 

earners to enter the housing market. And that is why we have 

initiatives in place to help add 12,600 new housing units so that 

these moderate-income earners can actually realize their dream 

of home ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again in The Battlefords, with the assistance from 

Sask Housing, we recently opened over 40 low-income housing 

units. And a 21-unit affordable condo project will soon be 

completed, thus allowing 21 families access to a safe, quality, 

and affordable home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the future is bright for this great province we call 

home. We are setting ambitious yet achievable goals for 

ourselves, and we have a plan to achieve those goals. We want 

to continue to be a leader in Canada. We believe we will soon 

surpass British Columbia as an exporting province. We are 

already a leader in potash and uranium production. We are 

leading the way in carbon capture technology. As well, we are 

now Canada’s top agri-food exporting province with more than 

$10 billion of exports in 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am excited about the contents of the Speech 

from the Throne. It outlines our vision and our plan for 

continued growth for this great province. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to move a motion, seconded by the 

member from Regina Coronation Park, and the motion reads as 

follows: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 

assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 

speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us 

at the opening of the present legislature. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 

Battlefords, seconded by the member for Regina Coronation 

Park: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

address this House and second the Throne Speech motion by 

the member from The Battlefords. 

 

It’s been almost a year since the 2011 election, a year in which 

our government accomplished a great deal: a balanced budget, a 

growing economy, and a record high population, to name a few. 

 

But a good government knows that no matter how much has 

already been achieved, there’s always more that can and should 

be done. Mr. Speaker, that’s why I and all of my colleagues in 

government spent this past summer asking our constituents 

what more can we do. I asked the people of Coronation Park 

this question, the people who took the time to visit my office, 

the groups I met with in the community, and the members of the 

public I met at events this summer. 

 

The constituents of Coronation Park took the question seriously. 

Everyone I asked took the time to think about what government 

means for them and what it could mean in the years ahead. 

They told me what we have been doing right, and they were 

quick to point out what we could be doing better. 

 

They told me they want their government to mean what we say 

and say what we mean. Mr. Speaker, that is this government. 

They want a government that follows through on its 

commitments, a government that keeps its word. Well, again, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s this government. People want a government 

that offers them help but not a handout, a government that 

respects its citizens, that supports them to be independent. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what our government is all about. 

 

So as I reflect on the year that’s been and look forward to this 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

legislative session, I want to thank the men and women of 

Coronation Park for welcoming me as their new MLA and for 

taking the time to voice their opinions on what our government 

can do to make Coronation Park, Regina, and Saskatchewan 

even stronger. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Coronation Park saw themselves 

reflected in the budget last spring and now see themselves 

reflected again in the Throne Speech. They know that they have 

been heard and that this is a document that understands the 

day-to-day struggles that working people are facing. All 

summer my constituents reminded me how the biggest 

challenge can often be the simplest challenge — to live within 

one’s means. We all know the temptation, Mr. Speaker, to 

spend what we have when we have it, and perhaps even borrow 

a little to add to it. But, Mr. Speaker, that can lead to trouble. 

 

And my constituents, working men and women raising families, 

know all too well how important it is to spend wisely. They 

know what it’s like to weigh every decision considering what 

you have, what you need, what you can afford, and how much 

you need to set aside for the future. That’s why our 

government’s commitment to balanced budget rings true to 

them because a government needs to be careful with its money 

as families are with theirs. After all, a government’s money is 

really the people’s money. They trust us with their hard-earned 

tax dollars, and the least we can do is treat that money as wisely 

as they themselves would. 

 

My constituents have thanked us for setting a good example by 

being fiscally responsible, by being committed to balanced 

budgets, by looking for smart ways to save, and by paying 

down our debt. As one constituent told me, my children 

understand when I explain that we as a province owe money 

and we are going to pay that off and live within our means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was proud to campaign on a platform that said 

we could balance the budget and improve the quality of life for 

some of our province’s most vulnerable citizens. We promised 

it then; we followed through in last spring’s budget, and now 

we’re going even further with this fall’s Throne Speech. 

 

As the Throne Speech states, our goal is to make Saskatchewan 

the best place in Canada for persons with disabilities. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m always cognizant of the struggles that people with 

disabilities are facing. I am proud of our track record so far. 

And I’m particularly pleased with the Throne Speech 

commitments to further increase benefits under the 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability program, or SAID. 

SAID was actually the first issue that brought voters through 

my door during the campaign, and it was an issue we heard over 

and over on doorsteps, on the phone, and in the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SAID is a valuable program that supports 

independence, respect, and dignity. These are things that many 

of us take for granted in our daily lives, but to someone with a 

disability unable to earn an income, independence, respect, and 

dignity are precious and hard-won. 

 

I’ve had the good fortune to meet many people who have 

benefited from SAID, people who face enormous challenges in 

their daily lives, people like the folks who live at Huston 

Heights, a 50-unit apartment-style independent subsidized 

housing complex in Argyle Park for people with disabilities. 

 

The people of Huston Heights were a bit skeptical when they 

first met me. They didn’t know much about me, but I kept 

going back, meeting more and more of them, whether they 

wanted me to or not, and slowly but surely getting to know 

them as they got to know me. I spent afternoons over coffee and 

evenings over chili suppers building a better understanding of 

this unique community because, make no mistake about it, they 

are a community. They’re also a family and a network of 

mutual support. The men and women who live there support 

each other the way all good neighbours do, and the meaning of 

being a good neighbour runs a bit deeper there than it usually 

does in a city this size. Many of the folks who live there receive 

SAID benefits, but SAID is not always enough. 

 

Living with disabilities can be complicated, and the Throne 

Speech reflects that. It recognizes important concerns around 

education, employment, inclusion, transportation, and housing. 

And the Throne Speech commits our government to working 

with the community to build a comprehensive strategy that will 

consider all of these issues. It also includes a commitment to 

add another 12,600 new housing units by the year 2016 to 

provide better, broader access to safe, affordable, and quality 

housing. 

 

I think we’ve all seen the benefits a housing project can bring to 

families, neighbourhoods, and communities. I know I have. 

Take the Silver Sage affordable rental units that opened up this 

summer in my constituency — 24 new units that support 

families, improve their quality of life today, and build a strong 

future for their children tomorrow. It’s a great example of 

partners like Sask Housing, city of Regina, and Silver Sage 

holdings coming together with a common goal and making that 

goal a reality. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Making goals a reality is something our government has had a 

lot of experience with, especially when it comes to ambitious 

goals like growing Saskatchewan’s population. Our province is 

growing faster than it has in the last 90 years, and immigration 

has played a big part in this. I see the results everywhere I look 

in my constituency: newcomers to Canada settling in and 

building new lives here, children from around the world 

attending schools like Coronation Park, St. Michael, Mother 

Teresa, and the Regina Huda School. 

 

Regina Huda School is a great example, Mr. Speaker. Just this 

past June, I was honoured to be part of their fifth grade 12 

graduation celebrating the successes of some outstanding young 

people. Many of these young men and women were born 

elsewhere, but the majority of them are staying right here in 

Saskatchewan to attend university and build careers. Every 

graduate I spoke with had a clear vision for their future, and 

they were already well on their way as scholars, leaders, and 

community builders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my office hears a great number of newcomers that 

have come and asked for assistance, clarification, and 

conversation. Coronation Park is home to a multitude of 

newcomers, and I’m proud to have the opportunity to meet and 

work with many, and I’m looking forward to being a part of 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

welcoming many more. This will be aided by our province’s 

continuing engagement with the federal government to increase 

the annual cap in the immigrant nominee program by 50 per 

cent, from 4,000 to 6,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech doesn’t just focus on bringing 

new residents to Saskatchewan, it also focuses on improving the 

outcomes for many of the residents already here, including the 

First Nations and Métis people. It includes a commitment to 

work with First Nations and Métis organizations to improve 

educational outcomes and increase employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen first-hand the importance of education 

and employment opportunities. For the last six years I’ve had 

the honour to teach sociology electives to licensed practical 

nursing students at Kawacatoose First Nation. The students 

were enrolled through SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] but had the opportunity to 

study close to home, close to family, friends, children, their 

community and elders, and of course with a great instructor. 

 

But seriously, even though I was the one teaching the course, 

they were the ones who taught me many important lessons: how 

important it is to make sure that students are supported in their 

learning; how important it is for educational institutions to be 

flexible, to try new things, and to work in partnership with local 

communities; as well as the importance of traditional teachings 

to health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost all of my students graduated their course. 

And out of those graduates, all of them found employment in 

this province — some in rural communities, some in cities, and 

some on their reserve. They’re all contributing to 

Saskatchewan’s ongoing economic success. And they’re all 

doing so because they are able to attend classes through a very 

innovative pilot project that has become the model for bringing 

the school to the student instead of bringing the student to the 

school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to innovation, not 

just in terms of innovative education models, but also 

innovation in health care, research, and development. One of 

our boldest initiatives has been to step forward as the first 

province in this country to fund research for the liberation 

therapy for MS [multiple sclerosis] symptoms. I think 

everybody in this room, and probably a few outside its walls, 

know how strongly I feel about the value that liberation therapy 

can provide. And I’m honoured to be part of a government that 

is supporting scientific, evidence-based clinical trials well 

ahead of our counterparts provincially and federally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the years I’ve had the pleasure to be part of 

Saskatchewan’s cultural community. From my early days 

supporting live independent music as co-owner of The Venue to 

stints shooting video for Much Music to producing original 

pieces of art, I’ve had the chance to meet many of our 

province’s cultural leaders. And I was honoured, and still am, to 

be invited to be a part of the recent creative industry’s 

consultations. Each and every session, here and in Saskatoon, 

provided both information and collaboration between the 

sectors. It has been fascinating to listen to the different 

perspectives and nuances between and among the different 

sectors. At the conclusion of these sessions, there is an 

appreciation as well as a degree of hope. These consultations 

support our Throne Speech commitment to build a long-term 

strategy to advance the commercial objectives of the creative 

industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech clearly establishes a strong 

vision for Saskatchewan’s growth and success. It supports 

families. It supports communities. It supports industries. It is 

built on bold goals and new ideas. 

 

And I’m going to digress a little bit here, but new ideas are not 

always embraced when first proposed. And I think a good 

example of this is Mike Myers in his SNL [Saturday Night Live] 

skit, “Lothar of the Hill People”. And as Lothar says, look, 

Father. Look, I made this, and I think it could help us and make 

it easier to haul things because it rolls. I call it a wheel. What do 

you think? Can we use it for helping to haul things? Well, son, 

that might be a good idea, but it’s a new idea. And because it’s 

a new idea, we must fear and reject it. 

 

And to quote Anthony Robbins: 

 

Don’t be afraid of new ideas. Be afraid of old ideas. They 

keep you where you are and they stop you from growing 

and moving forward. Concentrate on where you want to 

go, not on what you fear. 

 

The architects of this Throne Speech couldn’t have said it 

better. With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to formally second 

the motion brought forward by the member from The 

Battlefords. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well once again it’s a 

pleasure to stand in this Assembly and talk about a document, a 

visionary piece of work, created by the Premier and his team 

moving us forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to start off by thanking the voters of Prince Albert 

Carlton who sent me back to this Legislative Assembly last year 

with a strong majority, supporting our vision, Mr. Speaker, 

based on our document, our platform piece. And this Throne 

Speech builds on that, moving us forward. And we talk about 

ideas in that platform piece that we brought into play. We’re 

going to continue those moving on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re also talking about new ideas, and those in the House will 

know that I’ve talked a lot about the vision for the future, the 

youth in our province. And I’m going to focus on that today 

because the two members prior, Mr. Speaker, did a great job in 

talking about the quality of the Throne Speech, the substance of 

the Throne Speech, and how it impacts various groups across 

this province, moving them forward in a growing economy, Mr. 

Speaker. But the pieces I want to discuss today really involve 

this vision that we have to leave this province in a better state 

than we found it as members of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Every Throne Speech since 2007 on has always had a vision, 

and the cornerstone of that vision’s been a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker, fiscal probity and responsibility, so that in the future 

after I am long gone from this House, my daughters and my 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

grandchildren can say that this province was founded with a 

vision, to be sure, but our government maintained that focus 

going on to give them a strong base and a strong building 

platform to go on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if we leave this province with reduced debt or no debt by 

the time I leave this Assembly, that would be one of the 

proudest moments of my life to ensure that my future 

generations with the Hickie name will be able to actually still 

have a place to stay, a place to play, and a place to thrive, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In this Throne Speech, we identify that since taking over in 

government in 2007 we’ve seen an increase of 80,000 new 

people in this province. That’s huge, Mr. Speaker, insomuch as 

that we now have a force that can actually be used and can be 

used as an employee base, employee base for young 

entrepreneurs to start new businesses, can keep the economy 

driving forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And my two daughters will be able to benefit from that growth, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’m very proud to have that opportunity for 

them because growth by itself is one thing that we can hang our 

hat on, say it’s a great thing to have. But it’s how that we’re 

going to be able to support that growth, Mr. Speaker, working 

with the economy, working with the stakeholder groups, that 

will give that foundation for younger people, even younger than 

my daughters, in some cases like we saw yesterday, that new 

immigrant family that came in from Scotland with that young, 

little son that was sitting behind me in the House, who we can 

look at them and say it’s for that group that we can actually plan 

for that future. And this Throne Speech maintains our vision 

going on, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy with that. 

 

One thing this document talks about, Mr. Speaker, is that we 

will need to see up to 60,000 new workers by 2020. 

Governments always talk about the need for employers to hire 

more people and they generate that policy base to help them. 

We looked at, as a government in 2007, we saw that small 

businesses drove the economy. They still do to this day, Mr. 

Speaker. And we also talk about the fact that there are more 

opportunities than ever before in this province for employees. 

We see people moving back to this province on a regular basis. 

We see job postings, a record number still in our economy 

looking for thousands . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Thousands. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you . . . that we see opportunities 

abound. And I look at my daughters, Mr. Speaker. Alyssa’s in 

university right now, first year studying in University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Thankfully she takes after her mother. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Absolutely. Yes, she’s got the brains and the 

good looks of her mother, Mr. Speaker. I can acknowledge that. 

And then my other daughter, Mackenzie, who is in grade 12, 

who will be following right next year, Mr. Speaker, to the U of 

S [University of Saskatchewan], my alma mater. I’m very proud 

they’re attending that school, that academic institution, that I 

can say I went and picked up my daughter last week for lunch 

and I got lost because of all the construction that we see there 

and all the detours, which is a good thing, Mr. Speaker. I had to 

pick her up in front of an old establishment I spent a few nights 

at, and I couldn’t even get in there, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

construction. So I was very happy to actually say that things 

have changed since my time there . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . It was the theatre. Yes, it was the theatre. Yes, that was one 

of the places as well I spent some time. 

 

The issue with the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 

that we are funding students through the scholarship 

opportunities put in place in this last year’s budget, the 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship which, when I saw my 

daughter’s tuition bill, I noticed it was right off the top, Mr. 

Speaker, which was an awesome opportunity for me to say to 

my daughter, you know what? That now allows us as parents 

across this great province to be able to plan for your future, 

have more money available than to actually keep putting in 

tuition. I’ve always told my daughters, I’ll pay for the first piece 

of paper; after that, you’re on your own. But, Mr. Speaker, with 

this opportunity year in and year out, that gives me the 

opportunity to help fund them for post-academics as well and 

postgraduate work as well if they so choose, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One thing about the university as well I will say, as I found out 

this year, I didn’t realize this, but every student who achieves a 

high standard of academics at grade 12 is automatically entered 

into advance scholarships for post-secondary as well. It comes 

right off tuition as well. And Alyssa did very well in high 

school, and she saw some saving this year or I saw the savings 

and so did my wife in the tuition bill. So we’re happy to have 

that opportunity. Again it goes to the fact that their mother has a 

lot more brains than their father has, so they’re doing very well. 

I appreciate that. 

 

One thing about the university having that opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, is this. Without growth in this province and the 

economy that we’ve seen in the last five years, I doubt, I highly 

doubt our academic institutions could have the opportunity to 

provide those scholarships, those opportunities for kids to 

actually work hard in high school and reap the benefits. And we 

see it in this Throne Speech as well. We’re asking for the 

educational facilities from pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to grade 12 

to ensure that they work hard and stay focused on our kids and 

our youth in schools, to work with them, work with the parents 

as well to bring forth opportunities so they can actually still 

strive and thrive in this economy in this province. 

 

The bottom line in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, it allows 

our young population, those of the future, to stay in this 

province, not to have to leave like so many of my friends’ kids 

did, Mr. Speaker, and so many of my friends did as well to see 

opportunities. Now they can stay here and that’s an awesome 

opportunity for our future of this province, Mr. Speaker. We see 

that as one of those benchmarks as a government, that we can 

all be very proud of, that we’re seeing people having 

opportunities to stay. 

 

One thing about my riding is that — of course it’s not in my 

riding — but the Highway No. 11 twinning has been a great 

project that we’re seeing move forward. It’s almost done, Mr. 

Speaker. I believe 12 kilometres has yet to be done. We’ll see 

that done by next year — knock on wood, mother nature 

co-operates. But that adds to a sense of peace and comfort for 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

my wife and myself because our daughter drives back and forth 

right now to university, not maybe enough to see us at home on 

weekends, but it gives us an opportunity to know she’s safe. 

And Mackenzie, her sister, will be safe going back and forth as 

well in the future. 

 

And for those of us who’ve had the opportunity to drive on that 

highway now, it’s a great experience insomuch as that it takes 

away . . . It just seems like times flies faster, Mr. Speaker. Safer 

as well, not always having to pass vehicles to get to our 

destination. Not that I speed, Mr. Speaker. I always drive within 

the rules as a police officer still. I’m sure that’s going to be one 

of those benchmarks I always follow as well, but it gives us a 

chance to have safer travel. 

 

One thing in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, that I want to 

talk about. It mentioned in the media yesterday was that the 

opposition criticized it’s no new initiatives, especially in health 

care. I find that very puzzling, Mr. Speaker, because the new 

Minister of Rural Health and Remote Health is one of those 

individuals that always saw that he needed to champion this 

cause, Mr. Speaker. He lives in a rural riding and of course he 

works with his boss, the new Minister of Health, who will work 

together to ensure that we have the opportunities in the future 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’m not his boss. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well you are now. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And we see an opportunity in this Throne Speech to talk about 

initiatives that the new minister has looked at in Nova Scotia, 

building on these great men and women that work in our 

province in the health care field — look at having a team 

approach in our rural areas to advance health care and to be a 

positive impact moving forward. 

 

As well as we saw announcements of international medical 

grads, I believe it was 24 in this fall, have come to this province 

to study and expand and be part of our health care system. 

We’ll see up to 90 more I believe in the next year or so. That 

bodes well that we have a health care system managed by 

ministers, deputy ministers, people in the administration that 

understand our vision as well, and that’s great for the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Throne Speech builds on other throne speeches, Mr. 

Speaker, along with successive budgets we’ve had as well, to 

ensure that the opportunities in this province remain strong. We 

see entrepreneurs having opportunities. We see current 

businesses having opportunities, whether they be large 

corporations or small operations — mom-and-pop operations, I 

call them — or for new entrepreneurs that want to enter the 

workforce and generate more of our economic momentum by 

hiring youth in this province, and others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is still the place to be, not the place to be from, Mr. 

Speaker. I firmly believe that. This Throne Speech takes that 

vision moving forward. We’ll see that, I’m sure, the opposition 

will have some criticisms of this. But if they’ll look into the 

actual, into the line-by-line in the Throne Speech, they’ll see 

that we have an opportunity to maintain our momentum, see the 

growth of our economy move forward, see opportunities for our 

youth and for my daughters. And it’s because of that, Mr. 

Speaker — for my two girls — I definitely support this Throne 

Speech. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the Premier 

delivered the deluxe version of the Throne Speech to a 

$100-a-plate luncheon in Saskatoon. Even had a colour picture 

of him in the booklet that was produced. And yesterday we got 

the plain version here in this place where the democracy for 

Saskatchewan should be the key feature. And so, Mr. Speaker, 

already just in the format of what’s happened with this 

particular Throne Speech, we have a message about what’s 

happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier and the Sask Party have one version for people 

who can afford to pay for it, who can afford to live in very 

many parts of the province, and then he’s got another version or 

another message for the people that are struggling. But 

unfortunately that message isn’t in the Throne Speech. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to ask questions about what’s here, but we 

also need to ask questions about what’s not here. 

 

The message is I think both overtly and covertly, or not 

anywhere, that the middle class, that ordinary families, small 

businesses, there’s not much there for you. And we know that 

people are already contacting us around some of these particular 

issues. 

 

We emphasize or we talk a lot about the tax issue for small 

businesses because we know that the small businesses of 

Saskatchewan provide most of the jobs. And we find it curious, 

given the members opposite and the areas that they represent in 

the province, that they’ve focused on reducing taxation for the 

large corporations and slow walking or even maybe stopping 

the reduction on the taxes for small businesses. So we’re 

surprised. But these are the kinds of signals that come there. 

 

Now the other thing about this Throne Speech is that there’s not 

much new in it. I mean there’s so little new after the comments 

from last week that the Premier had to throw out a few bits and 

bones that aren’t even in the speech this week to try to get some 

news, whether it’s the good initiatives around protecting our 

highways workers or some of the other comments that are 

made. But practically, what’s in this speech has been announced 

over the last few years. 

 

For example there’s 2.5 billion for infrastructure listed. Almost 

all of this money has already been announced and passed in this 

Assembly, and it’s already been proven to be not sufficient for 

the needs that people have in this province. Another one — and 

I know the member that just spoke before me referenced this — 

Highway 11. And we’re all in support of twinning Highway 11, 

but I think the Sask Party has announced this one six times 

since 2008, and I think what they should do is just get the work 

done. And so we’re all looking forward to a safe facility there. 

 

Another example of sort of a rehash or a re-announcement of 

things is around housing. We all know that more affordable 

housing units are needed in the province, and that comes from 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

the new mayor of Regina saying housing is his number one 

issue. You go and talk to people from smaller communities, 

whether in the Southeast or the North, and housing is a major 

issue. And so the announcement of housing in the Throne 

Speech was actually announced in last year’s, the 2012 budget. 

And 4,600 of those units were actually in an announcement in 

March of 2011. Issuing a new press release does not equal new 

homes for Saskatchewan people. And I think people are starting 

to understand how just getting words from this government but 

no actions is going to be a major problem for all of us. 

 

Another example of a redo or a rehash is SaskBuilds. The P3 

secretariat was set up by the Sask Party with great fanfare and it 

was failed and then abandoned. It was turned into an efficiency 

office and then, well we’re not quite sure where it quit. But to 

go back to that same concept, give it a new name and then raid 

the rainy day fund to put some money in there to go and try to 

get some of these projects, we have many questions about this 

because we think that there are some great difficulties with it. 

 

It also raises questions around the finances of the province. And 

I think we would all note that when I asked the Premier today if 

some of the basic points around finances in this Throne Speech 

are such as they are because the province is running out of 

money, he avoided that question by going off onto all kinds of 

other diversionary things. But we will continually come back to 

that question because that is a fundamental question about a 

conservative Sask Party government. We’ve been burned before 

by a government that kept announcing things and announcing 

things and spending money and eventually Saskatchewan 

people have to pay. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to ask that question and 

we look forward to some answers. But I’m assuming that we’re 

not going to be getting very many clear answers about that, 

because the issue really revolves around how are we being 

prudent, how are we using Saskatchewan common sense to do 

the things that are needed for people. And as I say, this 

document does not provide for the middle class, for ordinary 

families. It doesn’t provide for small businesses, and we’re 

disappointed for that. 

 

Now there are also some goals, some words set out in this 

document which are plans or goals — I think it’s called a plan 

for growth — but there’s really no description of what the 

actions are that are going to allow us to reach those goals or 

plans. As New Democrats we believe in smart growth. We 

believe in making things happen in a very ordinary way, and 

that you tell people what you’re going to do and then you go 

and do that. Unfortunately we have a history now of five years 

where the actions of the government come as surprises — 

sometimes surprises to the whole community, sometimes as 

surprises to a particular part of the community. And we know 

that that’s not a very good way to govern, and we know that 

people are watching that particular issue. 

 

One of the major challenges in this speech does relate to the 

First Nations unemployment. And my colleague asked 

questions about that today. It’s now at a high . . . The 

unemployment rate for First Nations people that want to work is 

at 21.3 per cent, but there’s no action plan to deal with that 

particular issue. And what’s especially difficult about that is 

that the Aboriginal employment development program was 

wiped out by this government. They never really explained 

why. But they did say they were going to try to do something in 

that area, and it’s been stalled — it’s been stalled and it’s been 

stalled and it’s been stalled. And lo and behold it shows up in 

the Throne Speech as, well, something else we’re going to do. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. That’s not what the 

people of Saskatchewan expect. 

 

And there are other areas where plans have been made to 

expand things, whether it comes to the numbers of doctors 

available in rural communities, when it comes to supporting 

different areas. And we know that the government’s even 

created a new ministry to try to deal with that one, and we’ll be 

assessing that pretty carefully too. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are some references in here, but there are 

a number of things that, well, there’s things that aren’t in the 

Throne Speech. And what we know from the history of the last 

year is that it’s these surprises, as I referenced before, that are 

the problem. Nobody in the election and nobody in the Throne 

Speech ended up telling us that there was going to be millions 

of dollars for three more MLAs, but we were dealing with that 

fairly quickly last year. 

 

The film industry did not expect to be gutted last spring, but 

we’ve seen the fallout of that and once again a slow walk of any 

kind of a solution we’ve all been waiting to see. We know both 

from a practical basis and from the experience of people 

involved in this industry that many people have had to move 

away to find employment in the film industry. And this is very 

sad because we had developed a very good core of people who 

could be among the best of the producers and actors in North 

America. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re wondering what other surprises are 

going to show up. We’ve had the surprise where the 

government has announced about privatizing our personal 

information Crown, the one that deals with land titles but also 

deals with a number of other issues. And this particular one is 

surprising because it does actually provide revenue for the 

province to help deal with particular expenses there but also 

some other revenue that goes into the overall government 

services that are provided. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And it’s an area where the public expects that the government 

would be involved and provide security of title, security of the 

boundaries of property that you have. And it’s a fundamental 

part of growing the economy of Saskatchewan because we all 

know that when corporations, whether they’re small or big, 

want to invest money and get involved in the province of 

Saskatchewan, they want to know that there’s security of title 

related to the property that they’re going to be involved with in 

the province. And so to raise uncertainty in this area is also 

something that is surprising that the government would do that. 

It’s not necessary and it, I think, is going to cause some 

difficulties. 

 

Now there’s also a suggestion in last week’s document which 

doesn’t show up in the Throne Speech at all and that relates to 

the Heritage Fund. And as I said last week that this proposal for 

a heritage fund was made saying, well we’ll do it when we’ve 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

paid off the provincial debt. Well then you go and look at the 

books of the province, and the plan to pay off the provincial 

debt is at most $80 million a year. When we started looking at 

the calculations, it was pretty clear that the monies that would 

start to go from non-renewable resources into a heritage-type 

fund which other parts of the world and North America have. 

They have a very good one they’re working on just in North 

Dakota, just south of us. Alberta has something that’s similar 

like that, Alaska . . . Places where there’s great revenues from 

non-renewable resources, people make some very prudent 

decisions about how to provide for future generations. 

 

But the suggestion we get from the Sask Party is, well we’ll 

start putting some of that in when the government has paid 

down the debt. And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s 2060 at the earliest. 

And we don’t think that that’s a prudent way to deal with this, 

and we will be saying that directly. 

 

I know some of my colleagues have been talking about it. 

We’ve got this time capsule 100 years from now and it might be 

that we get to open the time capsule before we actually start 

putting money into a heritage fund. It’s that far out in the 

planning for the province. 

 

And so there’s also a brief mention in the Throne Speech about 

the Saskatchewan employment Act, and it uses the words, we’re 

going to have the most modern legislation. And that sends a 

chill through many people in this province, because 100 years 

of negotiation, accommodation, discussion, legislation, 

regulations has provided a relatively stable work community, 

work relationship in Saskatchewan. And the way that the 

government brought out the discussion on this last year with 

then no public consultation has created quite a number of 

difficulties. 

 

My colleague from Saskatoon, and all of us helping him, went 

around the province and listened to people, and once again it 

was this uncertainty and this fear about what the government 

might do. We know obviously from the Throne Speech that 

something is going to come forward here, but once again we’re 

not getting the details, and we’re also getting intimations of 

things that we’re very uneasy with. 

 

When you look at the document that went out to the public, it 

challenged many basic things that people have expected as part 

of the work contract if one lives in Saskatchewan, and we’re 

very concerned about that. So I think that the Throne Speech in 

that area ends up being something that just creates difficulty; it 

doesn’t assist in the further development of our province. 

 

Now you end up wondering where and why the government is 

being so, I guess, closed or terse or not really saying what 

they’re going to do. And as I said before, we’ve had enough 

surprises from this government that we’re apprehensive about 

it. We know that the public is apprehensive about this. And so 

it’s, as I indicated before, some of the privatization initiatives 

are of concern. And I mentioned before, the personal 

information Crown, ISC. We think that and we know the public 

thinks that this is an idea that maybe should be going back into 

the rethink category. 

 

But also we have this suggestion around the SaskBuilds or the 

P3 secretariat. And I think that often the people, you know, 

public, and maybe even members in the legislature don’t always 

realize what we’re talking about here. Well one of the 

advantages of being a government and having a good credit 

rating in Saskatchewan now, which we all appreciate — and it’s 

taken a lot of work to get it back into a situation where it is now 

— is that when you have projects that are important for all of 

the people of the province, that you can then secure the funds to 

actually build the project. 

 

Now one of the questions always becomes then is how you 

finance those things. And the P3 secretariat says, well we’re a 

little uneasy about borrowing the money to do a project which 

we think is important. And let’s go to some, like a project like 

the new bridge in Prince Albert, and it’s important for a new 

bridge in Prince Albert, and it’s also important for the old 

bridge in Prince Albert. Now practically what happens is that 

for the economy of Saskatchewan, let alone the economy of 

Prince Albert, but for the economy of Saskatchewan we need 

another bridge in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the economy of Saskatchewan, we need to 

make sure that the bridge that’s in Prince Albert has been 

rejuvenated, fixed, and we also need another bridge. But this is 

the perfect kind of example of where the government may set 

up a P3 because it will have a guaranteed load of traffic which 

could pay a toll. And there aren’t many places in Saskatchewan 

where you can actually control the traffic around a particular 

place. 

 

So if we had a toll road to Moose Jaw, well we’d go four miles 

north, or two miles north and go on the grid, and get around it. 

And that’s true pretty well anywhere in Saskatchewan. But 

when you get up to Prince Albert and we want to get across the 

river, you have a choice. You go across that bridge, or you go 

down and maybe find a ferry if it’s the right time of year that 

ferries work, or you go another direction and see if you can get 

a road or another bridge. But that ends up being a lot of miles or 

a lot of kilometres added on to your trip. 

 

So in Prince Albert, are we going to see this government come 

forward and say, oh we’ve got a great idea; we’ll put a bit of 

money in there, you know, maybe the municipality puts 

something in, but what we’ll really do is we’ll get a company to 

build a bridge and then we’ll put a toll both on the old bridge 

and the new one so you can’t escape it. Or like most places 

often do is you only put a toll going one direction because you 

assume people want to come back. And all of a sudden you’ve 

got a line of cash that’ll come and pay for a particular facility. 

 

And who’s going to pay that? Well businesses are going to pay 

it to make sure they get to the North. But, many, many people 

who rely on Prince Albert as a centre for commerce from all of 

the northern communities would also be hit with that. Well 

many of us in Saskatoon and Regina, maybe we’d pay the toll 

once a year or something when we went up that way but, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re wary of the wording that we see in this Throne 

Speech and that we’ve heard in the more deluxe version last 

week, and we’re wondering if there are other places where this 

kind of thinking will prevail. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that there 

are some real concerns about the concepts and the ideas that 

have been set out here. 

 

Now when we have the tradition or the concept — clearly it’s 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

over a hundred years that throne speeches have been given in 

the province of Saskatchewan and before that it was in the 

North-West Territories legislature in this particular part of 

North America — but there’s always been a tradition that this is 

the place where you do set out your plans and goals for the 

province. And I think that kind of the events over the last 10 

days raise a question about that respect for this institution. And 

I will talk about this more often maybe than some others, but I 

say that it ends up diminishing the role that we have as 

legislators in this province when the executive branch, the 

Premier, ends up going to another place because then he gets to 

give the speeches as he’s so bluntly stated. Because one of the 

reasons that you have the representative of the Crown give that 

speech is that it can then be given in a measured, well-toned 

way that does set out the plans for the province that allows for 

us as government and opposition to then debate it here in this 

House. And, Mr. Speaker, anything that diminishes the 

importance of that role, diminishes the importance of this 

House is wrong, and we will fight against it because that is just 

not how things happen. 

 

We also know from the last few years that we’ve had fewer 

speeches to the throne from the ministers of the Crown. And 

we’ve lost what has been a tradition that is easily revived. And 

maybe I challenge the Premier and the people in the legislature 

to bring back at least a portion of speeches from ministers in 

each department where they lay out some of the goals and 

objectives of their department or ministry so that, on the record, 

we can get some sense of what it is that’s going to happen in 

Agriculture or what’s going to happen in Health or what’s 

going to happen in Highways or Education, post-secondary. All 

those kinds of speeches that are . . . You know, sometimes 

they’re summaries of what’s going to happen but at least we 

end up having that on the record that we can go back and refer 

to. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t had that type of information for a 

few years. And I remind the Premier that this may be something 

that he should be doing because it’s part of how this institution 

works. And I think it’s important that people across the 

province have both this chance to see it on their television 

screens, go and look at the web information, but also go and see 

the transcripts of what’s been said. 

 

[12:00] 

 

And it may be that the Premier delivers his speech outside of 

this place, and not having the Lieutenant Governor doing so, he 

can control the message. It may be that he doesn’t have very 

many ministers give comments about what’s going to happen in 

their ministries because he wants to control the message. But, 

Mr. Speaker, the public wants to know what you’re going to do, 

not how you’ve controlled the message. And we will continue 

to ask questions about that particular issue. 

 

Now over the last few days, we’ve seen the results of 

democracy at both our municipal level and also at the First 

Nations elections. And we’re very pleased to welcome all of the 

new municipal council members and mayors, school board 

candidates, and we look forward to working with all of these 

people. And we know that regardless of which position people 

are elected to or that they’ve run for, they all come with the 

same goal which is to serve the people of Saskatchewan, and 

we want to say thank you to all of the successful and the 

unsuccessful candidates. And as was mentioned earlier, special 

congratulations to the FSIN leaders, Chief Perry Bellegarde and 

Vice-chief Kimberly Jonathan, as well as some of the others. 

But those two are the ones that have higher profile in the news 

this week because once again the leadership within the First 

Nations . . . 

 

And then also congratulations to the people who’ve been 

elected in the Métis leadership as well because they have to be 

partners in what happens in this province. And we know that 

the connections and the ability to work together is what’s going 

to allow us to move forward. And so, Mr. Speaker, when the 

Throne Speech kind of leaves a lot of things out or we have a 

record of a government that surprises everybody, we all get 

concerned about what is the future for our province. 

 

In a couple of minutes I’ll be introducing an amendment to this 

motion in support of the Throne Speech because, as I said last 

week, the Throne Speech had to do much better than the 

booklet of rehashed ideas that we got last week because there’s 

no actions; there’s no plans as to how we’re going to do these 

things. And as I’ve said a number of times, this Throne Speech 

didn’t do better, but the people of Saskatchewan deserve better. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 

And that this government no longer enjoys the 

confidence of the Assembly because it has allowed its 

ideology to trump common sense when governing. It 

has introduced an agenda of privatization which puts 

politicians ahead of people, and it ignores the middle 

class and small businesses of Saskatchewan. 

 

So moved. And this is seconded by the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved the following motion: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 

And that this government no longer enjoys the 

confidence of the Assembly because it has allowed its 

ideology to trump common sense when governing, has 

introduced an agenda of privatization which puts 

politicians ahead of people, and ignores the middle class 

and small businesses of Saskatchewan. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased and honoured to stand up to respond to the Throne 

Speech in the year of Our Lord 2012. I’ve heard that phrase 

before. 

 

And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great honour for me 

to again represent the people of Athabasca. As we all know, it’s 

certainly a lot of work. It’s a lot of challenge. And for the two 

northern MLAs and those that live in the far southwest and 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

southeast corners of our province, we know travel and the 

demands on your time and family members, the loss of valuable 

time with your family and friends, those are some of the 

sacrifices made. You become an MLA and travel to Regina to 

take part in this great hall of debate, and great hall of 

democracy, so to speak. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I say it’s 

an honour, and I want to thank the people of Athabasca for their 

kind support and their kind help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Throne Speech and I look at the 

reality of how the Sask Party is governing and the reality that 

we’re going to be facing fairly short . . . in short time here as a 

province, because there are some troubling clouds looming on 

the horizon. We’ve always maintained that, and that you got to 

be very careful and prepared for the rainy day and prepared for 

the time when Saskatchewan has to really, really get ready for 

some of the troubling clouds that we see on the horizon. And 

those are some of the messages that, you know, that I want to 

share today with my response. 

 

So I liken the whole notion of the Throne Speech to the reality 

of governing and what the Sask Party are actually practising out 

there is like a bad marriage, Mr. Speaker. And the reason why 

it’s a bad marriage is because the reality of what the challenges 

are in the province, and the glossy presentation of the Throne 

Speech, don’t match up at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I watched with great interest yesterday as the government 

was having their Throne Speech read out, that half the Sask 

Party caucus was asleep. You know, they’re sitting there, 

they’re fidgeting, and they’re off to dreamland. And maybe half 

of them are wondering where the P.A. [Prince Albert] bridge 

allocation was and half of them were wondering where the 

DISC [Disability Income Support Coalition] program was at, 

half of them wondering, I wonder how long the good times are 

going to roll. And, Mr. Speaker, the only exciting thing that 

happened yesterday in the Sask Party caucus during the whole 

Throne Speech debate was somebody’s cellphone went off. And 

that’s when the attention focused on them. Somebody’s 

cellphone was beeping and everybody said, whose cellphone is 

beeping? That was not the point, whose cellphone it was. The 

point is they were half asleep because the presentation given 

under the Throne Speech was boring, Mr. Speaker. Especially 

when you have to mention some project six times in a row and 

six years later, you’re still mentioning it in the Throne Speech. 

Like how boring is that? 

 

And today my leader made reference to a tired, old government. 

They’ve been there six years, Mr. Speaker. They are a tired, old 

government already, Mr. Speaker, because the good times are 

going to come to an end. And I don’t know where to begin, Mr. 

Speaker, to begin criticizing the actions of that government 

versus the glossy presentation they made in their Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I say to the people of Saskatchewan that it’s all hogwash, 

especially when you have to mention one project six times over 

the past several years, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the twinning of 

Highway 11. I think it is mentioned six, six times, Mr. Speaker. 

Like enough already. I think people are getting the message that 

this road is being fixed. And I think maybe it’s time that they 

get a new agenda going, that they get a new vision, and they get 

a new plan, Mr. Speaker. 

I don’t know where to begin as to what this government is 

doing wrong, Mr. Speaker. I go back to the reference of a bad 

marriage. You have an uninterested party in a sense that 

sometimes in marriages that happens. And the people of 

Saskatchewan are looking at this government and saying, when 

did we give them the agenda to privatize our Crowns? When 

was that given to them, Mr. Speaker? It was never given to 

them. When did the people of Saskatchewan give them the 

agenda to go to war with our working people, our working men 

and women, Mr. Speaker? They never got the agenda to do that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then they went to war with our teachers, you know, where 

the teachers are very, very unhappy with some of the activity 

that they got. And I want to make reference when I went to the 

STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] gathering, and what 

they said was when we went to visit these teachers . . . And they 

had a nice, glossy black box that were sitting at each of the 

teachers’ tables — maybe you were there, Mr. Speaker — and 

in this . . . The box is really fancy. It even it had a little ribbon 

on it. And the teachers thought, well maybe this was some 

chocolates, you know, as an apology for the manner in which 

the teachers were treated, Mr. Speaker. And so they unwrapped 

the ribbon, this nice black, fancy box, and they’re wondering 

what was in there. The box was a fairly elaborate, elegant box. 

So when they opened it up, what did they find in there? They 

found a carpet — a piece of red carpet that they took out of this 

Assembly as a gift to the teachers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, everybody’s going around saying, what’re 

you doing sending a piece of red carpet to the teachers? What is 

that about? That’s how disorganized and disjointed these guys 

are. So one of the teachers said to me, we don’t want a piece of 

the red carpet from the Assembly. We want a piece of wall, they 

said. We look around, Mr. Speaker, and we keep asking them, 

why do you insult the teachers by sending them a piece of red 

carpet from this building? Like what’s the message there, Mr. 

Speaker? These guys got it all wrong. They’re a tired old 

government. You look at their front benches, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve only been there six years and they’re tired, they’re old, 

and the pressure of governing finally affected the way they 

think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let’s go down the list again. The Aboriginal community, 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve gone to war with them. They’ve gutted the 

Aboriginal employment development program. We hear the 

numbers have gone up in terms of the unemployment, Mr. 

Speaker, for both First Nations and the Métis people. So you 

see they’ve gone to war with them, Mr. Speaker. And Lord 

knows under the immigrant file, they’ve also squandered the 

opportunity for Saskatchewan to grow because they’re going to 

war with the immigrant community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now the other part they’re going to go after now is the 

environmentalists, the people that really are concerned about 

our environment. Well they’re going to shut them down too, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re going to shut them down too, all in the 

name of saying that we’re in charge and we’re not going to 

listen to anybody else that’s going to have anything to say about 

the future of Saskatchewan, including those pesky 

environmentalists that keep getting in the way of the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. Those people have a right to speak, 

and their right to speak and to exercise their democratic right to 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

come here and tell people what this government is doing wrong 

is being, every day is being severely cut back. And there’s ways 

and means that this government is doing it but they’re very, 

very quiet on how they do it. And, Mr. Speaker, people know 

that. 

 

And most recently some of the activity around the disabled file, 

Mr. Speaker, it is very, very, very discouraging when you see 

that some of the programs that they’re highlighting in the 

Throne Speech does absolutely nothing for a lot of disabled 

people. And we’re going to talk a bit about that at a later time, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I want to do is make sure we talk about northern 

Saskatchewan because that’s where I’m elected from. And we 

want to make sure that we respect all issues in the province but 

primarily because we’re from northern Saskatchewan, I want to 

talk about the Throne Speech and exactly what the North and 

how the North was impacted. 

 

Four thousand, five hundred words in that document, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the Throne Speech — 4,500 words, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know what happened? Not one of those 

words made a reference to the North. Not one, Mr. Speaker. 

Why, Mr. Speaker? Because they, the Saskatchewan Party, had 

made it within their language, within their activity, within their 

thinking, that the North is not getting anything. So I list off the 

disability community. I list off the environmental community. I 

list off our teachers. I list off the Aboriginal people. I list off 

rural Saskatchewan. I list off those that want to protect the 

Crowns for our ownership. And now I list off the North as 

people that the Saskatchewan Party has totally ignored and has 

gone to war with some of these groups. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a crying shame. 

 

So you go back to the glossy presentation of the so-called 

Throne Speech versus the activities and the actions in the 

budget of the Sask Party. You can see that this is indeed a very 

bad marriage, Mr. Speaker, because all they’re doing is 

promising things and they’re very, very short on delivery, Mr. 

Speaker, very short. 

 

Now today we talk about the northern agenda, and we’re talking 

about highways today. My colleague from Cumberland brought 

a group in from Wollaston Lake, and they’re talking about their 

highway. And they’re very concerned because they talk about 

the incredible challenge to Wollaston Lake in terms of having 

access for food, for medical supplies, for gasoline, and so on 

and so forth. And what happened, Mr. Speaker, is Wollaston 

Lake people said, well maybe these guys will be good and 

they’ll finish off this road because they told us in 2008 under 

the former minister of Highways, by the fall of 2012 you’ll 

have your road. You’ll have your road. And what happens, Mr. 

Speaker? Wollaston Lake people have showed up here and are 

saying, where’s our road? Where’s our road? It’s not done yet. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve got a meeting with the Minister of 

Highways, and I pray the Minister of Highways gets up at the 

meeting and says, yes, we’ve done wrong. We promised. We 

should follow through. That’s what I hope he says, Mr. 

Speaker. He should say, I hope, we promised that. We should 

follow through to the people of Wollaston. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why should he do that? Not because the 

NDP committed to that in 2007, Mr. Speaker. Because his own 

colleague from Cypress Hills, who was the former minister of 

Highways, he made that commitment to them. And all of a 

sudden, as soon as he made the commitment, the money’s gone. 

So today I want to ask the minister, when he has the meeting 

with the people of Wollaston Lake, you make a commitment, 

follow through and show them the money. Show them the 

money, Mr. Minister, because that’s where action will speak 

louder than words. And so far all we’ve seen from this 

government on northern issues, Aboriginal issues, and 

highways is just a bunch of fancy words and rehashed 

announcement as the Throne Speech has indicated from time to 

time during the presentation of the entire speech, Mr. Speaker. 

So I want to share with the minister and I want to send a copy to 

the member from Cypress Hills, their very own commitment to 

Wollaston Lake, Mr. Speaker, their very own commitment. And 

I’ll ask that to be xeroxed and presented to those two folks. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why nothing from the North? The minister 

alluded today to a highway being built for the mining sector. 

Now let us be very, very clear, Mr. Speaker. We in the NDP 

support any development when it comes to highways for mining 

companies. There’s no question in our mind that’s important to 

the northern economy. We have a great relationship with 

Cameco and Areva and the many other mining companies, and 

the First Nations and Métis people and non-Aboriginal people 

of the North embrace their partnership with the mining sector. 

The problem is you can’t just build the road for the mining 

sector. You’ve got to start building roads for the people that live 

in that area because it has a direct relationship as to how they 

view industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They want to have access to safe highways. They want to have 

access to year-round supplies for gasoline, for food, for 

medicine, and the list goes on. And yet this Sask Party 

government has denied them that opportunity. And it doesn’t 

stop, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t stop at Wollaston Lake. In fact it’s 

being felt in Cumberland House. It’s being felt in Pelican 

Narrows. It’s being felt in Dillon. It’s being felt in Patuanak. 

It’s being felt in Turnor Lake. It’s being felt in Black Lake. It’s 

being felt all throughout the North. 

 

So what happens with this government is they turn around, they 

announce this million dollar road — which we support, which 

we support — but they don’t put anything else in the North to 

help people with safety and the critical issue of making sure that 

they have decent highways in northern Saskatchewan. But to 

build a highway for resources, they’re right on it. To build a 

highway for people, they show no interest despite making that 

commitment themselves, Mr. Speaker, despite making that 

commitment from themselves. 

 

Now what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is the people of 

Wollaston Lake and the First Nation and Métis people of the 

North are coming here to the province and they’re telling the 

provincial government and they’re telling the people of 

Saskatchewan, look, we know we’re doing great by 

contributing to the economy, to the mining sector. We know 

we’re doing great by contributing to the wealth of 

Saskatchewan through some of our hydro power stations in 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

northern Saskatchewan. We know that there’s tourism 

opportunity. We know that there’s oil and gas. We know that 

there’s forestry. The North is rich. It’s an abundant source of 

resources for the people of Saskatchewan, and the people of the 

North want to share it. 

 

But what they’re saying to the people of the province is, why 

don’t you let us have our fair share? Why can’t we have decent 

houses? Why can’t we have safe highways? Why can’t we have 

commitment from this government, Mr. Speaker? Because this 

government is going to war with northern people, with the 

Aboriginal people, with the working people, with the teachers, 

and the list goes on and on and on. And that war, Mr. Speaker, 

is not going to stop until we get rid of the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech does nothing but simply 

misdirect or redirect people’s attention to the fact that they are 

building an economy for some of their corporate friends and 

that’s about it, Mr. Speaker. That is about it. So once again the 

people of the North come here. They travel hundreds of 

kilometres. They’re asking for the road to be finished to 

Wollaston Lake. They’re asking for the road in my area to be 

worked on. And they’re saying, in your haste to haul out the 

resources out of the North, can you at least lay down some 

pavement for us? Can that at least be a legacy for the 

Saskatchewan Party? Because why? Because you promised us 

in 2008. You promised you would do this and you didn’t 

deliver. Mr. Speaker, they did not deliver. 

 

Now what I look at, Mr. Speaker, is quite frankly the northern 

people and the northern part of our province does a great 

amount, a great amount in terms of contribution to the tax base, 

to the economy, to the wealth created for the province as a 

whole. And all the northern people are saying is, just give us 

our fair share because we’re tired of travelling on dangerous 

roads. We’re tired of travelling on gravel roads that often are 

washed out in the summertime. We’re tired of travelling roads 

that are iced up during the wintertime. And we’re tired of 

travelling on a ferry that’s fairly old in the Wollaston Lake’s 

case, that come out during the 1970s. And they’re tired of 

having that barge break down steady. And what did they want? 

They wanted a road so they wouldn’t have to have that barge 

service there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to operate that service, how many thousands, 

hundreds of thousands of dollars did that cost? So in the long 

run, the people of Wollaston have a very good argument. It’s 

going to save the government tons of money over a period of 

time. So why don’t you invest in our community highway, the 

community access highway, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And one of the things that’s really disappointing me, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that when we lost government in 2007, a 

good example is the people of Cumberland House came to the 

Assembly and they called the minister’s office and they asked 

them, can we see where the project for our Cumberland House 

road — which I think is 123 — and where’s the money? Why 

aren’t you guys fixing up that road? And I think one of the staff 

members said, the money was never there. That was the 

response from one of the staff members at the minister’s office, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That was meant to mislead the people of Cumberland House 

because, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is the 

money was allocated. Because no minister, as the minister 

alluded to during estimates, no minister can make any kind of 

commitment unless it’s gone through its due process, Mr. 

Speaker, and that due process is called a budget And, Mr. 

Speaker, we can’t make any kind of announcement unless the 

budget has been approved, not from within the department but 

from the Treasury Board and from the cabinet. So it’s a fairly 

rigorous process which the Minister of Highways explained in 

committee, how it worked. Because I knew how it worked but I 

wanted to see if he knew how it worked. He was fair in the 

sense of saying this is how it should work, and this is how it 

does work. 

 

So what happened, Mr. Speaker, is they can’t, they cannot, 

make a commitment or announcement unless it’s gone through 

that fairly rigorous process. So when we announced the 

highway to Cumberland House, the improvements then, Mr. 

Speaker, we obviously had to follow the same rules that they 

follow and the same process. Why did somebody in that staff 

turn around and say, the money was never there. Why would 

they tell the people of Cumberland House that, Mr. Speaker, the 

leadership? And I’ll tell you, I have my theories as to why, Mr. 

Speaker. But that’s exactly the point of why people don’t 

support this government and certainly why we don’t support the 

Throne Speech and why we’re going to watch very, very 

carefully what they do, what they do when you talk about these 

objectives and these plans for the future when it comes to their 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I tell the people of Saskatchewan it’s like a bad marriage. 

It’s like a bad marriage because you have one partner that’s 

willing to do a lot of the work but quite frankly the other 

partner’s sitting down, not working at anything to resolve these 

issues. And, Mr. Speaker, that bad marriage is going to come up 

and as we all know, as we all know sooner or later that issue’s 

going to come to a front. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are going to 

reject the Saskatchewan Party. They’re going to divorce their 

ideology. They’re going to divorce them from government 

because they’ve broken too many promises and tried to 

manoeuvre their way out with glossy little presentations called 

the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll look at some of the issues that we talked about. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you, I can go on and on about the union and 

the proud men and women that work in our service. They do a 

great amount of work in health care. They do a great amount of 

work in infrastructure and they do all these wonderful things. 

And yet you wonder why is the government, the provincial 

government, still going to war with their lean program, Mr. 

Speaker, and also with the manner in which they treat our 

working men and women? 

 

And these working men and women are not going to go away. 

They’re going to continue fighting like the North. They’re 

going to continue fighting this government right till the bitter 

last day, Mr. Speaker. And they will continue that fight for 

many, many years. 

 

And I turn around and say, well if they have this lean project, 

why didn’t they express it? Why didn’t they do the lean project 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

for the current Sask Party caucus? Pare out those three extra 

MLAs you want. We don’t need three more MLAs. We need 

three more snowplow operators. We need three more people 

working in the health field, Mr. Speaker. We need more 

doctors. We need more nurses. We need more teachers. We 

need all these wonderful people out there working instead of 

having three more additional MLAs. 

 

Did they campaign on that? Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. But 

they didn’t make reference of that in the Throne Speech. You 

know why? Because the people of Saskatchewan don’t want 

that. They rejected that idea and they still reject that idea 

because it doesn’t do anything good for the people of 

Saskatchewan or anybody else except the Saskatchewan Party 

in the hopes that they can gerrymander the next election, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I look at the other issue — taking rural Saskatchewan for 

granted, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan, rural 

Saskatchewan, reached out to these guys and they supported 

them. But right away, Mr. Speaker, you see cuts to the 

AgriStability Act or the AgriStability program. We want to see 

what those cuts and the impacts are going to be felt throughout 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the most recent examples, they tried to do away with 

SaskTel’s wireless cell service, Mr. Speaker. We got on that as 

an opposition, and what did they say? Well, Industry Canada 

took away our frequencies so SaskTel can’t operate that service, 

so 8,000 rural Saskatchewan people. Well, Mr. Speaker, they 

got a bunch of folks really upset and they said, well because 

SaskTel has an older system. So we turn around and say, well 

why would you want to hurt rural Saskatchewan? That’s good 

for the small business community, good for the farm families, 

good for all these people that live in rural Saskatchewan. Why 

would you want to take away that service? Well because we 

have another private sector player coming on, Xplornet I think 

is the name of the company. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they have a data cap which means that they 

only have so much information they can download. Secondly, 

what they call their footprint is not as great as SaskTel’s 

service, which is a lot smaller. And the worst part is their fees 

are higher. So the service is less. The options for service is less, 

but the costs are greater. And what happened? Instead of 

defending and supporting rural Saskatchewan, these guys let 

ideology trump common sense in saying we’re going to bring 

Xplornet in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, after a few days of opposition criticising that 

move and the 8,000 people that are impacted by that decision, 

all of a sudden they said, oh, Industry Canada changed their 

mind. We got our frequencies back to 2014. And I said, well 

number one, we got to make sure we never lose those 

frequencies. And number two, if you would stop taking the 

money from SaskTel’s bottom line, they could re-invest money 

into their system to make sure that this service is never 

interrupted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what they’ve done was they stripped SaskTel of any profits 

they have, and they took in their spending — we don’t know 

where yet — but they took the dividends and they stripped 

SaskPower, SaskTel, all these Crowns of any dividends. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when you do that, when you do that, that’s 

contrary to good business practice. That hurts the Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. It hurts the Crowns. And that’s why we on this side 

allude to the fact that the Sask Party has a 

privatization-by-stealth agenda when it comes to the Crowns, 

and none of that was mentioned in the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker. And what all they’ve done, they re-announced and 

rehashed some projects they started; up to six times they 

re-announced that, and once again to the Throne Speech, they 

announced that again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I look at all these issues that . . . There’s so much more that 

I’d like to say. They give us a time limit of how we respond to 

the Throne Speech. And I listen to some of the backbench, the 

backbench as they get up and say some of these things that 

they’re supposed to say. I’ll tell you that you’ll never get into 

cabinet if you deviate from those reading notes that you’re 

given. So you get up and you read out the notes that you’re 

handed and don’t deviate. Just stay on message, okay, because 

that’s the agenda. Some of you guys have been here for a while. 

You just follow your script. Don’t deviate from the script 

because if you do that, your chances of being in cabinet or 

getting that extra 1 kilometre of road paved in their 

constituency will be squashed. 

 

So don’t deviate from your script, backbench, because that’s 

exactly what you’re there for. You’re not there to talk about a 

brave future. You’re not there to talk about fairness. You’re not 

there to talk about equality. You’re not there to represent your 

constituents on a wide variety of views. You’re there to just 

simply do your script, do as you’re told, and say what you’re 

told to say when you’re told to say that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s what my point is today. The Throne Speech, they 

know, they know it’s not strong. They know that the 

Saskatchewan people can read all through this whole 

presentation, Mr. Speaker. And if they ever get up in this 

notion, any of the backbench saying look at all these wonderful 

things we’re doing, who they should thank today, Mr. Speaker, 

who they should thank today was the Alberta government. And 

I’ll tell you why. Because when the Alberta government said to 

their private industry folks, we’re going to look, we’re going to 

review the royalties of our oil and gas, well guess what? The 

big boys, the oil and gas boys said, well we’ll see you later, 

Alberta. We’re heading to Saskatchewan. 

 

That work began in 2001, and who was the leader at the time, 

Mr. Speaker? It was Lorne Calvert. He reduced the royalties. 

He brought in companies, and they’re ready to make all kinds 

of deals with the Saskatchewan people. And as a result of some 

of that work when the Alberta government announced their 

royalties change, people knew that Saskatchewan was going to 

start to boom. And this began, Mr. Speaker, as early as 1998. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Now we sit here, we sit here and we listen to those guys, and I 

can almost guarantee you when Alberta announced the royalty 

issue with the oil and gas companies that maybe some of their 

front bench or some of their Conservative connections probably 

phoned Alberta and said, don’t do that, because it’ll all come to 

Saskatchewan and they’ll invest in Saskatchewan and they’ll 

make the NDP look good. So I almost guarantee they probably 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

didn’t want that to happen, Mr. Speaker. They may have talked 

to their oil and gas buddies — don’t come here and invest until 

we’re in government and it’ll make it look like we’re going all 

these wonderful things. The big oil and gas boys said, the heck 

with that. We’re here to make some money. We’re going to 

Saskatchewan and, Premier Lorne Calvert, you’re a pretty darn 

good Premier. We think that the royalties that you set up is 

really good. We know that the NDP are always worried about a 

capital strike. That’s not going to help anybody in the future, so 

we’re going to continue investing in Saskatchewan. And this 

Conservative government in Alberta talking about royalty 

issues, we don’t want to deal with them any more. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden the wheels started to turn, 

you know, and I mentioned earlier in some of my speeches 

people like Eric Cline, Eldon Lautermilch out of P.A., people 

like Maynard Sonntag, these were the people that actually led 

some of this charge. They were really instrumental in making 

sure that the entire cabinet was aware of what was going on. So 

to make a long story short, oil and gas companies migrated to 

Saskatchewan because they were pissed off at the Alberta 

government. They wanted to come here and deal. Well they’re 

very upset with the Alberta government, Mr. Speaker. They 

wanted to come here and deal with an NDP government that 

had the right royalties, the right environment, the right attitude, 

and the right leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now you fast forward four or five years later and there’s the 

Sask Party saying, look at all these wonderful things we’re 

doing, when in fact they inherited all that stuff. Like, get with 

the program. You inherited all that stuff. You inherited the 

booming economy. You inherited money in the bank. You 

inherited a growing population. And they’ve been saying, look 

what we’re doing. Look what we’re doing. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the people of Saskatchewan know. 

 

So my point being that if you inherit a great economy, a 

growing population, a proud province, and great job numbers, 

we simply ask on the NDP side two things: (1) don’t mess it up. 

Don’t mess it up, and (2) govern for all people with the wealth 

that you inherited. Govern for all people. Don’t exclude people. 

And try and follow some of the ideals and examples that the 

NDP set up for you so you can be a good government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They started privatizing 

different Crown corporations, and they blame us for that. We’re 

privatizing, that is what they’re saying, but it’s all your guys’ 

fault because you didn’t put it under some Act five years ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s important is that the people of 

Saskatchewan sit here and they watch this, and they actually 

kind of smile because they know it’s actually full of a lot of 

stuff that you find on the ground as you walk through the farm 

field, that when they claim credit for something they didn’t do, 

the people of Saskatchewan kind of shake their head. They kind 

of shake their head and say, well as long as it’s good for us, you 

know, we’ll tolerate that. But what, Mr. Speaker, what they 

have done is they’re starting to mess up the good bounds that 

Saskatchewan was in when the NDP were in charge, Mr. 

Speaker. And the worst part is they’re starting to exclude 

certain people. 

 

And what they’re doing is they’re using glossy little booklets 

called the Throne Speech to try and glaze everybody’s eyes 

over in the hopes that they can convince people that they’re still 

doing a great job, Mr. Speaker, because they’re not. They 

simply are not. Any time you go to war with people, and any 

time you ignore northern Saskatchewan, or any time you ignore 

highways, any time you sell off a Crown, every time you 

exclude a certain group and you try and gloss it over with all 

these fancy little words, Mr. Speaker, you insult the intelligence 

of the people of Saskatchewan, and they will not forget that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in some of the final points I want to make, Mr. Speaker, 

and I know there’s a lot more that I do want to say, but I’m 

going to be fairly brief in some of the comments that I want to 

make is that . . . Let’s look at the disability program, Mr. 

Speaker, the disability program — and I think it’s called DISC 

— and they made a reference to that in the Throne Speech. 

 

Now as a result of the DISC program, or the SAID program, 

you look at what they’re talking about is trying to get the 

disabled community engaged and certainly support them better 

through the program called the SAID program where you take 

them off welfare and you put them through this program. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, they brag about how much extra money that these 

people from the disability community are getting, and the fact 

of the matter is, on one hand, you increase their income by 40 

or $50 a month, but then you turn around and you jack up their 

rents. You jack up the costs of medicine. You jack up the cost 

of living. You jack up all these things, and then you see that the 

net effect is that people in the disabled community turn around 

and saying, well we had more money but where’d it go? 

Where’d it go? 

 

It got clawed back by the government, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

exactly my point, that there’s no thought put to the program. 

And right now they’re in transition and you look at some of the 

issues that they’re struggling with, the transition phase itself, 

from the welfare program to the youth SAID program. There’s 

a lot of difficulties in that. That wasn’t addressed in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t talk about that, once again 

glossing over the issues. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, from northern Saskatchewan’s perspective, 

we have a leader in the disabled community that is a fairly 

strong leader. He has been advocating for northern disability 

issues for years and years and years, Mr. Speaker. And that 

gentleman’s a guy by the name of Gary Tinker. 

 

Now Gary Tinker many years ago — I think it’s 22, 23 years 

ago — he began a walk from La Ronge to Regina here on 

crutches and he wanted to bring awareness of northern disabled 

issues, Mr. Speaker. Now one thing that Gary is really upset at 

right now, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that — and that’s why I want 

to make sure I mention it in response to the Throne Speech — is 

exactly, and I’ll quote from Gary’s conversation with me, and 

this is the quote from Gary Tinker because he’s quite mad right 

now at the manner in which the northern people, the disabled 

people are being used in northern Saskatchewan. And I quote 

from the conversation: 

 

The first time when the government announced this big, 

massive disabled program, well, okay. Everybody was 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

excited. They wanted to come up with disability solutions 

and disability program. That was my understanding. I said, 

then make sure you guys don’t forget the North. There are 

between 6 to 700 people across the North with disabilities. 

And when they said disability support income program, 

and they clapped for themselves, but nothing is happening. 

Years have gone by and nothing has happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s Gary Tinker. And he was . . . He tempered 

his conversation and he tempered his comments, Mr. Speaker. 

And then there’s another example, another one of his quotes. 

Quote: 

 

I don’t know what is happening with the government 

people, with the new people [and I’m assuming he’s 

talking about the Sask Party] and I don’t understand why 

they didn’t consult with us when these changes came 

through. We only have $60,000 for the people and that 

money will be gone by the time we get any allocation 

because the program demands are so high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so 600, 700 disabled people in the North, I think if 

my math is right it’s roughly $80 per disabled person in the 

North. And that’s meant to offer admin and support. 

 

So I got a host of comments from Gary and conversations from 

Gary, who is really upset, not from the fact that he didn’t try to 

reach out to this government to talk about the SAID program or 

the disability program. It’s because he did reach out, he did 

advise them. He was fair to them: he gave them the opportunity, 

the benefit of doubt. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, six years later he’s really upset that this 

government simply did not consult, did not listen to them, and 

turned their backs on 700 disabled people in the North under 

this program, and turned around and said, well here’s $60,000 

to help you out, Mr. Speaker. That was a huge cut to the Gary 

Tinker Federation, Mr. Speaker. We have more to say about 

Gary Tinker’s federation as time will permit, but those are some 

of the examples, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the examples 

that I’d like to allude to. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I want to point out, that as an 

opposition we find that there is a renewed strength, there is a 

renewed sense of optimism within our caucus. We’re going to 

have a fantastic leadership race, Mr. Speaker. The best is yet to 

come. We’re going to stand here every day and fight against the 

Saskatchewan Party government. We’re going to continue to 

gloss over their pamphlets and their booklets as they try and 

convince the people of Saskatchewan doing all this great job. 

 

But we know that there is trouble looming on the horizon, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re seeing some of their corporate friends, that 

there may be a reduction in investment. We hear some of the 

mines might not be opening up. There’s some concern there, 

Mr. Speaker. The price of oil and gas is going down. The rainy 

day fund that they spoke about, well that’s also going down. So 

the question people of Saskatchewan have got to ask 

themselves, if the government has all this money that they 

allude to or give the impression they have, why in the heck are 

they re-announcing projects up to six times? And they’ve done 

it most recently with their Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. It just 

doesn’t make sense. It leads us to believe that there is 

something funny going on. 

 

We want to get to the bottom of that, Mr. Speaker. We want to 

find out why they’re doing this. What’s the bottom line for 

Saskatchewan’s budget? Are there some problems? And, Mr. 

Speaker, is there going to be any kind of information coming 

from these guys to tell the people of Saskatchewan exactly 

where we stand with the resource sector, with our budget, with 

our programs, and why they keep re-announcing old, rehashed 

announcements in a Throne Speech presentation which is really 

important for the people of Saskatchewan in terms of getting 

some advice and direction as to what the government is 

planning for the next year? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to close off with a couple of points. 

First of all, I think that the people of Saskatchewan in general 

want to make sure that while the economy is going good, they 

want to keep it as strong as they can. They understand that 

when people are watching — the middle class, the rural people 

— they’re watching television, they’re watching what’s going 

on, the primary concern is to make sure that they have stability. 

And we in the NDP caucus certainly appreciate that point and 

we certainly want to see the economy continue building and we 

want to see the economy continued to strengthen, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what we want to see happening. We want to see 

recognition in the fact that there are some environmental 

concerns that are coming forward. There’s always that balance, 

Mr. Speaker. You don’t have to compromise one over the other. 

You really have to begin to look at that balance to make sure 

things are indeed happening along that front. 

 

You don’t have to go to war with our working men and women. 

You don’t have to do that. That’ll hurt us in the long run. 

There’s no reason to do that. You don’t have to ignore the 

North with its rich resource base and simply think that you can 

always take out the resources at no cost to you. Because the 

people of Wollaston and many other regions come here today to 

say, no, we’re going to stop doing that now. We need to have 

some investment in our communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to stop fighting against people 

that want a true disabled program. They want to see a visionary 

program. They don’t see any evidence of that whatsoever, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think really, quite frankly, that Gary Tinker 

comment really hit the nail on the head when he gets so angry, 

the fact that he felt like he was used. And, Mr. Speaker, at that 

end of the day he got a lot less money for a burgeoning demand 

for supporting disabled people to the North, and that really is a 

slap in the face. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out in my closing comments 

that I take great pride, I take great pride in standing up today to 

talk about the deficiencies of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

They have not been forthright with some of their issues in terms 

around the management of our finances. 

 

They know there are some looming crises in their resource 

sector. We know that people in Saskatchewan don’t want to see 

all the resources given away for nothing, that there’s got to be 

something for the future. There’s got to be something for 

infrastructure. When you hear in Prince Albert . . . And the 

Prince Albert MLAs are way in the back, and they’ve been 

silent. When you hear in Prince Albert that you need a new 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

bridge because it’s choking off economic activity to the area 

and to the North, and when you hear in Prince Albert that when 

you shut off the water, water lines are collapsing because that’s 

the only thing that kept the water lines up was the water 

pressure, when you hear all these issues, Mr. Speaker, and you 

hear nothing but silence from the current MLAs — and this is 

happening right across rural Saskatchewan, not just Prince 

Albert — then you begin to wonder, where did these guys go? 

Where did these guys go? 

 

The bottom line is they went nowhere. They continue sitting 

here and singing from the same song sheet. You will not deviate 

from the notes you’re given because that’s what you do as a 

backbencher. But, Mr. Speaker, I think they should stand up, 

speak up for their people, and begin to present a fair view of 

what Saskatchewan needs to do to build into the future. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, like I said, we have great 

opportunity in this fall sitting to present more issues. There’s a 

song in my heart for about 30 issues and I want to get them all 

out of my chest here before the Christmas season’s upon us. So 

once again, I want to second the motion of the amendment that 

my leader has made. And of course the amendment is: 

 

And that this government no longer enjoys the confidence 

of the Assembly because it has allowed its ideology to 

trump common sense when governing. It has introduced 

an agenda of privatization which puts politicians ahead of 

people and ignores the middle class and small businesses 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I second the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to stand in 

this Assembly and speak to the Throne Speech that was 

delivered yesterday, the government’s plan for growth in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But first of all I’d like to acknowledge the work of a number of 

people that have supported me through the years. And number 

one, I’d like to say thank you to Tina Durbin. For 20-plus years 

she served as my CA assistant and retired earlier this summer. 

And I currently have a young gentleman who is actually doing 

an excellent job as well, Jeff Cole who’s serving me as my 

constituency assistant. So hats off to Tina for the work, the 

time, and the effort she gave. And as some of my colleagues 

have mentioned, they actually help make us as MLAs even look 

better just through their conscientious work in our offices. Also 

thank you to Audrey McEwen for her continuing service to the 

constituency. 

 

I think I’d be remiss if I didn’t say thank you to my wife and 

family as well. We, as MLAs, through the years we all know 

what it is to devote and carry the load of our responsibilities to 

represent our provincial parties and to represent government 

and to listen to the concerns of people. And many times our 

spouses and our family members tend to get overlooked. But I 

think as members it’s important for us to acknowledge their 

work, their commitment, and their support, as the member from 

The Battlefords mentioned today, even in the difficult times to 

know that there are people around you that are there to offer a 

word of encouragement and support you. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take a moment to say thank you to 

all the men and women who just a couple of days ago put their 

names forward to enter into municipal elections. I’m not exactly 

sure what happened across the province, but in my constituency 

there were a number of communities that actually had elections 

to fill positions on council, and it’s been a while since we’ve 

had that. In fact in some municipal councils over the past 

number of years, they’ve had to give out a second notice trying 

to fill positions. But this year we have many communities 

where there were 10 and 12 people running for six positions on 

council, and we have had mayoralty races as well. So I think 

that speaks well. I think that speaks to the growth in the 

province of Saskatchewan and the fact that people are excited to 

get involved in the area of local government. 

 

We talk about growth and we talk about opportunities as MLAs. 

Let me just divert a couple of minutes from growth, and speak 

to the many opportunities we have as MLAs to get to meet our 

constituents. 

 

It’s not all that often that you get to join with a family as they 

celebrate 125 years on the family farm. And it was my pleasure 

this week, my pleasure to gather together with a family as they 

celebrated 125 years. And as I was reminiscing with the family 

members, both younger and some of the more elderly folks, we 

all came to the same conclusion. We wondered what the 

original family members would say today if they were able to 

stand on that family farm. My sense is they would look out with 

pride as they looked at the generations that had come, and they 

would also be very proud of the progress that had taken place. 

And what was a quarter section, turned into a three-quarter 

section family farm, is now a growing farm where the couple 

are now farming 5,000 acres of land. And in some cases that’s 

small in today’s figures, but versus what it was years ago, it’s 

exceptionally large. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we talked about growth, and one of the 

challenges that communities have faced over the past 

half-dozen years is, as the growth has taken place, they’ve all of 

a sudden realized that they don’t have the ability to actually 

work with and prepare for the growth in their communities. And 

when I speak about that, I speak about communities that were 

struggling with their water treatment plants. They were barely 

keeping up to where they were. And as more families moved in, 

they had a difficulty in developing new residential areas. They 

also had problems with their sewage lagoon systems. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as a result of works of this government and working 

with the federal government, the infrastructure program of the 

day helped them begin to meet some of those goals. 

 

And I have been pleased to join with the communities of 

Grenfell and Whitewood as they opened new water treatment 

facilities, and the community of Moosomin, just recently, as 

they opened their new Communiplex. And I can tell you this: 

the people in those communities and the leadership in those 

communities were really grateful that senior levels of 

government stepped up to the plate to help them address those 

goals. 

 



October 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

And I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, that in this current Throne 

Speech we continue to speak up and recognize, as the Premier 

indicated earlier, we recognize that it isn’t just, we’ve dealt with 

the infrastructure needs; now we don’t have to worry about it. 

Municipal governments are telling us that’s going to be an 

ongoing issue. And I’m pleased to see that we are able to look 

forward and say to municipal governments and to the people of 

this province, we will continue to work with you to address 

your infrastructure needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth is not just bricks and mortar; it’s people. 

And in my constituency we have seen a lot of young families 

move into communities in the constituency. In fact in the most 

recent statistics, I believe every community has grown and 

some have grown significantly, but it’s also created some 

stresses. 

 

One of those stresses is young couples trying to address how 

they deal with daycare issues and care for their siblings, their 

children who need to be cared for while they’re endeavouring to 

meet their responsibilities of the jobs that they’re involved in. 

And our government has again stepped up to the plate. In fact 

under the former minister of Social Services, a number of 

programs were announced where the government was able to 

assist communities and groups and individuals provide daycare 

services. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we all realize that the 

demand far outweighed the ability, but the number of daycare 

spots has grown significantly over the past four years. And I 

would imagine we will continue to see growth in that area. 

 

But I would also like to say too, in some cases where we 

weren’t able to assist with the development of those daycare 

spaces, the need was there and individuals stepped up to the 

plate. Not only did individuals, but communities and local 

businesses. And tomorrow I’m looking forward to gathering 

together, to meeting with folks in Rocanville as they open their 

new daycare facility. 

 

Other areas where we’ve seen growth, Mr. Speaker, is in 

schools across the province and the number of young people 

that are going to school. And as a result of that, we have seen 

the constituency of Moosomin, we’ve seen a number of schools 

that have been expanded or where schools have been upgraded 

and new capital projects have been announced. And one of 

those is Prairie Valley and just recently we opened up the new 

K to 6 [kindergarten to grade 6] school in Kipling, and they 

continue to work to develop the rest of the capital funding that 

is going to expand that school. And, Mr. Speaker, most of that 

money is actually coming from the local level. 

 

There again, I say provincial coffers haven’t been always able 

to meet every need, but local initiative has taken over and 

school divisions have moved forward as they’ve seen the need. 

And I want to extend a thank you to the previous minister, the 

former minister of Education who saw that when the new 

funding formula was coming into place, that a handful of school 

divisions were going to be really challenged, and implemented 

a gradual phase-in of the new funding formula which greatly 

assisted Prairie Valley School Division as they move forward 

with their commitments to address the needs in their 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition has been talking extensively about 

the needs for First Nations people and educational 

opportunities. I’d be remiss if I did not again just bring to the 

attention of the constituency, the work done on the Cowessess 

First Nation. And I want to recognize the work and efforts of 

the current member for Greystone, the previous minister for 

Advanced Education who, in consultation, we were able to 

assist Cowessess First Nation in moving forward with a 

licensed practical nursing program. 

 

And to date, Mr. Speaker, 21 individuals have graduated from 

that program; 21 individuals are now working as licensed 

practical nurses in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And at the graduation this past June of the last group of licensed 

practical nurses from that program, I was informed they had I 

believe it was 74 applications for 14 seats; 74 young men and 

women were stepping forward and many of them First Nations 

young men and women. And I just feel really proud and really 

pleased to see that we were able to assist. 

 

And that’s just one program, Mr. Speaker. That’s just one of the 

programs which we’re working to assist First Nations young 

men and women as they look to move forward and achieve 

opportunities that are certainly open to them in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech was all about growth, all about 

how we move forward to meet the needs of a growing province 

and of a growing population in the province of Saskatchewan. 

One of the things that has been brought to my attention — and 

we’re talking a lot about debt reduction — and people that I ran 

into, whether it was community leaders or individuals, business 

men and women, every one of them to the T said to me, rather 

than worrying about retiring the provincial debt immediately, 

put a plan in place to work towards reducing that debt. Because 

I don’t think if you try to reduce the debt immediately, you may 

not have the resources available to meet the ongoing needs like 

the infrastructure needs. 

 

And I’m pleased to see that we are moving forward with a plan 

that says we’re going to move to reduce that debt. At the same 

time, we will work to meet the targets of addressing the needs 

of individuals. And I’m pleased to see as well, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not just the province of Saskatchewan, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, but if I’m not mistaken, Erin Weir made this 

comment about a well managed debt reduction program. “I 

agree with Premier Wall that, as a matter of accounting, it 

makes sense to pay off existing provincial debt before creating 

a new savings fund.” I think that’s positive. Mr. Speaker, that 

was one of the NDP candidates who put that up on his website 

that he agreed with the Premier of Saskatchewan in taking a 

planned initiative in dealing with provincial debt. 

 

In regards to debt restructuring as well, Peter MacKinnon said 

this in The StarPhoenix: 

 

“The government is very wise to be thinking of what 

happens when the province is debt-free. And if the 

resource (revenues) that are available to the province 

exceed what is necessary to operate then what should we 

do? What kind of approach should we take? I think that 

requires systematic thought, not simply year-to-year policy 

decisions.” 

 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2012 

And that’s what this Throne Speech does. It thinks ahead, takes 

a systematic approach as to how we move forward in 

addressing debt, how we move forward in ensuring that the 

commitments to health care and education and highways and 

you name it take place across this province in a manner that all 

people across the province can benefit from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk also, just mention, make a comment 

about how working together with local individuals can assist 

addressing some of the local needs. For example, this past 

summer on a number of occasions I’ve driven down to Kenosee 

Park. We only live about 30 miles from it so I’m quite pleased 

to speak about the park. And I speak about how that park has 

provided services to people over the years in the province of 

Saskatchewan, not just from the province of Saskatchewan but 

certainly we see a lot of North Dakota plates at the park. 

 

And one of the ongoing issues the past few years was the 

lowering of the water levels at Kenosee Park. Over the past two 

years one of the park’s individuals took the time, and a lot of 

times his own time, to kind of map out, well how do we get the 

water from the back part of the park into the major lake, into the 

big lake? And a lot of local people working with him said, well 

first of all we need to know how the water flows. There’s no 

point in blowing beaver dams at the end of the back side of the 

park and all this water rushing in, and then it disappears before 

it gets to the lake. So a long-term plan was put in place, a 

well-thought-out plan, that enabled, that measured or drew out a 

diagram of how the water flows, and then a systematic approach 

was taken where water was . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Do the members . . . A member has 

requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to members for offering me the chance to introduce a good 

friend to this Assembly. And sorry for interrupting the speech 

there as well. 

 

It’s my pleasure to introduce Mr. Myan Strong-Garcia, a grade 

7 student, St. Joan of Arc. His parents, Myan’s parents, are 

good friends of ours, Kendra and Jaime. And it’s a pleasure to 

have Myan join us here today for an artistic display that’s going 

to go on just after this Assembly. But Myan’s also a pretty 

fantastic football player, maybe one of the top young football 

players in Rosemont, to be honest. I think he’s got over 1,000 

yards this year, Mr. Speaker, eight touchdowns. He plays for 

the Bengals. He wears orange on the field, which I really like, 

Mr. Speaker. He’s a pretty talented young man. 

 

His mom and dad are fantastic people. His mom just ran for 

school board and put forward a really solid effort there. And 

certainly his dad is one of my good friends and is a running 

partner literally and politically. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members of this Assembly to introduce Myan Strong-Garcia to 

his Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I note the clock is rolling by fairly 

quickly, but to make a long story short, as I was going down to 

the park this year, everyone commented about the level of the 

water in the lake at Kenosee. It’s just been coming up, and that 

happened because with the Parks and Renewable Resources and 

local people, we found a way to manage the flow and to ensure 

that we got every drop of water into that lake. 

 

I’d like to make one further comment — I think the time is 

running out — but anyway I’d like to make one further 

comment about the work of Highways and, Mr. Speaker, that 

may have to come another day. 

 

I thank you for your time and your effort, your indulgence and 

the work of my colleagues, and I am in support of the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

The Speaker: — The time of adjournment now being past, this 

House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1569 

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1569, 1570 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1569 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1569 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1570 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1570 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1570 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1570 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1596 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1570 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1570 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1571 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1571 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1571 

 Resignation of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1577 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Foster Families Week 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1571 

 Saskatchewan Elections 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1571 

 Warman Becomes Saskatchewan’s Newest City 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 

 2012 Provincial Métis Awards 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 

 Growth for Saskatchewan 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 

 Autism Awareness Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 

 Civic Elections 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1573 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Throne Speech and Performance of Government 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1573 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1573 

 Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1574 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1574 

 Northern Roads 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1575 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1575 

 First Nations and Métis Employment 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1576 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1576 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1577 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1578 

 Sitting Days 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1578 

 Leave of Absence 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1578 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1579 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1580 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1587 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




