




















































Hansard: April 11, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 45A  THURSDAY, APRIL 11, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3167 

 April 11, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, with leave for an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has requested leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to introduce and to welcome a very special guest, His 

Excellency Thordur Aegir Oskarsson, the ambassador of 

Iceland to Canada. He’s here in the province of Saskatchewan 

and at our Legislative Building today on official business. We’ll 

discuss that a little bit later. 

 

Joining him today is Mr. Jón Jónsson, the honorary consul of 

Iceland in Saskatchewan who we’ve had the pleasure of 

meeting on several previous occasions. These gentlemen are 

accompanied today by Laurie Hutton, the international affairs 

officer, and by Caitlin Lane, a protocol officer with the protocol 

office. 

 

These gentlemen are going to meet with representatives from 

government members. They’ve already had a meeting with the 

Minister of the Environment. They’re going to meet members 

of the Icelandic community in this province. They’re going to 

be travelling to Wynyard to celebrate the annual Thorrablot 

Icelandic Heritage Celebration. 

 

Wynyard, incidentally, is the largest geographic Icelandic 

settlement outside of Iceland. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan, like Alberta and Manitoba, is home to a number 

of communities with distinct and proud Icelandic heritage, 

including the communities of Quill Lake, Wadena, and Foam 

Lake, just to mention a few in our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you know, our provincial motto is “from 

many peoples, strength,” and it is very clear that our province 

would not enjoy many of the advantages that we do today if not 

for the hard work and sacrifice of those first settlers like those 

who came from Iceland to call Saskatchewan home. And to this 

day, Mr. Speaker, thousands of Saskatchewan residents 

celebrate their Icelandic heritage. I’d like all members of the 

legislature to welcome our guests, the ambassador and the 

honorary consul, to Saskatchewan’s legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Provincial Secretary in welcoming Ambassador Oskarsson 

and Mr. Jónsson. We hope that your time here is a good one as 

you’re visiting and having the celebrations going on this 

weekend. I hope it’s a good time connecting with the Icelandic 

community here in Saskatchewan, and it’s a true pleasure to 

have you here today. So, velkomin. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the west 

gallery, it gives me great pleasure to introduce a group of 29 

students from the Huda School in Regina Coronation Park. 

Along with them, three teachers: Melissa Mah, Sandy Jost, and 

Diane Sabo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Huda School has a mission of gaining the best 

of the Canadian culture while preserving the Islamic identity, 

and they should be proud of the high academic standards that 

they have set. 

 

I look forward to every time I go to the Huda School. I’ll be 

there for their graduations. And I look forward to speaking with 

the students a little later, I think it’s room 218. But I’m looking 

forward to it, and please don’t stump me like you did in the 

rotunda with your questions. But I’d like all members to join 

with me in welcoming the Huda School, staff, and students to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with colleagues in the legislature in some welcomes and 

introductions that have already been made, specifically to the 

ambassador from Iceland. We want to welcome him here. And 

while that is of course the name of his country, we’re trying to 

earn that title just in terms of weather, it seems here lately, in 

the province. 

 

We want to welcome him here. He’s the latest in a series of 

ambassadors who have come to our province, and we’re always 

grateful to be able to share with them Saskatchewan’s story and 

to explore opportunities for our mutual benefit. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I may also — 

because I have not yet to say a welcome and an introduction to 

our friends — I understand the CPA [Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association] event was a good one last night. 

And we certainly have enjoyed the company and the presence 

of those who have joined us from Africa, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

welcome them, and to the kids from the Huda School. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join with the Premier in once again welcoming our South 

African guests who are, most of them are seated behind the bar 

today. I will attempt to introduce them by name, and I must 

stress that it’ll be an attempt. 

 

The leader of their delegation is Peter Maloka. Also these are 



3168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

the members. We have six members and two members from the 

Clerk’s office. The members seated behind the bar are, as I 

mentioned, Peter, Sibongile Makae — and please forgive me if 

I mispronounce your names — Jonas Ramokhoase, Sindiswa 

Magwandana, Casca Mokitlane. Roy Jankielsohn is up in the 

gallery. Roy, will you give us a wave. Also they are joined by 

their deputy secretary, Leonard, who’s way up there in the 

Speaker’s gallery. And Hein Viljoen is a researcher. 

 

I must say, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to have several 

meetings with our guests. They’ve been wonderful guests. 

We’ve had some fruitful discussions. I certainly hope that they 

learned as much from us we have learned from them. And once 

again I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

them. Today is their last full day. Tomorrow we put them on the 

plane and they leave the snow. As one of the members said, 

when is it all going to leave? And we are wondering the same 

thing. So I would ask you to welcome them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join with the Premier and the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood to welcome the South African delegation 

once again. But I guess, I suppose not just to welcome but to 

thank them for their presence here in the Assembly over the 

past days. 

 

And yesterday, when members of the opposition had a chance 

to sit down and discuss with the delegation, yes we talked about 

the weather. But more importantly, we talked about differences 

and similarities in our electoral systems and how our 

legislatures operate. And we also had a very good discussion 

about how governments can work to improve the lot of life for 

all people in a society and how we can come together. So I 

enjoyed the conversation yesterday, as did my colleagues in the 

opposition. 

 

I hope they have a good time for the remainder of their time 

here in Saskatchewan and I wish them a very safe trip home. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased and honoured to stand today to present another petition 

in reference to cell service to northwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

and Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and 

the neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

their areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I say time and time again each day, that 

the petition that we have presented here has been signed by 

people from all throughout Saskatchewan, and this particular 

page, Mr. Speaker, are people that have signed are primarily 

from Patuanak. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present another petition calling for the reconsideration 

of passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know it’s a consolidation of 12 labour laws in our province 

here. And there’s been hundreds of hours of study and 

comparison done in the interests of due diligence. But we worry 

that stable labour relations in all sectors will run the risk of 

being thrown into turmoil as the result of Bill 85’s sweeping 

changes. Thousands of represented workers stand to lose their 

rights to bargain collectively and be represented by the union of 

their choice. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Seniors’ Housing in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I brought 

spring greetings to three seniors’ residences in Saskatoon 

Riversdale. One of my favourite parts of this job as an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] is connecting with 

communities I represent. I value the opportunity to sit down 

with folks and listen to their thoughts and concerns. 

 

Over the course of the two days, I visited McAskill Manor, 

Arbor Green, and Columbian Place. The residents were eager to 

chat and of course, Mr. Speaker, I tried not to overstay my 

welcome, especially at Columbian Place as they were keen to 

watch curling and were avidly keeping up with the men’s world 

championships. 

 

Two of these residences are managed by Saskatoon Housing 

Authority and Columbian Place, which was recently built, is 

managed by the Knights of Columbus. Although the residents 

are incredibly appreciative of their housing, they couldn’t help 

but express concern for the individuals on the wait-list for 

seniors’ affordable housing. Each residence has long wait-lists, 

Mr. Speaker. Columbian Place was just built last year and, as I 

understand it, it has a wait-list already of over 70. 

 

Appropriate and affordable housing is vital for the growing 

population of seniors in Saskatoon. Affordable housing 

provides seniors with the opportunity to stay in their 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3169 

communities near their family and friends, and to be able to pay 

their bills on a fixed income. We’ve all heard stories about 

seniors making choices between paying rent and buying 

necessary medications and food. Our seniors have paved the 

way for future generations and deserve the highest quality of 

care and support that we can provide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I enjoyed my three spring teas with some of the 

seniors in Saskatoon Riversdale, and I look forward to the 

chance to visit my senior constituents and others when session 

is out. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Resort Recognized by Reader’s Digest 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to speak about a popular destination in my constituency. 

Reader’s Digest magazine recently listed Elk Ridge Resort as 

one of “9 Must-Visit Canadian Winter Resorts.” 

 

It is the only resort from Saskatchewan mentioned. Located just 

outside of Prince Albert National Park and the townsite of 

Waskesiu, Elk Ridge Resort was founded in 1993 by my friend 

and neighbour, legendary entrepreneur Arne Petersen. It started 

out as a nine-hole golf course and has since flourished to a 

four-season resort. 

 

During the winter months, guests can take advantage of a 

variety of amenities including a skating pond, cross-country 

skiing, snowshoeing, a toboggan hill, and over 400 kilometres 

of freshly groomed snowmobile trails. In addition the resort 

boasts luxurious cabins and suites, a 27-hole championship golf 

course, indoor pool, spa, excellent cuisine, conference facilities, 

and year-round activities. 

 

Elk Ridge Resort is very popular with our locals and attracts 

tours from across Canada as well as internationally. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Elk Ridge Resort on this special recognition, and 

invite my colleagues to spread the word about this 

Saskatchewan gem. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Aboriginal Artist and Activist’s Lecture and Biography 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday, March 26th, myself 

and the member for Regina Lakeview and hundreds of other 

citizens had the opportunity to attend the latest edition of the 

Forward Together lecture series at the First Nations University 

of Canada. The speaker was internationally acclaimed 

Aboriginal artist and activist, Buffy Sainte-Marie. 

Sainte-Marie’s lecture was entitled “Detoxifying Aboriginal 

Self-Identity,” and touched upon a wide and compelling range 

of issues such as the environment, Idle No More, Aboriginal 

rights, inclusiveness, and social justice. After the lecture there 

was a reception to celebrate the release of her biography titled 

Buffy Sainte-Marie: It’s My Way. 

 

The biography was written by a First Nations University of 

Canada indigenous studies professor, Blair Stonechild. And 

Stonechild brings a historical perspective to Sainte- Marie’s life 

story, including not only her music but her life as a 

philanthropist, activist, educator, and artist. Stonechild tells the 

story of a multi-faceted woman behind the music and does 

justice to her roots and ongoing connection to Saskatchewan, 

especially to Piapot Cree Nation. 

 

I would like to congratulate the University of Saskatchewan and 

First Nations University of Canada on yet another great 

instalment of the Forward Together lecture series. I’d like to 

congratulate Blair Stonechild on his great new biography. And I 

want to thank Buffy Sainte-Marie for being Buffy Sainte-Marie. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Yorkton Kids Expo 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The weekend of 

March 22nd to 24th, an interesting event was held in Yorkton at 

the Ukrainian Orthodox Auditorium. The Kids Expo was a 

trade show targeted at mothers, babies, and young children. 

 

This trade show, the idea of Joelle Bohn, owner of Joey 

Children’s Apparel, had an amazing number of displays and 

activities for those attending. The dozens of trade booths held 

the attention of the parents and some of the children, but the 

other activities kept the youngsters entertained and busy for 

hours. Mr. Speaker, they had an inflatable play structure, face 

painting, and even a Dora the Explorer photo booth, courtesy of 

Lori Trost Photography. And I’m proud to say even the member 

from Yorkton got his picture taken with Dora. 

 

I heard talk at the event that Sunday that they will need to find a 

larger venue for next year. What is truly amazing about this 

trade show, Mr. Speaker, is that the proceeds from the Kids 

Expo will be going toward making one of Yorkton’s many 

children’s play parks wheelchair-accessible. 

 

Additional funds to the worthy cause are also coming from a 

portion of Dairy Queen sales during the event. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask all members to join me in thanking Joelle Bohn and the 

organizers and the participants of Kids Expo, along with Mark 

and Lori Butchko of Dairy Queen, Yorkton, for their hard work, 

contribution to making life a little more fun for children with 

physical challenges in our area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Athlete in National Biathlon Competitions 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, about this 

time last year — well I guess it was actually March 1st but this 

just seems like March 1st right now — I stood in this Assembly 

to recognize and congratulate a young constituent of mine, 

Flight Corporal Jason Reimer of the No. 43 The Battlefords 

Royal Canadian Air Cadet Squadron. Corporal Reimer, who is 

now Sergeant Reimer, had just competed in the Cadet National 

Biathlon competition in Martock, Nova Scotia. Jason 



3170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

represented our province very well with his sixth- and 

seventh-place finishes in two divisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, biathlon is a sport that requires great physical 

fitness for the skiing segment and great marksmanship for target 

shooting. I am pleased to report that over the past year, this 

young cadet has continued to hone his skills and his 

conditioning. This year at the National Cadet Biathlon 

Championship, which was held in Valcartier, Quebec, our 

young representative won gold in the mass start, he won silver 

in pursuit, and he helped our provincial team win top spot in the 

patrol race. 

 

Jason’s accomplishments were recognized when he was 

presented with the Jean-Philippe Le Guellec Award which is 

presented to the senior competitor with the highest 

accumulative aggregates at the national competition. This is a 

very prestigious award indeed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Later this month, Jason is turning his attention to competing in 

the national biathlon competition on the civilian side. I would 

ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

this young athlete and wishing him continued success in future 

competition. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Student Housing 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise in the House to share some exciting news 

regarding the city of Regina and our province. In our 

government’s plan for growth, we reaffirmed our commitment 

to the success of Saskatchewan students. We want to ensure our 

students can focus on their studies, not finding housing or 

worrying about how they’ll pay the rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why our government is investing $10 

million to help build a new residence at the University of 

Regina. This investment will give more students the opportunity 

to focus on their educational goals and allow the University of 

Regina to continue to attract students from beyond our borders. 

Further, Mr. Speaker, this new residence, like the one we 

supported at the University of Saskatchewan, will help reduce 

some of the rental pressures in the city of Regina. 

 

Once again our government has shown with action that we are 

committed to housing throughout our province. Since 2007 

we’ve invested in over 500 student housing units at the 

University of Saskatchewan, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] in Prince Albert, North West 

Regional College in Meadow Lake, and the northern teacher 

education program in La Ronge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new commitment at the U of R [University of 

Regina] brings a total investment to housing of 1,100 housing 

units at post-secondary institutions across our province. In 

addition this year’s budget provides significant support for 

students, higher operating and capital funds for post-secondary 

education, and further investment in research and innovation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new residence will help contribute to the 

success of our future leaders of Saskatchewan and assist in 

easing some of the housing eases in Regina. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. The NDP [New 

Democratic Party] seem to be deeply confused about P3s 

[public-private partnership], and rightfully so. The confusion 

seems to stem from the contradictory positions from other New 

Democrats. 

 

First it was the revelation that the NDP government opened a 

P3 office at CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] in 2000 headed by Pat Atkinson. Then we found 

out about NDP officials who were meeting with Partnerships 

BC [British Columbia] as late as 2000 to discuss P3 

opportunities. That must have been quite shocking for the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then in May of last year, Manitoban NDP Finance Minister 

Stan Struthers said, “Public-private partnerships can provide an 

opportunity for the public sector to build projects more 

efficiently.” But wait, there’s more. Mr. Speaker, just this last 

January, former Saskatchewan NDP Finance minister, Janice 

MacKinnon, authored a report supporting the use of P3s to 

increase the supply of long-term care beds. 

 

Then just this March, the ever helpful federal NDP released a 

report, and I quote, “The P3 model can enable greater value for 

money for some infrastructure projects.” Then to top it all off, 

the member from Lakeview took Mayor Fougere out of context 

on March 7th, suggesting the mayor didn’t fully support P3s. 

We now know that the mayor supports the P3 process for not 

only the waste water treatment plant but also the Regina bypass. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why don’t the members opposite join with us in 

supporting P3s by endorsing the position that we’ve taken, 

Janice MacKinnon has taken, the mayor of Regina has taken, 

and more importantly, the position of the Manitoba NDP and 

the federal NDP, Mr. Speaker? Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Combatting Discrimination and Bullying 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in question 

period I raised some very basic questions about the promotion 

of gay-straight alliances as a common sense way, Mr. Speaker, 

of ensuring that our schools are safe and ensuring that our 

schools are welcoming places. I asked the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, if he would consider putting information, simply 

information, about GSAs [gay-straight alliance] on the Ministry 

of Education’s website. And I think this was a constructive 

suggestion, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s a common sense 

approach. 

 

The response that we had, Mr. Speaker, though was surprising 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3171 

to me. Because instead of looking at the merit of that proposal, 

Mr. Speaker, we saw the Premier talk about the issue of 

religious freedom, Mr. Speaker, suggesting that simply 

providing information on the website would infringe on 

religious freedom. Mr. Speaker, this isn’t about forcing schools 

to do anything. This is about providing a safe and welcoming 

environment for children here in Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the Premier: how exactly does putting some 

basic information on the government’s website about the 

benefits of GSAs equate to lost religious freedom? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we were having a 

wide-ranging discussion. Included in that was the suggestion 

from the hon. member with respect to the website. There is a 

discussion across the country about GSAs in particular and 

anti-bullying initiatives that I think is a discussion that we want 

to have in the province. 

 

More than that, we’ve asked an MLA to focus on this particular 

issue, working with the ministries involved. And I remember 

when I did say, rhetorically I think, we wanted to strike a 

balance in all things that we do in terms of rights that are 

protected in the Charter and in our own Human Rights Code 

here in the province, rights to freedom of religion, and rights 

around sexual orientation and the issue of gender. When I 

indicated in the House that I thought a balance was important, I 

thought I saw the Leader of the Opposition nodding his head in 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue with the initiative of the 

member for Fairview. She is going to work with the ministers 

involved. We’ll take suggestions such as has been put forward 

by the opposition and, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to 

working together with the opposition and the rest of the people 

of the province on an anti-bullying initiative here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear. The suggestion 

of putting more information on the website, Mr. Speaker, has 

nothing to do with infringing on religious freedom. I’m not 

talking about legislative measures, Mr. Speaker. That is not 

where the discussion is at. 

 

What I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker, is the leadership role that 

the Ministry of Education could play in putting information 

about the benefits of GSAs, how gay-straight alliances are 

established, how they operate, on the ministry website. To me, 

Mr. Speaker, this is a no-brainer. To me, Mr. Speaker, this is 

about providing information to youth who may be bullied, 

youth who may be feeling ostracized, and providing to allies 

who want to support those individuals. 

 

By ramping up the discussion, Mr. Speaker, taking it to the 

approach of losing religious freedom, Mr. Speaker, I’m worried 

about the tone that that sets. And I’m worried about the 

message that that sends to gay youth in our schools, Mr. 

Speaker, who are struggling with this and who have been 

bullied, Mr. Speaker. 

My question to the Premier: when discussing this issue, why did 

he choose to go to the place about losing religious freedom, 

wrapping up the discussion in that way, in a divisive way, Mr. 

Speaker, in a way that I think clouds the issue, Mr. Speaker? 

Why did the Premier not simply agree that providing this 

information on the ministry’s website is a smart thing to do and 

would help youth here in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already answered the 

question. The question was asked twice; the answer remains the 

same. The debate that we had in the legislature yesterday is an 

important one, more than just the debate, the discussion. We’re 

going to take action with respect to anti-bullying over and 

above what already exists with respect to the ministry and in 

school divisions. 

 

As you have this discussion across the country today around 

GSAs in particular, there is the debate from the religious 

community about its implication for certain schools. Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the fact that the NDP and the Leader of 

the Opposition is not calling specifically for legislation in this 

regard, and maybe he should . . . If that’s the position of the 

NDP, they may want to clarify that because we do want to look 

at all the options. Legislation actually might be one of them, 

and if he has suggestions around it we’d be interested in those. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I just want to be very, very clear. The debate 

was broad yesterday. It wasn’t just about a suggestion around 

the website for the Ministry of Education. And I think in all 

matters, we want to make sure we’re balancing all the rights 

that are protected in Canada’s Constitution and the Human 

Rights Code, all the rights. We can find that balance. That 

would be the priority of this side of the House. I expect it would 

also be the priority of members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my questions yesterday were very 

specific. They were about the steps that the government could 

take on adding some information to their website. My questions 

were not about forcing school divisions, forcing schools to do 

things through legislation. It was about leadership that the 

government could take in providing information to students, to 

parents, to teachers, to allies here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the day that the Premier was on his feet in this 

Chamber saying that providing some of this information raises 

questions of losing religious freedom, Mr. Speaker, it was the 

same day as we know as Day of Pink, and that the government 

ministry had a news release posted on their website about the 

Day of Pink. The Day of Pink is actually the international day 

against bullying, discrimination, homophobia, and transphobia 

in schools and communities. So by the Premier’s own logic, by 

providing this type of information on the website, Mr. Speaker, 

that post about the Day of Pink would have been in violation, 

would have been overstepping, in his view, issues of religious 

freedom. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he threatened, Mr. Speaker, 

about putting this issue on the website? Why is he concerned 

about providing this information to Saskatchewan people, Mr. 



3172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

Speaker? And why did the government’s news release on the 

Day of Pink not even mention homophobia or transphobia? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what an incredible stretch, 

Mr. Speaker. What an incredible stretch from the Leader of the 

Opposition to suggest that in the course of answering a question 

in a general discussion on GSA when we referenced the 

importance of, well the existence frankly, of a debate today in 

Manitoba and in Ontario where legislation exists around the 

issue of freedom of religion — also protected in the Charter, 

also part of this province’s Human Rights Code — that that 

member, that that Leader of the Opposition would stretch that to 

the extent he just did, Mr. Speaker. That is frankly politicizing 

the issue in a very partisan way, maybe to try to score some sort 

of points. 

 

I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that we were interested in ideas 

from that member and that party. Mr. Speaker, his suggestion 

with respect to the website for Education may well be part of 

the recommendations that come from the efforts of the member 

for Fairview. We’re taking an open mind to all of those 

suggestions. There are other issues around cyberbullying that 

have real concern, I hope to members on all sides of the House. 

They’re a concern to parents. She’s going to be looking at that. 

She’s going to be looking at all aspects of anti-bullying. 

 

The suggestion the member mentioned yesterday and today 

may well be included in that final initiative that the government 

enacts. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to approach it as a total 

package. We’re going to do all of the homework, led by the 

member for Fairview in conjunction with the Attorney General 

and Minister of Education. That’s precisely how it should be 

done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if they’re approaching this issue 

as the total package, looking at how individuals can be bullied, 

you would think that the government’s news release on the Day 

of Pink would talk about homophobia and transphobia. That 

would be taking it as the whole package, Mr. Speaker, looking 

at all of the issues of bullying that young people in our schools 

face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’m concerned about is when we’re talking 

about a serious issue about bullying, we’re talking about an 

issue where many LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 

transgender] youth in our schools are facing bullying, are 

feeling like they’re ostracized, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why 

the discussion in yesterday and in question period, Mr. Speaker, 

had to go to the topic of losing religious freedom because that 

clearly wasn’t what the discussion was about. And that’s not 

what people are concerned about here in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. What people want in Saskatchewan is to ensure that 

there is a safe and supportive and a secure place for every 

young person in our school systems, Mr. Speaker. That is what 

is important. 

 

My question to the Premier: if the approach is a holistic one, 

looking at all areas of bullying, Mr. Speaker, once again why 

did the government’s news release on the Day of Pink not talk 

about homophobia? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to be very clear 

about this again because the member continues to try to make 

this stretch with respect to a comment I made in one of the 

answers with respect to the overall context of a discussion on 

this matter and others, including the discussion we had in this 

country around marriage, Mr. Speaker, where freedom of 

religion for those churches, for those organizations that did not 

want to, for religious reasons, marry gay couples, Mr. Speaker, 

that there was an accommodation for that. It is part of the 

discussion. It is happening around this issue in other provinces, 

whether that member likes it or not. 

 

I know the Archbishops in Catholic have put forward an 

alternative that accommodates the concerns that have been 

referenced in this House — quite reasonable concerns, and the 

concerns we should be focused on — but also focuses on all 

areas of differences. I think rather than GSAs, they’re talking 

about committees that would be called respecting differences, 

Mr. Speaker. This is something that, this is another idea that’s 

been proposed that would help accommodate certain religious 

institutions that are involved in education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government takes this issue seriously. We’ve 

appointed a Legislative Secretary to work with the ministers 

involved. We’ve told members opposite earnestly that we want 

their input and their advice. We hope that they will continue to 

be involved. We’ll look at all suggestions, including what is in 

government press releases, Mr. Speaker, in the future, and also 

including what might be on the Education ministry’s website. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m a 

person of faith, as is the Premier. I think that’s important to 

recognize. But I’m not afraid, Mr. Speaker, about having 

gay-straight alliances in our schools. Because this isn’t about 

forcing things on school divisions, Mr. Speaker, this is about 

ensuring that children are safe, Mr. Speaker. A gay-straight 

alliance in a school is not about putting posters in the hallways 

saying that students should be gay or that something should be a 

certain way. But what it is about, Mr. Speaker, is providing a 

safe space for students who are being bullied and for teachers 

and allies who want to support those students. 

 

And it’s important to look at the context as well. For example in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, five out of seven of the Catholic high 

schools, the Catholic high schools in Saskatoon, have a 

gay-straight alliance or a club very similar, Mr. Speaker. These 

have existence in some schools. It’s not about forcing a school 

division to do something, but it’s about creating the space, Mr. 

Speaker, that is safe for students. 

 

So my question to the Premier: I’m encouraged and I appreciate 

his willingness to work together on this issue to find areas 

where we can agree and where we can advance the promotion 

of safety and inclusion for all students. A concrete and a 

no-brainer approach, Mr. Speaker, is to provide information on 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3173 

the ministry’s website. Will the Premier commit today that they 

will improve the ministry’s website to provide more 

information on gay-straight alliances? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in part at least, the hon. 

member’s question is answered in its preamble, Mr. Speaker, 

because we have GSAs being formed or groups that are 

accomplishing the objectives of GSAs. Perhaps the 

nomenclature is different, as the Leader of the Opposition has 

pointed out. They’re happening today. They absolutely can 

happen in the province of Saskatchewan today. We encourage 

their creation whenever students want to come together with 

teachers, with allies to make them happen. 

 

With respect to resources that can come from this government 

or any other source related to government, funded by 

government, this is going to part of what is going to be 

considered in terms of the work of the member for Fairview, the 

Legislative Secretary for the anti-bullying initiative. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Support for Post-Secondary Institutions 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the University of 

Saskatchewan president gave the state of the university address. 

The president highlighted a number of tough decisions that the 

University of Saskatchewan has to make in the year to come, 

including continued layoffs, ongoing questions around 

programming, and concerns about a structural deficit. All this 

took place against the backdrop of Sask Party government 

billboards and TV ads boasting of the supposedly great job 

they’re doing in post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a jarring disconnect between the reality on 

campus, the tough decisions that are being confronted there, and 

the political spin using public money on the part of this 

government. To the minister: why the disconnect? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for his question. During the last six months of the 

NDP’s time in office — and I think during that period of time 

the member opposite was the minister — there was an 

expenditure on advertising by Advanced Education of some 

$748,897.42. Not that I want to get too precise, but that’s . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been a lot of misinformation about the 

government’s support for post-secondary education. We think 

it’s important we set the record straight. In our time in 

government, we have never cut operating funding to 

universities. We have in fact, Mr. Speaker, increased operating 

funding by 52.8 per cent over the last six years. The NDP 

increased operating funding by only 37 per cent during their last 

six years of government. Under our government, tuition has 

increased by an average of 3.5 per cent per year. Under the 

NDP, tuition increases averaged 10 per cent per year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — [Inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, the period that the 

minister references of course, the operational increase for that 

year was 7 per cent for the sector. And in terms of the structural 

deficit problems that the University of Saskatchewan is 

wrestling with now, that of course was not the situation. 

 

Further evidence of the tough decisions needing to be made on 

campus at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] around the 

future of the school of medicine: program offerings are in 

question. And the school itself currently ranks dead last among 

other medical schools for certain categories, and the problem of 

probation still looms large. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the government doing to help with these 

problems, or do they think that their self-serving, 

self-congratulatory PR [public relations] and spin campaign is 

helping the situation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the university president 

has made it clear that the issues around the College of Medicine 

and the Academic Health Sciences Building are not a matter of 

resources. They’re a matter of internal governance, and they are 

dealing with those issues. And we are supportive in their efforts 

to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is not productive is what the members 

opposite are doing. The member from Massey Place, now the 

leader, on January 17th, 2013 said about the Academic Health 

Sciences Building: 

 

The building — intended to house the medical, nursing 

and other colleges — is sitting unfinished as a result of the 

Sask Party’s government’s surprise abandonment of the 

project and the university. 

 

Something, Mr. Speaker, he ought to have known that was 

absolutely wrong. December 17, 2012 the U of S website on 

capital projects said: 

 

The Council of Health Sciences Deans’ office has moved 

to the new location in office suite 5D30. The Biomedical 

Sciences office, College of Medicine, has moved into their 

new location on the 2nd floor of D wing . . . The majority 

of faculty have moved into or are in the process of moving 

into their new D wing . . . The main entrance to D wing is 

open during normal business hours. New meeting rooms 

are available . . . Elevators are . . . functional. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought to apologize and ought 

to take some pride in the university. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. Recognize the member for 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — The spin’s not just on the billboards or on the 

TV screens, Mr. Speaker. But one of the key indicators of the 

success or failure of Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions 



3174 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

is Aboriginal enrolment. Yesterday we heard that Aboriginal 

enrolment was back up to the year, to the level it was two years 

previous, after having dropped by 10 per cent the year before, 

the year last, Mr. Speaker. That kind of instability and that kind 

of inconsistency in terms of what should be a straight upward 

trajectory, Mr. Speaker, for Aboriginal enrolment is alarming. 

 

So again, in terms of the problems that are being confronted in 

the post-secondary education sector, Mr. Speaker, as 

particularly relates to Aboriginal enrolment, what is that 

government doing to help the problem instead of giving 

themselves a big old pat on the back? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to fund 

institutions such as SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies], FNU [First Nations University] and the U of R 

and the U of S which have got a growing number of students 

enrolled from the Aboriginal community. We encourage the 

initiatives that are taken by those institutions, and we’re pleased 

that we’re seeing some significant success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention briefly the member from 

Regina Rosemont. And I have a quote from him: “It is very 

troubling to see the treatment of education at prosperous times 

when we see cuts within programs where we see skyrocketing 

tuition.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say there have been no cuts to the 

universities from this government. Operating costs up 52 per 

cent and the tuition has increased only 3.5 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have taken a great deal of steps to ensure that 

our universities and our post-secondary educations are 

well-funded and, Mr. Speaker, are able to service the needs of 

our students. We look forward to taking more steps to ensure 

Aboriginal involvement, and we will continue to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Response to Job Loss 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, The Battlefords region is 

reeling following the closure of the Maple Leaf Foods 

processing plant and with it, 300 jobs. For a community of this 

size, this is a major blow. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it follows a string of other job losses for The 

Battlefords and area. Vanguard trailer manufacturing, Mifab 

welding have also left the community. Mr. Speaker, when these 

types of industries leave a community, they take with them 

more than jobs; they can uproot families. 

 

It’s clear the region needs a focus from the province for 

economic development. Currently 160 employees are left 

without jobs to replace the money, the income they were 

earning from Maple Leaf. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: with a 

big employer leaving The Battlefords, what’s the Sask Party 

government’s plan for jobs in the area? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, any time there is a loss of 

jobs in our province in any community across Saskatchewan, 

we are obviously very concerned about it. We have a rapid 

response team that immediately goes in and has discussions 

with the employees and employers. We try to relocate people to 

jobs as quickly as possible here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The good news is, in our province though, we have an 

extremely buoyant economy here in our province right now. We 

have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, or thereabouts, 

the lowest at 3.8 per cent. So there is opportunity for people in 

our province to take up employment in the various opportunities 

across the province. So there is some good news in those 

situations because we have an extremely buoyant economy and 

there are other opportunities for people to go to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 

minister’s answer seems to be that those families can simply 

move to other areas of the province. It’s seems that it’s clear 

that this government doesn’t have a plan whatsoever for 

economic development in The Battlefords and area. 

 

They announced the northwest enterprise region in 2009 when 

they took over local economic development committees. Then 

they appointed Wally Lorenz, a former Sask Party MLA, as the 

Chair. But that community saw the enterprise region fold after 

the Sask Party pulled funding. Now the region is without local 

economic development support — not helpful for a community 

that’s dealing with the loss of jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province was supposed to participate in a 

committee to help find jobs for those out-of-work former 

employees of Maple Leaf. What steps did that committee take? 

And what did the province bring to that table to find real 

employment opportunities for the people of The Battlefords? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated earlier that 

obviously any time there’s a loss of employment, we are very 

concerned about it. We send in a rapid response team to talk to 

the people and see if we can’t move them into another 

opportunity as quickly as possible. Saskatchewan, though, has 

now the largest population that we’ve ever had. We’re the 

second fastest growing economy in Canada right now. 

 

We have a very enviable record in many areas, and that’s why, 

frankly, the Conference Board of Canada has indicated 

Saskatchewan will boast the fastest economic growth in all of 

Canada over the next two years. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, there is 

opportunity here in Saskatchewan. Any time there’s a loss of 

jobs, we are very, very quickly to move to help encourage and 

relocate if necessary, but also create opportunities for people in 

the job market. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3175 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was about 

those very actions of which we didn’t hear of any from that 

minister, and they were promised to have been involved in a 

committee, something that there’s no evidence of, Mr. Speaker. 

And the latest employment woes in The Battlefords are not 

helped by a budget that is simply not delivered for the 

community. The Prairie North Health Region told the local 

paper the provincial budget will be very troubling for the 

community. CEO [chief executive officer] David Fan said, “It is 

a very difficult budget for us . . . ” 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Education critic raised just yesterday that 

various members of the local school board have said that the 

Sask Party government just simply isn’t listening and that 

there’s cuts that are being forced all throughout the classrooms 

of those communities. And of course there’s the broken promise 

as it relates to the Saskatchewan Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a government should serve all of Saskatchewan, 

all communities in the entire province, but the Sask Party 

government’s record in The Battlefords is one of neglect where 

health and education, economic development — the basics — 

simply aren’t being supported. Why has the Sask Party 

government turned its back on Battlefords and area? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one of the tools 

that are available to people when they’re seeking jobs in 

Saskatchewan is saskatchewanjobs.ca. And if you look at that 

website today, in North Battleford you’ll see that there are 337 

jobs currently available in North Battleford, where there’s 

employers that are looking for people, where there’s employers 

that are looking for people to take up the jobs that they have 

available in North Battleford right now that are available to 

them. And if you look at that same situation all across 

Saskatchewan, you’ll see a very similar trend, where there are 

over 13,000 jobs available in Saskatchewan as a whole for 

people that are unemployed currently. And that is precisely the 

reason why, Mr. Speaker, that we have the lowest 

unemployment rate in all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member’s assertions are incorrect when it 

comes to the markets that he is referring to: in North Battleford, 

337 jobs currently available on saskjobs.ca. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Leadership 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen today on these 

topics in question period, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier on the 

issue of bullying, the issue of gay-straight alliances in the 

school, Mr. Speaker, not showing the leadership that is needed 

on this issue to ensure all children are safe. We’ve seen the 

Advanced Education minister clearly not showing the 

leadership that is needed when it comes to the post-secondary 

sector, preferring billboards as opposed to actually providing 

supports for students and for our institutions, Mr. Speaker. And 

we see the Minister of the Economy, as opposed to addressing 

the issues in The Battlefords, actually recognizing the concern, 

Mr. Speaker, and taking action, we see simply a spin saying that 

everything is fine. 

My question to the Premier: will he recognize, will he recognize 

the need to actually admit some mistakes, recognize that they 

need to do better when it comes to inclusion of students, need to 

do better when it comes to provisions for our students, need to 

do better when it comes to the people of North Battleford? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting question 

because the gentleman opposite, the Leader of the Opposition 

has been leader of the NDP for a very short time. His question 

is about admitting mistakes. His question is about leadership. 

Mr. Speaker, in the course of just those four weeks as the brand 

new, newly minted leader of the NDP, he’s had trouble on the 

Keystone issue. He now says he’s in favour of Keystone, but 

last May he voted against Keystone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he campaigned for the leadership of the NDP by 

saying we need more efficiencies in the health system. And then 

when those efficiencies are identified by the Minister of Health, 

he says he opposes those very efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. He 

says he wants a new style of politics, but what do we see 

coming out of his office? Anonymous Tumblr sites, anonymous 

Twitter sites, and on the day that he apologizes for that, the 

deputy leader’s got to stand up and apologize for the language 

in this place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This province is moving forward in health care and education. It 

has Canada’s leading economy, Mr. Speaker. And I would point 

this out: if the hon. member is asking about lessons in 

leadership, he should probably start with his side of the House, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order on both sides. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table 

answers to questions 302 to 314. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled questions 

302 to 314 inclusive. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 901 — The Orange Benevolent Society 

Repeal Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my pleasure today to move second reading of a bill on 

behalf of the Orange Benevolent Society. But before I make the 

motion, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just make a few brief 



3176 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

comments. 

 

In 2010 the Orange Benevolent Society asked me if I would 

sponsor a bill to amend their Act so that they could have 

provisions in their Act that would deal with distribution of 

assets if they decided that they would discontinue their 

operation. At that time they didn’t feel that they would be 

discontinuing, but they realized that the world had changed, that 

their function in society had changed. 

 

Originally when they were set up back in the early . . . in 1927 I 

believe it was, they dealt with orphan children, with children 

from families who couldn’t look after them. And they have a 

long and rich history of doing a lot of good work in the 

province caring for children. They did that through soliciting 

and fundraising. They didn’t rely on public dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, to carry out their good work and so on. But the world 

has changed and they have recognized that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so therefore earlier this year they asked me to sponsor Bill 

901 which repeals their Act; which in effect, Mr. Speaker, they 

cease to exist. But because of the amendments that took place in 

2010, their Act set out how they were to distribute their assets, 

Mr. Speaker. And at that time, in the 2010 amendment, it set 

out that upon dissolution they would distribute their assets to 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — If the member for Athabasca wants to carry 

on a discussion with a member from the opposite side, please 

contact him and leave the floor to do so. I recognize the 

member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I said, 

the amendment in 2010 has set out the mechanisms for the 

distribution of the assets upon dissolution. And the assets are to 

go to organizations that deal with youth and families. So I am 

very pleased to be able to tell you today, Mr. Speaker, that in 

the last few months the Orange Benevolent Society has 

distributed $5.3 million to a number of organizations, and I will 

list some of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I don’t have amounts for each organization, but some of 

the organizations and institutions that have received funding 

from them is the Melfort Hospital, the Tisdale Hospital, the 

Nipawin Hospital, Ronald McDonald House in Saskatoon, the 

pediatric ward of the University Hospital Foundation at the U of 

S, the seniors’ home in Rosetown, the Noble Irwin Foundation 

in Swift Current, CHAB Children’s Fund in Moose Jaw, Casey 

Foundation in Regina, Hospitals of Regina Foundation. And I 

believe there was a few dollars left which they have used for the 

Hayes Haven Personal Care Home which in fact the Orange 

Benevolent Society has built in 2000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m very pleased to represent these people and, Mr. Speaker, 

at this time I would move that Bill No. 901, the Orange 

Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan repeal Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood 

has moved that Bill No. 901, the Orange Benevolent Society of 

Saskatchewan repeal Act, 2013 now be read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 100, this bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Bill No. 902 — The Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

indeed an honour and a privilege to stand and bring forward this 

bill. The Lutheran Sunset Home is trying to update, modernize, 

and being able to make themselves more efficient for the future. 

So this is one of the steps that they needed to be made, and I’m 

grateful for the opportunity to do this. 

 

So I move that Bill No. 902, The Lutheran Sunset Home of 

Saskatoon Amendment Act, 2013 now be read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Batoche that Bill No. 902, The Lutheran Sunset Home of 

Saskatoon Amendment Act, 2013 now be read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 100, this bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Standardized Testing in Saskatchewan Schools 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to rise to introduce a motion on this private members’ day 

regarding the actions we’ve seen on the part of the government 

here where they’re introducing standardized testing in 

Saskatchewan schools, and coming at a time I think where it’s 

probably the worst time to introduce this type of program for a 

number of reasons which I will comment on today. 

 

We know that schools are strapped. We’re hearing that 

continuously. We just heard from the school division in North 

Battleford about the impact of this budget on their operations. 

And these stories keep coming, particularly in those stressed 

areas where there’s a huge population growth and numbers are 

flowing into the urban centres at incredible rates, and school 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3177 

boards simply aren’t able to keep up. 

 

So there’s a number of pressures in terms of crowding — 

children learning in hallways and large numbers of students 

being taught in closets and cloakrooms throughout schools in 

those areas where there’s pressures on numbers, certainly 

students being transported lengthy distances to get to spaces 

where there are available chairs and desks for students to learn, 

and of course the obvious attendant pressures that the educators 

face when it comes to these kinds of growth issues, issues that 

are related to the incredible growth that the urban centres are 

facing. 

 

So it’s just beyond us, Mr. Speaker, why this is a time that this 

government saw it appropriate to increase expenditures on 

something called standardized testing. We know that schools 

have in place, over the many years that schools have been 

operating in Saskatchewan, adequate testing procedures to 

ensure whether students are doing well, and if not, then 

measures are taken to assist those students in reaching their 

ultimate goals. 

 

I think I just want to reflect for a couple minutes on my time as 

a teacher. I was a teacher in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, and it was 

a rewarding experience for me. It was a very challenging 

experience. One thing I learned is that as a teacher in a 

classroom, there’s a lot of discretion and responsibility for that 

individual instructor to look after the needs of the students that 

are in the classroom. And that’s a very personal relationship, 

Mr. Speaker, with those individual students. It’s one that’s 

creative. It’s one that’s a wonderful opportunity to connect with 

some amazing young human beings and an opportunity to help 

them find their own potential. And every one of those students 

is wonderfully different. They all bring different attributes to 

the world. They all bring different experiences and interests.  

 

And I even think of my own children when they are learning. 

And my oldest son, Zachary, who I speak about from time to 

time, when he was a young student, he was incredibly curious. 

And he still remains that to this day. He’s 19 now, but he’s the 

most curious person I think I’ve ever met. And his teachers 

often commented on that. And so he had this insatiable desire to 

learn. And his teachers were able to provide him . . . He had 

some great teachers that gave him that extra depth that he 

needed to stay curious, to stay interested. He was able to 

participate in a program in Saskatoon called AcTal, which is a 

program for academically talented children, and he was able to 

spend four years in a classroom with other academically 

talented children. And the support and the stimulation that he 

received as a part of that program went a long way to keep him 

engaged and learning and to keep him curious. So I’m very 

thankful for those opportunities. 

 

And more than anything I’m thankful for his teachers, and in 

particular his one teacher Mr. Flaherty, who is one of my 

constituents, who was always, always allowing the kids to be 

curious, allowing them to explore their own interests and follow 

their dreams and follow their nose basically when it came to 

learning. And I can tell you learning happened. These kids were 

successful, and we didn’t need standardized tests to tell them 

that. 

 

[11:00] 

One of the things I want to go through a little bit as I make my 

comments today in relation to this motion, Mr. Speaker, is a 

study that came from the British Columbia Teachers’ 

Federation. And it’s a position paper from 2009 with some 

interesting comments on the effect of standardization and 

standardized testing. And yes, we know that there are certain 

points in students’ learning where evaluation needs to take 

place. 

 

As an educator and as someone who went through the College 

of Education and studied how proper evaluation needs to 

happen, multiple-choice exams are not the preferred choice for 

truly evaluating. You have to write essays. If you’re learning 

English, a series of multiple-choice questions is not the most 

effective way to determine whether a student has acquired the 

learning goals of that particular unit. And so you wouldn’t 

always have a standard test. You would allow students to write 

paragraphs and full sentences, which require a different form of 

evaluation than that you’d see from standardized testing which 

is an attempt to sort of widgetize the learning of the students 

and try and measure a small bit of the learning so that we can 

get a measure across the board. 

 

Now I understand that that is one form of evaluation, Mr. 

Speaker, but there’s just so much more that has to happen in our 

schools. And with a focus on learning rather than on testing, I 

think our students will continue to thrive and succeed. 

 

One of the things that the paper says — and in this case they’re 

talking about an assessment in British Columbia called the 

foundation skills assessment tests — and the comment that they 

made, I’d like to quote this. It’s an extensive quote, but it says: 

 

Classroom instruction and assessment practices must be 

congruent with a belief that learning happens when the 

individual child is central to, engaged in, and excited by 

learning. With this focus, and through a series of finely 

tuned and complex decisions, the teacher’s responsibility 

is to make curricular, instructional, and assessment choices 

to foster the growth of the whole child. Learning is the 

exciting process of constructing meaning. Teachers are 

committed to making education a dynamic and joyous 

process because we know that such engagement produces 

lifelong learners. 

 

And that was certainly the experience that I saw my son go 

through when he was able to participate in the AcTal program 

in Saskatoon.  

 

Now the paper goes on to say why these standardized tests are 

not working in British Columbia, and here’s the quote: 

 

The overreliance on the Foundation Skills Assessment 

tests as measures of achievement, coupled with the 

requirement that districts set ever higher rates of 

achievement on these tests, has resulted in the proliferation 

of both district- and school-wide assessments. These 

assessments are not always connected to the daily 

curriculum of the classroom and therefore often result in 

changes to instructional practice. Outcomes are narrowly 

focused, and not centred around the learning needs of the 

child. 

 



3178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

That’s the end of the quote. What we see, Mr. Speaker, here is 

that if you start over-relying on these tests, they begin driving 

the learning experience of the child, and that is simply a 

backwards way, and a way that will not allow our children to 

thrive and prosper. They go on to say: 

 

The proliferation of mandated, district-wide, and 

provincial testing has taken time away from teaching and 

learning and has had an effect on the “taught” curriculum, 

by both narrowing it and making it shallower. The 

workload on teachers has increased dramatically, adding 

stress to the job, and forcing some to choose to teach 

part-time in order to be able to comply with the 

requirements imposed on this system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that what this minister is trying to do? Is he 

trying to make teachers work harder and work part-time so that 

they can do their job? Is he trying to narrow the curriculum and 

make it shallower? Because if he does, he’s going to succeed in 

that effort, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another quote I’d like to share from this paper is one from 

David Weinberger in a quote from his paper in 2007. And what 

he says here is, “Accountability has gone horribly wrong. It has 

become accountabilism, the practice of eating sacrificial victims 

in an attempt to magically ward off evil.” 

 

So the paper goes on to say that: 

 

Accountabilism suggests that there is a right and wrong 

answer to every question and flourishes where results can 

be measured exactly. Having spread to the education 

system, accountabilism is forcing students, and the schools 

they attend, to become things that can be measured 

precisely. Creativity, critical thinking, love of learning, 

safety, and sense of place do not lend themselves to 

precise measurement, therefore, they are not central goals 

of district accountability or achievement contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again this is a very clear description of what can 

happen when the focus is on testing rather than teaching. It’s a 

clear indication of when you focus too much on the results, 

learning itself is stifled. It’s warped. It becomes a system of 

objectivity rather than subjectivity where thinking is not 

happening anymore and where learning is simply memorizing 

the answer to the question. 

 

It forces changes in teaching and it forces changes in learning. 

And I don’t think this is something that the people of 

Saskatchewan want for their children, and I don’t think it’s 

something that the teachers of Saskatchewan support. And they 

are the professionals, Mr. Speaker. Having been a teacher, I 

know the great sense of professionalism that teachers place 

upon their jobs and the duty, the sense of self and duty that they 

have to those children, and you cannot underestimate that. 

 

But this type of approach, this type of standardized approach, 

which requires objectifying the learning that’s going on in the 

schools, is not respectful of the great work that the teachers do, 

that the students . . . and the curiosity of these students and their 

ability to venture into learning with enthusiasm and to engage 

in lifelong learning. These types of tests simply reverse that. 

They stifle it, and they’re going to force children to become 

widgetized. And I think that’s a true shame about this approach 

that this government is bringing to this subject. 

 

Another quote from this paper when referring to these tests, it 

reads as follows: 

 

Unfortunately, students and their parents pay the price. 

Students are forced to learn according to processes that 

can be easily measured, instead of ways that suit their 

individual learning needs. Schools resort to implementing 

standardized practices, and attempt to identify uniform 

“best practices” and scripted programs to prescribe and 

control instructional and assessment methods. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this kind of approach as described in this 

sentence is one that will control learning, and that’s one I think 

that people should be worried about. If you’re going to control 

learning, if you’re going to prescribe learning, if you’re going 

to require uniformity throughout the schools, it simply doesn’t 

fit what’s really going on in schools. 

 

Walk into any school in this province right now and you’re 

going to see an incredible diversity. You’re going to see 

diversity according to race. You’re going to see diversity 

according to physical health. You’re going to see diversity 

according to socio-economic circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s no school in this province that is homogeneous enough 

to be exactly compared student to student, nor compared school 

to school. 

 

And it’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker, that the minister himself 

isn’t even interested in this type of commentary. He’s busy 

chatting with his colleagues rather than listening to the 

wonderful information that comes from organizations like this 

that have good advice for this minister, when we haven’t seen a 

whole lot of listening going by this minister or any kind of real 

answers when he’s been questioned on why he feels and why 

his ministry feels and why this government feels that this is an 

important issue. He simply doesn’t seem to be interested, and 

that’s rather disappointing. 

 

There’s a quote in the paper that refers to a comment on a 

school, a school in British Columbia, one of the schools I’m 

talking about that has a lot of diversity, that has a wide range of 

people that are in the school, a wide range of students come 

with a wide range of experiences. It was an ESL [English as a 

second language] classroom, and they received an email from a 

teacher in Wales. And the Wales teacher had glowing 

comments about the students in this school who were ESL, how 

they were engaged in their learning, how the teachers had 

developed inclusive structures and were enabling children to 

succeed. And this teacher was very excited in what was going 

on in that school. 

 

Now here’s another quote from the paper. It says: 

 

Yet this school was publicly ranked at the bottom by the 

Fraser Institute. The effect on the students and parents was 

devastating. One parent told the principal that she didn’t 

want to leave the school. [She said] “I love my son’s 

teacher. I love the school. I feel so much a part of the 

community. But we are ranked at the bottom now. My 

family in China tells me we have to move. Our pride is 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3179 

now in question.” 

 

And that’s what’s happening to the people that are being forced 

into these types of objective evaluations being forced upon the 

schools. And the paper goes on to say that: 

 

All partners in education in BC, teachers, administrators, 

parents, and ministers of education have condemned the 

way in which the FSA results are used by the Fraser 

Institute to rank schools — the current census 

administration of the FSA ensures that the Fraser Institute 

will be able to continue to use these results 

inappropriately. It will only be stopped by moving to 

another structure of administration of the test such as a 

random sample. 

 

And that’s what we’ve been calling for, Mr. Speaker. The quote 

goes on: 

 

A random sample would provide the ministry with 

sufficient analysis of the system and prevent the misuse of 

data to create harmful ranking tables. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the comments I 

wanted to bring to the floor today for the Assembly. And before 

I make the motion, I just want to thank the Assembly for the 

opportunity to be able to comment today. And I would like to 

make a motion at this point, and the motion will read as 

follows: 

 

That this Assembly oppose the implementation of 

unnecessary standardized testing in Saskatchewan’s 

schools. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana: 

 

That this Assembly oppose the implementation of 

unnecessary standardized testing in Saskatchewan’s 

schools. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to enter into the debate today on the standards-based 

testing. My experience has been to spend nine years on the local 

school board, on the Melfort School Division board. I served as 

finance chairman. I served as facilities chairman. And I spent 

three years, Mr. Speaker, as board chairman. 

 

Over those nine years I got to see a lot of the challenges and a 

lot of the successes that teachers have, and both the teachers and 

the students of the Melfort School Division. And I gained a 

very, very high respect for the teachers and the teaching 

profession. I also want to mention, Mr. Speaker, that the 

director of education at that time was a gentleman named Bob 

Kroeker, who was a fountain of knowledge. And I learned so 

much from him. 

 

And when I talk about people I’ve learned a lot from in 

education, I’m going to talk about my brother, Warren, who has 

his doctorate in education. He retired a couple of years ago from 

superintendent of the Battle River School Division, the largest 

rural school division in Alberta. He spent his life in education. 

Yes, unfortunately he was one of those ones that moved to 

Alberta . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, yes, another one of 

those. 

 

But during the summer both Warren and I have cabins up at 

Emma Lake, and we’ll sit around and we’ll talk about a lot of 

things. And because we’re brothers, it ends up as a debate. 

Sometimes maybe even an argument might come out. We’ll 

talk about . . . Both Rider fans, so we can’t argue about that, but 

we might argue about who’s going to start on Sunday, that type 

of thing. I have to say we do agree on certain things, like the 

amazement at that O-lineman we used to have, number 60, 

when we would see him 35, 40 yards downfield blocking . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I can’t think of his name right now, 

but it’ll come to me. 

 

But when I was on the school board, we had two main 

problems. We had two main problems that happened to all 

school divisions at that time. And the first problem we had was 

we were underfunded by the government. At that time, at that 

time the historic standard was 60 per cent. We had dropped 

below 40 per cent. And all that did was took the cost of 

education and threw it onto the local taxpayers. So it frustrates 

me to no end when I sit here and I listen to the member from 

Athabasca talking about how they fought the deficit. They 

didn’t fight the deficit. They put it on our backs. 

 

The second thing that we used to talk about an awful lot was 

enrolment declining, you know, and an example of that was in 

1997, we had 194,000 students in Saskatchewan. By 2006, 

under the opposition’s government, we were down to 163. That 

31,000 students we had lost in those years. That was a problem 

with education. And you know, you talk about that, but I 

remember sitting in the Centennial Auditorium, as it was called, 

and this would be in the early ’90s, and they showed us this 

chart, Mr. Speaker, where the enrolment was here last year, and 

it’s going to be here this year, and it’s going to be here next 

year, and here, and here. And that was the department. It was 

just straight line down. 

 

[11:15] 

 

I’m pleased and proud to say that right now we’ve changed. 

We’re up to 168,000 students. We’ve rounded the corner, and 

now we’re going to have a straight line up. 

 

You know, but I wanted to talk about a recent . . . And I’ve 

heard the opposition member speak about the BC Teachers’ 

Federation study. I want to talk about a University of 

Saskatchewan study which I think might be pretty good in 

Saskatchewan. What they did, they studied Alberta students 

versus Saskatchewan students or, in Alberta’s case, 

standards-based testing versus Saskatchewan students. They 

found that the Saskatchewan students had a 3.5 per cent higher 

average coming out of high school — 3.5 per cent. I don’t know 

what that means, but, you know, it can’t be bad. 

 

So the kids go to university, and 12,000 kids over three years go 

to university. At the end of the first year, they look at the marks. 



3180 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

The marks from the Alberta students had dropped 6.4 per cent 

from their high school average to the first-year average. The 

marks of the Saskatchewan students dropped 19.6 per cent — 

19.6 per cent. And that’s from the U of S. That’s Saskatchewan. 

That’s something that . . . You know, why is that? . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . No, that’s right now. That’s a recent 

study. And you know, why is that? 

 

I was telling you before, I have a really high respect for 

teachers. I think our kids are wonderful. I think our teachers are 

wonderful. Could it be there is something in the system that is 

stopping them from doing a good job? You know, and this is 

. . . And instead what I hear is that all we have to do if we want 

better education, just roll in another truckload of money and 

that’ll give you a better education. That’s what we keep hearing. 

You know? It’s just like there’s no end of money from their 

part, even though they’ve never been able to build an economy. 

 

I have a friend . . . I have a friend. I have a friend. I have a 

friend who was a wise man. He unfortunately passed away, 

Dale Frier, but he did have a line that I used to just love. And he 

said, if you don’t know where you’re going, how are you going 

to know when you get there? And I think that’s true. And I 

think that’s very, very true in all of our lives, that you have to 

have goals. You have to have someplace to aim for and to look 

for. And you know, I believe that’s what we’ve done. We want 

more information. We want . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The best for our students. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Absolutely. We do want, we want information 

going home and we want some level of accountability. But I’ll 

tell you what this isn’t. This is not part of ranking teachers. This 

is not part of ranking schools. This is not part of funding. What 

the achievement initiative is, is it gives you a level of 

accountability. It does show where you have to improve. It 

shows a path — how to get to educational excellence. 

 

You know, too long our students have ended up in national 

studies in fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth spots. And that may be 

good enough for some people, but times have changed and it’s 

not good enough for Saskatchewan people. 

 

You know, we are so pleased to be able to bring in things like 

this that will help our students. And you know, if you help the 

students even at grade 4 and make sure that they’re caught up at 

grade 4 and grade 5 and grade 9 and grade 12, you help them 

for the rest of their lives. You know, and what the goal of the 

student achievement initiative is to develop a single, unified 

program that provides students and teachers and the parents 

with a uniform feedback, and that has got to do nothing but help 

in the future. 

 

You know, it’s something that I just don’t understand how we 

can go year in and year out, and I hear many things coming 

from the opposition about, you know, the teachers’ initiative on 

an individual base, but even teachers have to have goals. And 

the goal of this government is to ensure that Saskatchewan 

leads the country, leads the country in graduation rates. Like 

that is a goal. 

 

I want to wrap up, Mr. Speaker, and I want to wrap up by 

saying I’m very proud of all the things that we have 

accomplished on this government. We have done many, many 

good things, and I’m pleased and proud of that. But if I had to 

be nailed down to one thing that I am most proud of is that I 

feel we have unleashed the province. We have unleashed the 

people of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Absolutely. And, Mr. Speaker, I do today 

believe very strongly that we have to unleash the students and 

we have to unleash the teachers, and this bill will be harmful to 

that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a pleasure to enter into 

discussion here today as it relates to the health of our 

classrooms, the support that they can provide, the learning of 

our students, the support for the next generation. And it’s 

something that certainly is a passion of mine. 

 

I get a kick out of the member opposite in closing off his speech 

in sort of a nonsensical fashion talking about unleashing 

education when really this is everything about constraining 

education. This is what this is all about. If you look at all of the 

evidence, this is a plan to constrain education, to constrain 

students’ learning, to constrain the profession of high-quality 

teachers throughout this province, to constrain our classrooms. 

It certainly isn’t to unleash learning. That would be something 

that we’d be excited about supporting, and it’s the kind of plan 

that we’ll be speaking to here today. 

 

We know that on this notion of constraint that’s placed with this 

sort of right wing standardized testing agenda that’s being 

pushed forward is stifling for learning. We know the evidence is 

on the side of suggesting that this isn’t the way to go for our 

classrooms, and we need to be empowering learning, 

empowering our students, and supporting our teachers and 

respecting those teachers. 

 

I also have heard members opposite somehow pretend that they 

maybe now respect teachers, Mr. Speaker, which is a tad odd 

when certainly they haven’t listened to the voice of teachers on 

this matter. But this isn’t new to this government. This is a 

government that’s denied listening to teachers on matter after 

matter and has had no interest in listening to those voices. And 

this is the same government, Mr. Speaker, that actually took it 

to an unprecedented low by actually running ads against 

teachers in a very tenuous bargaining process that disrespected, 

demeaned the profession and the important role of those 

professional educators all across our province. 

 

Quite simply, the plan that’s put forward — and it’s not even a 

plan; it hasn’t been explained by the minister opposite — but 

the expenditure put forward to push towards a right wing 

standardized testing agenda of this government is without 

common sense, and is certainly without the evidence. And we 

haven’t heard from the Premier. We haven’t heard from the 

minister. We haven’t heard from members opposite any 

evidence that they’re pointing to that suggests that this is the 

right steps to be taking. What we see is it’s a matter of 

misplaced priorities and in fact will take us in the wrong 

direction. 

 

We need to look at the context of education right now. And 

when they’re making this choice to spend $6 million on 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3181 

standardized testing, they’re doing this against a landscape 

where educational assistants have been cut by the hundreds all 

across this province, causing impacts on learning and in 

classrooms for all students, placing great strain on those 

classrooms, strain on learning, and certainly strain on our 

teachers. 

 

We see growing class size, in many ways unmitigated by this 

government, causing strain. And we see complex and diverse 

classrooms that our students and our teachers are doing all they 

can to meet the needs of . . . to meet those challenges. And 

spending $6 million on this foolhardy plan does not serve the 

learning of those students and does not support the challenges 

that we need to step up to the plate for. 

 

We see that, in many ways we see failure to support the English 

as an additional language students. And failure to do that, and 

creation of complex classrooms impacts all students just the 

same way as it has to see this government peeling away 

supports and pulling away educational assistants for students 

with special needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is the context that we see. And we also need to fit this 

into the bigger picture, the bigger picture that is those factors 

that are external to the classroom, that have a direct influence 

on learning. And if this government really cared about 

improving educational outcomes, they’d focus on those factors 

that are so significant to a student’s learning: the context within 

our communities, within homes; the pressures that so many 

families are faced by way of housing pressures; the lack of 

security and the instability that so many families, so many 

students are facing, the growing inequality for far too many in 

this province, the lack of access to basic nutrition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guess it comes down to, I come down to a 

pretty simple place in looking at this as a big picture. If a 

student doesn’t have the stability of a roof over their head, if 

they don’t have food in their belly, then learning itself is going 

to be a non-starter. And the minister can push forward with an 

expensive foolhardy right wing agenda of standardized testing 

all he wants, but the results aren’t going to be where we need 

them to be. 

 

We need to be supporting the big picture, all those factors that 

support student achievement that are external to the classroom. 

That’s where the focus of government needs to be. It needs to 

be towards a more equitable, more equal society in extending 

opportunity to all. We’ve seen opposite steps of this 

government. 

 

And then back into the classroom, we need to make sure that 

we’re supporting the classroom. And at a time where 

population’s growing, at a time where diverse needs of students, 

diversity of our classrooms is growing, we need to make sure 

that those supports are in place in those classrooms. And 

certainly the approach of not listening to parents, not listening 

to students, not listening to teachers, and then cutting the very 

supports that are going to enable success in those classrooms is 

the wrong approach to go. 

 

There’s been some good opinions that have been placed out into 

the public dialogue, opinions that should be listened to by this 

government in reconsidering this plan. I think of the work that’s 

been done by Professor Marc Spooner and Paul Orlowski who 

put a letter to the editor titled “Reconsider mandatory tests in 

Saskatchewan.” And this is a strong letter. It states research and 

study after study after study that opposes this direction of 

government, that proves and has analyzed where other right 

wing governments have pursued this foolhardy agenda, what 

those results have been. 

 

And they ask the Saskatchewan government to reconsider this 

$6 million expense, an expense that they very rightly point out 

is just the start, is just the beginning. And at a time when we 

have precious resources, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure 

we’re allocating those dollars in a way that makes sense, that 

returns value for dollar, that gives us the best bang for our buck. 

And this is a wasteful exercise, one that constrains education 

and constrains our classroom. 

 

The evidence they’ve put forward cites study after study. And 

I’ll highlight just a little bit, quoting from their letter to the 

editor: 

 

The effectiveness of standardized testing as a means of 

improving education has been widely questioned and 

critiqued in the relevant research literature. Standardized 

assessments have not been demonstrated to improve 

teaching or learning in any significant manner [and that’s] 

(Hout & Elliott, 2011). 

 

I’ll just repeat that last part: 

 

. . . have not been demonstrated to improve teaching or 

learning in any significant manner. 

 

It goes on here: 

 

Standardized assessments provide onetime snapshots that 

do not accurately measure how a student performs day 

after day and they are, by their very nature, summative, 

rather than formative; teachers who perform regular 

assessments . . . daily . . . are best positioned to evaluate 

how a student is performing vis-à-vis curricular outcomes. 

 

And that study was Davies, Herbst, and Reynolds, 2008; and as 

well, Harris, Smith, & Harris, 2011; and WNCP, 2006. 

 

The evidence continues to cite, “Standardized testing diverts 

teaching time and monetary resources away from . . . [students], 

teachable moments, and direct teacher-student contact time.” 

And that’s by Kohn of 2011, 2011; and Sahlberg of 2011. 

 

The work of Pasi Sahlberg is something that we certainly can 

reference and use as a guide as some desirable directions for a 

system. This government is moving in the opposite direction. 

The evidence isn’t there, Mr. Speaker. This government hasn’t 

listened to parents, hasn’t listened to teachers, and it’s failing to 

step up to the plate in a meaningful way that they must for 

students. 

 

We’ve seen graduation rates declining in a dramatic fashion 

under this government, and that’s a massive failure — taking 

the tremendous opportunity that we’ve been presented and 

failing to manifest that in meaningful improvements in the lives 

of students and the next generation and in the realities of our 



3182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

classrooms. 

 

[11:30] 

 

This is a government that has disrespected teachers time and 

time again with the failure to listen, with the circumstance, if 

you can imagine, of running ads against the profession in a 

demeaning way at a time where they were negotiating, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s pretty clear where they stand as it relates to 

teachers, the importance of education in society, and they’re on 

a track that’s certainly not supported, as I say, by evidence, not 

supported by common sense, and not in the best interests of our 

students. 

 

What a government needs to do is to keep its mind to the big 

picture of working towards a more equitable, more equal 

society, dealing with issues of poverty, making sure that we 

have security of housing, making sure we’re building strong 

families. That’s going to make the biggest difference in 

education. And as we allocate our resources, we shouldn’t be 

putting it into high-priced schemes that are failed to be wrong. 

We should be putting them into the direct supports and needs 

that make a difference in the lives of students, teachers in the 

classroom, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll be supporting the motion put forward by the member 

from Nutana here today: 

 

That this Assembly opposes the implementation of 

unnecessary standardized testing in Saskatchewan’s 

schools. 

 

Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That was a rather 

pessimistic view of where we’re going here. But I appreciate 

the opportunity to have a few moments to enter into the debate 

here, Mr. Speaker, on the motion made by the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to just mention that under 

the first six years of the Saskatchewan Party government we’ve 

increased our total operating funding to our school divisions by 

a total of twenty three and a half per cent. Mr. Speaker, this 

equates into $338 million since 2007-2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, operational funding this year has increased 2.3 per 

cent. That’s in this year’s budget, a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker, which equates to $40.6 million more for our 

Saskatchewan school divisions. Mr. Speaker, this funding 

increase increases the budget to help the growing school 

divisions, such as Saskatoon Public and Saskatoon Catholic, 

with a 5.2 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. Regina Catholic is at 

5 per cent and Regina Public at 3.9 per cent increase over last 

year. 

 

This also includes $17 million to pay for enrolment increases. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I might add that this is the first time ever that 

current year enrolments have been used . . . or funded, pardon 

me. Capital spending is up $7.2 million to a total of $119 

million, Mr. Speaker. This will help provide 40 new 

relocatables that will be available for Saskatchewan’s 

fastest-growing communities. This will accommodate in total 

up to 800 students. 

 

Supports for learning funding which go to classroom supports, 

such as English as an additional language and educational 

assistants, is increased by $10 million, Mr. Speaker. This will 

be to a total of $268 million. 

 

Money is going to planning for two new schools, one in 

Langenburg and one in Gravelbourg. Money is also being 

provided for the projects that are already under way. Mr. 

Speaker, total school infrastructure allocation has increased by 

264 per cent over the NDP. In the last six years since the Sask 

Party has been in government, Mr. Speaker, they’ve committed 

$600 million to school infrastructure. The previous six years, 

when the NDP were in government, Mr. Speaker, that same 

spending was $165 million. 

 

All in all, our government has allocated funding for 43 major 

capital projects, over 900 additional smaller projects across the 

province. Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were in government they 

closed 176 schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to improving the 

educational outcomes for all our students. We have some of the 

most dedicated professional educators working in our sector. 

And unfortunately, too many of our students still are not 

graduating from high school. Mr. Speaker, about 72 per cent of 

our students graduate high school, and even more concerning, is 

only about a third of our First Nations and Métis students 

graduate. The status quo is not working That is why we have 

looked for some new initiatives, Mr. Speaker, and we are 

introducing the student achievement initiative. Let me be clear, 

Mr. Speaker, this is not just about assessment; it’s about a 

balance between instruction, curriculum, and assessment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, standardized-based assessments are already a part 

of our education system. While the province currently 

administers some standardized tests to Saskatchewan students, 

it does only every other year. In addition, students write each 

test in only two to three grades. So while the current system 

provides a sample of student achievement, it’s too limited in 

scope to have much of an impact. 

 

A more comprehensive approach to standardized-based 

assessment will benefit students in a number of ways. These 

tests will provide the provincial government with a more 

accurate understanding of academic achievements throughout 

the province. With this information, we’ll be able to target 

additional supports and intervention to schools with low results 

and also we’ll be able to learn from those schools that obtain 

better results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s school divisions that are already using this 

standard-based assessments and early year evaluations, the 

same types of successful programs that we intend to use at the 

provincial level. For example, the Chinook School Division 

have their own standardized literacy tests, and the division has 

seen a 21 per cent increase in students meeting or exceeding 

their literacy standards over a four-year term. In 2008, Mr. 

Speaker, 63 per cent of the students met or exceeded 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3183 

grade-level reading. In 2012, four years later, 84 per cent of 

those students met those grade-level readings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina public school division uses an early years 

evaluation or an EYE to support their pre-K [pre-kindergarten] 

and kindergarten students with tests in June and then again in 

February. Mr. Speaker, in the interim between the EY [early 

years] tests, the EYE data is used to give teachers and staff 

training to support these very students in the pre-K and 

kindergarten classes. 

 

Prairie school division uses an achievement program that has 

seen year-over-year improvements in 23 of the 26 student 

achievement areas. And, Mr. Speaker, these include areas such 

as reading, mathematics, and treaty education. My question 

would be, why does the opposition dismiss these types of 

programs that are done by our school boards across this 

province and why are they prejudging the same approach that 

will be used at the provincial level? 

 

I would also like to speak just a little bit about how the student 

achievement initiative came about, Mr. Speaker, and some of 

the consultations that have happened and that are happening. To 

help our students be the best that they can be, we need to move 

forward with this student achievement initiative. In order to get 

it right, we need to hear from front-line educators, Mr. Speaker. 

And that is exactly why we have 13 teachers contracted to work 

on the tools and the resources for this initiative. 

 

The ministry is engaged with all sector partners regarding our 

student achievement initiative. The ministry has met four times 

with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation since Christmas 

regarding a consultation process with the teachers and the 

students. And just last week, Minister . . . Just last week, Mr. 

Speaker, the ministry met with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation regarding a schedule and a process to do just 

precisely this work. 

 

We have looked at what other jurisdictions are doing, and we 

know that other provinces like Alberta and Ontario have 

implemented this in their new approach and have seen 

improvements with their student success. We are the last 

province in the country to implement an assessment model that 

reports out at the individual student level. 

 

Research says that assessment with regular feedback has the 

strongest positive impact on student achievement. That’s 

something we’re missing with the assessment model we 

currently have — the assessment for learning or AFL. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak a little bit about a personal 

consultation that I had. And it happened a little while ago, and it 

was in the upcoming to the plan for growth that was released by 

our Premier here about last fall. 

 

As we went through that summer, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

asked MLAs, government MLAs, to go out and consult with 

people on what makes Saskatchewan just the great place it is to 

live. Well, Mr. Speaker, I spoke with many educators that 

summer about specifically the education system and what 

would make it better, and there’s teachers that I spoke with that 

asked for an assessment model, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ve spoken with them since we’ve talked about the student 

achievement model that is here now, and they’re quite excited 

to implement it in a classroom, not only to measure students 

and schools and across school divisions but also, Mr. Speaker, 

they want to look at it to enhance their teaching ability with 

students as they go through the years and improve their 

teaching methods with these particular kids, Mr. Speaker. So 

this was consulted. It was part of the growth plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would like to say that this is not an American high-stakes 

model of assessment. This is not about ranking individual 

schools or teachers, and it’s certainly not about tying funding to 

performance. This is about our students in Saskatchewan. 

We’re able to track library books in this province, but we’re not 

able to track a student’s learning. That needs to change. 

 

Student achievement, Mr. Speaker, will be a Saskatchewan 

program that is developed by Saskatchewan people for our 

Saskatchewan students. We’re going to capitalize on the good 

work that is happening across this province already in our 

school divisions that I mentioned. This is about developing a 

provincial standard so that there’s consistency from school 

division to school division. And this is working in some school 

divisions already, Mr. Speaker. This is just another tool in the 

tool box to improve the outcomes for Saskatchewan’s most 

valuable resource, our children and our students. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to get into this debate. It’s a very important one, and 

it’s clear that we have a lot of work to do in education. And we 

hear about it. We read about it in the newspaper daily about the 

challenges students are facing in their classrooms. And parents 

are seeing this. And they come to us and they say, really? 

Unnecessary standardized testing? 

 

Everyone is for assessment. Assessment is necessary — 

absolutely, absolutely. And these folks talk about four school 

divisions, and I’d like to know more about it. But we think it’s 

great that school divisions are doing innovative local work 

where they’re improving results, and that’s a good thing. But 

when we’re talking about the unnecessary kind of things this 

government is doing, $6 million for computers . . . And that’s 

just the start. That’s just the tip of the iceberg. We don’t know 

where this will end over the next five, ten years. This is just the 

beginning. And so we have a lot of concerns. 

 

We have a lot of concerns that this seems really, really 

unnecessary. And I want to talk a little bit. You know, we know 

that the minister is having a difficult time getting a handle on 

what is this really about, and that’s what we’re hearing now. 

The speaker just before me talked about, this actually came out 

of the Premier’s growth plan, that that’s a direction for the 

standardized testing initiative. That’s where it’s coming from. 

 

I was really disappointed. I want to quote from March 26th, the 

Hansard there where the minister said, we’re introducing the 

student achievement initiative, Mr. Speaker, because for the 

first time we’ll be able to tell parents, tell students, tell teachers 

the rationale of how we can move children forward and how we 



3184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

can continue in that direction. 

 

The first time? I’m a teacher. I think I’ve been able to tell 

parents when they come for parent-teacher interviews the 

rationale for how we evaluate, assess students. I can’t believe 

on one hand they’re saying we trust teachers, but we’d rather 

have them testing than teaching. I think teachers have been 

doing both very well. 

 

But they really feel that the emphasis are on the challenges in 

the classroom. And whether it’s overcrowding, whether it’s 

achievement rates in terms of all the groups in our schools . . . 

And we have to do more for vulnerable groups, and we have to 

do more particularly to support First Nations and Métis students 

in our classrooms. And we have to do more when English is a 

second language. But the answer, to say the answer is more 

testing, not more teaching; more testing, not more classrooms; 

more testing, not more educational assistants, that’s just 

wrong-headed. That’s wrong-headed, and it’s completely 

unnecessary. 

 

Now the minister goes on, and this is what he said on March 

20th when asked about this. He says, you know: 

 

The student achievement initiative, Mr. Speaker, didn’t 

just come out of the blue. As my colleague said it, [and 

that I think he’d probably be referring to me] we didn’t 

find it in a garage sale [I didn’t say that]. This student 

achievement initiative is the product, is the result of the 

provincial panel on student achievement . . . 

 

And so let’s look at that panel that sat on the shelf. It was 

commissioned by this government in 2008 by the current 

Finance minister, then the Minister of Education. The previous 

minister from Humboldt sat on it, and now all of a sudden we’re 

seeing parts of it resurface. Isn’t that interesting? Isn’t that 

interesting? And so the minister accurately . . . And I assume 

this is the recommendation he’s talking about, is number 9: 

 

The Panel concludes that student assessment is an integral 

part of teaching and learning, and that assessment provides 

valuable data to improve instruction and educational 

programming. The Panel recognizes that student 

assessment takes place in many ways, at many levels, and 

for many purposes throughout the education system. 

Therefore, the Panel recommends: 

 

[11:45] 

 

And then there are three, but the one I think he’s referring to is 

number (ii): “Establishing a comprehensive assessment 

program that focuses on collecting data to inform instruction 

and improve student learning.” So there it is in the report. Fair 

enough. 

 

But what we didn’t hear from the minister — and this is key, 

and this is what I’m hearing from all sorts of stakeholders in our 

education system — is right on page 2, page 2. So you don’t 

have to go very long to read it, and it says: 

 

The recommendations in this report have two important 

features: 

 

The recommendations are interconnected and 

interdependent. Each builds upon and strengthens the 

others and together they will significantly improve 

student learning. The recommendations are designed to 

be implemented as a whole, not as independent pieces. 

 

And so we see now a ministry that is cherry-picking 

recommendations that fit their agenda but not implementing the 

whole. Here they had a whole report, and it sat on the shelf, 

continues to sit on a shelf except for when the minister decides 

he’s going to pull out page 38 and section 9(ii) to back his 

initiative, this government’s initiative. That’s not how we work 

together. That’s not how we work with our partners. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, we have real concerns about this kind of 

approach to education when we see our graduation rates falling. 

They are falling, and that’s not a good thing. There is a way, 

and this panel report as a whole is the way to move. And this is 

the government that commissioned it but then decided to ignore 

it except for one part of it. And I think that’s a real problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we debate here today, what are the 

priorities in our schools? They are real. They are real. We see 

them. And we’ve talked about Living Sky School Division up 

in The Battlefords, the challenges that they’re facing in having 

to dip into their reserves to make difficult choices. Their kids 

are in hallways. They’re having to wear coats apparently 

because the heating infrastructure is not working as well as it 

should because they’re not getting the funding. They call it 

status quo. 

 

The School Boards Association doesn’t call it status quo. They 

consider it a cut. It may be above zero, but essentially in reality 

it’s a cut. And the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] 

considers it a cut because it’s a real problem. It’s not meeting 

the needs of the classrooms that we see in our schools. 

 

And I just have to . . . I think even today in question period we 

talked about Battlefords and the challenges that are happening 

up there. We have so many challenges in our schools, so many 

good things, so many good things, and teachers working as hard 

as they can and administrations working as hard as they can. 

But the fact is this kind of thing is unnecessary when the reality 

of what’s happening in our schools and our communities are not 

being addressed. 

 

And today we talked about the challenges in North Battleford 

and The Battlefords region where we see economic difficulties, 

hardships because of jobs being lost. Those things not only just 

come home, but they come to school when kids are facing 

uncertainty about what’s happening in their homes. And these 

are the realities that show up in our classrooms. 

 

So we have many, many challenges that we have to deal with, 

but instead this government decides to spend $6 million on a 

start-up on computers. And we don’t know where that will end, 

and we don’t know who asked for it. 

 

But we can say that there is a plan — there is a way to move 

forward — that this government had commissioned. And why 

are they ignoring it? Why are they ignoring the whole report 

and instead cherry-picking? 

 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3185 

So I think this is an important discussion and an important 

debate that we’re having here. And the resolution, I think the 

key word in it is unnecessary standardized testing. It’s 

unnecessary because we do a lot of assessment already, and 

there has to be a balance between testing and teaching. There 

has to be an appropriate way that we recognize that assessment 

is a key part in terms of planning for teaching, evaluating as you 

are teaching, and then at the end, to make sure that students 

have achieved the objectives of their learning. That’s key. 

That’s really important. 

 

But to overlay more on an already overcrowded agenda in 

schools, whether it be the size of their classrooms . . . Making 

sure everyone achieves their full potential, that’s key. That’s 

key. And I really think especially when we have some unique 

opportunities in Saskatchewan when it comes to First Nations 

and Métis, that we want to make sure that they recognize their 

full potential, and the same with new Canadians when the 

challenge is English as an additional language. That’s really 

important. Students who are living with disabilities, we have to 

make sure their needs are met. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a lot of challenges, a lot of 

pressures in our education system. And I really think it’s 

important that we think about, what are our priorities? And this 

government has choices about how it spends its money, and this 

is simply wrong-headed, wrong-headed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

think it’s unnecessary, and therefore I think that the resolution 

put forward from the member of Saskatoon Nutana hits the 

mark completely when she says, “This Assembly opposes the 

implementation of unnecessary standardized testing in 

Saskatchewan schools.” 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

real pleasure to join this debate this morning, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

a former teacher, and I have three students, three sons that are 

students in the Regina Catholic system, so this is a pretty 

pressing issue for myself. I was only a substitute teacher, Mr. 

Speaker, so I didn’t do a lot of assessment of students. I 

certainly handed out tests on days I happened to be there in the 

past. But certainly I was able to have some experience in this 

area when I had been in government with some math 

consultations we did, I did with the then member from Douglas 

Park, now the minister, Mr. Speaker. And we looked at the 

math curriculum. We listened to teachers. 

 

And two things come to mind when it comes to this debate, Mr. 

Speaker. Number one, we have very passionate, very, very 

passionate teachers in this province, Mr. Speaker. They care so 

much about their students, Mr. Speaker, and I know with my 

sons, their teachers are passionate. They’d do just about 

anything to see their students achieve. We had teachers 

travelling far distances in not great weather just to come and 

have their passionate views put out there, Mr. Speaker. So 

definitely we have a bunch of teachers in Saskatchewan that 

care, as I mentioned. 

 

And as it comes to this issue, Mr. Speaker, we talked a little bit 

about assessments, and we talked about the AFL, assessment 

for learning. Some teachers expressed problems that you get 

late feedback. Sometimes when you take in a grade 5 or grade 

8, you know, the board doesn’t get it till much later. Sometimes 

the students . . . It’s gone on to the next level. So it’s not 

immediate assessment, Mr. Speaker. It just looks at the grade 

level, not drilled down to that individual student and see what 

they need and what they need to do better. 

 

We talked to very passionate administrators: for example Liam 

Choo-Foo in the Chinook region of the province, Mr. Speaker; 

talked to Julie MacRae right here in Regina. And they told us 

about some very exciting initiatives they had, and great results 

that they had right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 

like to highlight one of the projects or one of the pilot projects 

they had, early years evaluation. I believe the member from 

Shellbrook mentioned that real quickly. I’d like to dig down a 

little bit into that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was a kindergarten class in a few categories from earlier in 

the year to later in the year we’re looking here. The students in 

this cohort that had appropriate development went from 16 per 

cent, 16 per cent all the way up to 64 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

through this pilot project. Those experiencing some difficulty 

decreased from 64 per cent to 36 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Those 

experiencing significant difficulty decreased from 20 per cent 

all the way down to zero. There are no more kids in this 

particular study. Now this is certainly a small study, Mr. 

Speaker, but it shows, I think, there’s great work being done in 

the field. There’s lots of experts out there, Mr. Speaker. And 

this is something that can certainly be used and looked at in 

other areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I think of my own son, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, he’s 

in kindergarten, and most parents know that there is assessment 

and evaluation going on in each reporting period. And well 

most recently, Mr. Speaker, between reporting periods they had 

an evaluation of his ability . . . or the number of letters he 

recognized in the alphabet. So number X out of 26 that he 

recognizes. The sounds that they make — X out of 26. The 

numbers up to 10, he was evaluated on that. And based on that, 

we’d like to get that number up just a little bit. So here’s where 

he was just recently, where do we need to get him to by the end 

of the year, and here’s some strategies we can implement to try 

and get him there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s good work. That is a very 

elementary model, a very basic model, but that’s the heart of the 

student achievement initiative, Mr. Speaker. We want our 

students doing better, and we measure how they are doing in 

those particular areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So can we look at those kind of scenarios, those best practices 

in certain areas of the province that we saw here in Regina, we 

saw in Chinook, we saw in Cornerstone, and that we heard in 

our . . . that I see with my sons and in other parts with our math 

consultations, Mr. Speaker? Can we look at the best practices 

and try to have it in other parts of the province, Mr. Speaker? I 

think I would, me as a parent, if I knew something good was 

happening in Saskatoon, if something good was happening in 

Melfort, if something really positive was happening in 

Martensville, I would think that I’d want to have the chance to 

have that happen with my students in my area or in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what this does. 

 



3186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, when I mention those statistics, 

those hard numbers, those facts, I challenge . . . What would the 

NDP do if they saw these numbers? Would they just completely 

ignore them? Would they just sweep it under the rug? Who 

cares? We won’t do anything with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s an obligation within a balanced budget 

and in all reasonable measures, if we want to improve student 

achievement in the province, Mr. Speaker, we want to look at 

what works in other parts of the province and try and replicate 

it, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what the ministry is doing with this 

motion. 

 

They mention — the member from Nutana — unnecessary. 

Well what is unnecessary? They acknowledge that assessment 

has to happen; evaluation has to happen. But are we going to 

leave it to the members opposite, the nimble nine, or are we 

going to listen to the experts in the field, Mr. Speaker? Are we 

going to listen to the Liam Choo-Foos, Julie MacRae, Ben 

Grebinski, Don Rempel, those members that were here earlier 

in the year up in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker? Are we 

going to listen to them, those folks that are in the system and 

know what’s happening within their divisions, or are we going 

to listen to the NDP, Mr. Speaker? 

 

You know, there’s a lot of fearmongering I think in this area 

going on, and certainly I guess that’s what oppositions do. 

That’s what they’re part of. That’s their modus operandi, I 

guess. It’s certainly not a high-stakes model like in the US 

[United States], Mr. Speaker. We’re not ranking schools. We’re 

not ranking teachers. The teachers aren’t going to stay up all 

night wondering what the results of the tests are in case they 

keep their job. Nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re trying to paint the picture that we’re going to 

have students chained to their desks, hours upon end, days upon 

days, filling out bubble sheets, Mr. Speaker. That’s completely 

false, Mr. Speaker. That’s just misinformation. 

 

And it’s certainly not an either-or, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

continuation of the curriculum. One part of it’s curriculum, the 

other part’s instruction, and the other part’s assessment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So you know, it’s not a massive part of the budget either, Mr. 

Speaker. When you look at the numbers, we saw from Chinook, 

we saw from Cornerstone, we saw from Regina Public, Mr. 

Speaker, this is new money over and on top of from before. It 

comes to point three, 3 per cent of this budget. And again this is 

new money. 

 

So we’re not cutting teachers. We’re not cutting everything like 

we hear from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. We’re fully 

funding this, Mr. Speaker. And we think it’s a good initiative. 

Again it’s just a tool. It’s just a part, it’s just a part of what 

we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. It’s another tool for the teachers, the 

great teachers we have out there. Give them another tool to use 

to help their students achieve. Which is exactly what they want, 

and that’s what I as a parent and what we all want here in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have great schools in our province. We have great 

teachers in our province. But can we do just a little bit better, 

Mr. Speaker? Can we do just a little bit better? Now I know the 

NDP, the members opposite, they’re all about status quo. Keep 

people, keep things the same. Don’t set goals; just keep things 

the same, Mr. Speaker. Not in this area necessarily but certainly 

when it comes to nurses, when it comes to wait times, 

population, the economy, the employment rate in the province, 

Mr. Speaker, they like the status quo. That’s fine. They’re okay. 

They like stagnation. So can we try something that’s proven in 

the province that we can try? Can we just try that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[12:00] 

 

And I wonder that the member from Nutana, she mentioned that 

I believe it’s her son or daughter went into the AcTal program, 

and that’s a great program from what I understand, in 

Saskatoon. How would the administrators or the teachers know 

if her son qualified in the first place? How would they know? 

Would they just . . . Do they just pick the students that go to 

that accelerated program? Would they just pick it out of a hat 

like the lottery system, just guess, just — I don’t know, you 

know — just randomly based on whimsy? 

 

They would probably do some sort of evaluation on that 

student. That student’s really achieving, maybe we can move 

them, give them extra work to do. We can move them on to the 

AcTal program, in fact, Mr. Speaker. So that would be an 

evaluation or an assessment of that particular student. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. I 

recognize the member from The Battlefords. I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Standards-based assessment has proven to be 

effective, and the positive results are very evident. The success 

of standards-based assessment can be seen in Chinook School 

Division which utilizes a standardized literacy assessment. 

 

In 2008 the division had 63 per cent of students meeting or 

exceeding grade-level reading. In 2012, Mr. Speaker, 84 per 

cent of students are meeting or exceeding grade-level reading. 

That’s a 21 per cent increase in students meeting or exceeding 

literacy standards over four years. Mr. Speaker, an impressive 

statistic. 

 

Chinook School Division is not alone in realizing successful 

results from standards-based testing. To the member from 

Regina Rosemont: why does the NDP continue to ignore the 

positive results of standards-based assessment in our education 

system? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the question 

from the hon. member. The reason we oppose it is because it’s 

been proven wrong. It’s been proven a wasteful expense, and 

it’s been proven not to be in the best interest of this 

standardized-testing approach pursued by governments all 

around the world. 

 

What I also don’t support from the member from The 

Battlefords is a government that’s spending $6 million on 

something that has no evidence, that’s been proven wrong, at 

the same time they’re cutting Living Sky School Division by 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3187 

$2.4 million, Mr. Speaker — a division that supports a very 

diverse population and a government that’s failing to support 

the needs of the classroom, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. We see a context where we see cuts to educational 

assistants by that government, cuts to supports in the classroom, 

growing class size, and a lot of strain on students and on 

learning. And they’re pursuing this foolhardy approach of 

spending $6 million more at a time where we need real supports 

in the classroom. I think of the Living Sky School Division up 

in the region of the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, and my 

question to that member is: how does he support this expensive 

$6 million plan without any evidence, that’s been proven wrong 

in other jurisdictions, at the same time as they’re cutting $2.4 

million from that local school division that’s working hard to 

meet the needs of students? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the member 

opposite for the question. I take issue with the members 

opposite talking about North Battleford and the economy in 

North Battleford in such a dreary manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the building permits in North Battleford just in the 

last number of years include building permits from companies 

such as NorSask, John Deere, Kramer. Mifab has been replaced 

with a garbage tank builder in there. There’s been two power 

plants built in the region, Mr. Speaker, as well as numerous oil 

projects, car dealerships, equipment farm dealerships, Mr. 

Speaker. North Battleford is a vibrant community that is 

moving forward in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regards to assessment, this is only one piece 

of the student initiative. Mr. Speaker, this is about balance. It’s 

about balance with curriculum, instruction, and assessment. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, many school divisions are already doing this 

type of work, and we want to build on that by expanding these 

models to the provincial level. Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s this 

government investing in Saskatchewan’s most valuable 

resource, and that is our children and our students. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

government is committed to first-class K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12] education in this province. Under the first six years of 

our government, we have increased total operating funding to 

school divisions by 23.5 per cent. Total school infrastructure 

allocation has increased by 264 per cent. And we have 

increased spending on new schools and major school 

renovations by 228 per cent over the NDP. Our government has 

allocated funding for 43 major capital projects and over 900 

additional small projects across the province while the NDP 

shamefully closed 176 schools when they were in power. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Centre: will that member agree 

that the NDP’s record on education is below standards that the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I am 

proud to stand up and talk about our record, but one thing I 

want that member and all those members over there to think 

about, about their good friends in the Devine era that left this 

province broke, left this province broke. In the first year of the 

Romanow administration, we had to spend more on interest on 

the debt left by their friends, left by their friends, than on 

education. How can that be? And he has the nerve to stand up 

and ask a question like that, ask a question like that. They 

forced us to spend more on interest than on education. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I will recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Just waiting. There we go. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. One of the things that’s been raised is 

concern by the academics that have been commenting on this 

decision by this government to implement standardized testing 

in the form they’re proposing, which we say is unnecessary, is 

that there was absolutely no consultation with the professional 

educators at our universities. This government just went ahead 

and come up with the idea — who knows at coffee somewhere 

or whatever — but they did not consult with the academics. 

And my question for the member from Melfort is: why did this 

government ignore the recommendations and not consult with 

academics on this program? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for her 

question. I really thank the member for her question. You know, 

I look at this, and I see from the opposition that the opposition 

were up on Monday, they were talking about Texas, and that’s a 

fact. They were talking about the BC Teachers’ Federation, and 

that’s a fact. When they talk about the U of S study that shows 

our students aren’t doing as well in the first year, they ignore it. 

And that’s what I get from them so often, is that they ignore 

things that happen, like the Chinook School Division and the 

Melfort North East School Division. And all the good things 

that are happening here, they ignore. And I just don’t know 

where they’re coming from. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

astounding how that side is always against growth. They’re 

against advancement. They’re against progress in every aspect. 

Two weeks ago our government voted and passed a budget. We 

voted on it; they voted against it. 

 

In that budget there was financing for students in the education 

sector. Overall funding has been increased in the budget for 

operational fundings increasing by over $40 million. There was 

$17 million for enrolment increases and $119 million for capital 

funding and $268 million to support learning, the support 



3188 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

learning program. Sadly every member on that side voted 

against that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member for Saskatoon Nutana, I’d like to 

ask that member why the NDP has voted against Saskatchewan 

students and ensuring the Saskatchewan students get the best 

education? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

always with the member opposite, I just sometimes wonder 

what he’s talking about because I’m not sure where that 

question’s coming from. 

 

In this case, the motion that’s being debated at this point is 

about the unnecessary additional costs for standardized testing 

when we have students who are learning in the hallways, we 

have students who are wearing their coats because the schools 

are too cold, we have students who are suffering as additional 

language students, EAL [English as an additional language] 

students because there aren’t enough supports in the classroom. 

Ten minutes a week for learning when these students need all 

the support they can get, and we see $6 million in computers to 

do additional unnecessary testing. It’s ridiculous. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. You know this 

government takes a lot of pride in patting itself on the back for 

all the things it’s done in the last five and a half, six years. One 

of the things they did is, they did this report on Provincial 

Panel on Student Achievement, released February 12th, 2010. It 

has sat on the shelf since then. So to the member from Regina 

Dewdney, will he make sure that this panel, all its 

recommendations will be implemented? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the NDP 

wrote the book on leaving studies in the drawer, Mr. Speaker 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well it’s nice to have that 

member not ask a question while shouting it, like he is right 

now, Mr. Speaker. But we’re fully behind student achievement 

in schools, Mr. Speaker. We want them to do better. This is for 

students. This is to help teachers as well when it’s possibly 

needed, Mr. Speaker. We’ve spent a lot of money on education 

— $1.775 billion this year alone, Mr. Speaker, $268 million 

specifically . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a personal 

statement. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 

asked for leave to make a personal statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Apology 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this morning I let my 

emotions get the best of me and I made a comment directed at 

the Leader of the Opposition about what would his dad say. Mr. 

Speaker, unfortunately that comment does not reflect my views, 

that I believe all people from the youngest to the oldest in this 

province — regardless of race, religion, nationality — should 

be able to live without the fear of being bullied. We all agreed 

that bullying is an atrocious form of treating people, and my 

statement doesn’t reflect my views on that. And I regret having 

made that statement, and I apologize to the Legislative 

Assembly and to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Motion No. 2 — Support for Uranium Mining Development 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the 

conclusion of my comments I would like to move the following 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly support further uranium mining 

development and expansion in northern Saskatchewan, 

especially given the positive track record of 

Saskatchewan’s uranium industry in creating opportunity 

and employment in the North, particularly for First 

Nations and Métis people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would first like to start off by discussing the 

recent royalty review on uranium and how it will affect the 

development and expansion in northern Saskatchewan. So these 

changes were implemented on April 1st, 2013 and recognizes 

actual costs incurred by industry. And the modernization of the 

provincial uranium royalty regime will enhance Saskatchewan’s 

competitiveness and is essential to continue attracting new 

investment and encouraging expansion in the industry in the 

North. 

 

The previous royalty system was implemented on January 1st, 

2001 and was designed to exist for 10 years. So we’re a couple 

of years past that, and the government held extensive 

consultations with industry and stakeholders. 

 

This new system, the new stepped rate royalty system will 

accurately recognize industry investments and improve the 

competitiveness of the province in attracting new investment. 

And it leaves in place the base royalty rates and moves to a 

system with two royalty rate tiers from three. And initially the 

implementation will see revenues unchanged for the province, 

but the long-term uranium royalty review in Saskatchewan is 

forecast to triple in the next 15 years. 

 

So a number of mine projects totalling approximately 2 billion 

in investments would not proceed without this change. And 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3189 

construction associated with the three proposed mines would be 

about 3,200 person-years, which is quite extensive. 

 

I wanted to talk a little bit about the initiatives that are going on 

in Saskatchewan in respect to First Nations and Métis 

employment and people who are out there working, you know, 

in the front lines and doing the work and laying the foundation 

that needs to be laid in terms of, you know, trying to close that 

gap, the economic gap of First Nations and Métis people in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s across . . . from all industry and 

government as well as well as our institutions. So there’s a lot 

of good work out there that’s going on. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And a couple of years ago prior to my, you know, my life, in 

my public life, I was part of some of these tables, so I realize 

how passionate these people are. 

 

And I just want to talk about some conversations that I’ve had 

at the grassroots level, you know, in the last little while. Last 

summer I went back home to one of my Saulteaux 

communities. I claim three. So I was in Fishing Lake at the time 

and I was able to actually sit and, you know, listen to the 

discussion that was going on between quite a few lady elders in 

the area, which as a young woman can be quite intimidating. 

And I was just happy to be sitting there and listening, and I 

didn’t want to call too much attention to myself because 

primarily I just like to go sit there and listen to what they have 

to say. 

 

So I caught the attention of one of them. So there was a little bit 

of fear in my heart when that happened. And then they, you 

know, they start to ask about my job and how I enjoy it and, 

you know, basically started discussing that we need more 

people to step up and participate in other levels of government 

and politics. 

 

And so that conversation led to how our province was doing as 

a whole in terms of what they’ve seen in the last while. And 

these ladies have been around. You know, there was a couple of 

them in their late 80s and early 90s, and so they’ve seen a lot. 

And they’ve seen the transition from, you know, when they 

were young and what they had to go through and what their 

great-grandchildren, you know, what kind of world they live in 

now. And they started talking about in the last few years they 

haven’t seen as many of their family members working as they 

have before. So that was, you know, it was really nice feedback 

especially to hear it from these women. And it was very 

powerful, and it was very profound. And at that point I knew 

that, you know, I had made the right decision to be here. 

 

So that kind of brings me back to what the uranium industry is 

in the North and the effect that it’s had in the North in the last, 

you know, 30 years and the changes of the North in terms of the 

infrastructure and just the employment. And a couple of years 

ago I was able to go to a conference, a CAMA [Canadian 

Aboriginal Minerals Association] conference which they have 

every year. And they have . . It’s the Canadian Aboriginal 

mining association, and because I was doing a little bit of 

research in that area in economic development and, you know, 

basically trying to figure out what we need to do to close the 

gap. 

So I found myself at this conference and I found myself as one 

of the attendees with a few, well actually quite a few people 

from the North, from Saskatchewan. So it was kind of nice to 

see fellow Saskatchewanians there. There was a few people 

from Cameco who were Dene. And I’m always a big proponent 

of graduate school and encouraging people to, you know, if 

they already have a degree to go on and get a master’s degree. 

And you know, I was doing that and they had already informed 

me we all have master’s degrees. There was about five of them 

sitting there, which was pretty neat. They’re all, you know, kind 

of speaking Dene and throwing in English, so sometimes I’d 

catch what they were saying. 

 

But, yes, and they all informed me, you know, while they were 

working — they’ve been working for Cameco for a while — 

that Cameco had supported them through their graduate school 

education. So I was actually quite pleased to hear that. And a 

few of their other employees had come to sit with us as well, 

and they kind of had a similar story to tell. And these are people 

who live in the Far North; one gentleman was from Black Lake. 

And you know, just hearing what their stories were, what their 

life has been like and how being employed in these jobs and 

how it’s affecting their families, and who are working in the 

uranium mines as well and how positive it has been on their . . . 

in terms of economically and how they can support their family. 

 

And in the Aboriginal community, you know, a lot of the old 

teachings have come back and are being re-taught. And one of 

them is, you know, I’ve talked about it before in the legislature 

about what we Saulteaux people call the [The hon. member 

spoke for a time in Saulteaux.] which is similar quite to the 

Cree term, and it’s got still the same meaning which is quality 

of life. And you know, how one of our main values should be 

looking after our families and being self-sufficient, and what 

that brings with it is the confidence. 

 

And I see that in a lot of Aboriginal people who are working 

and who have been able to, you know, look after their families. 

And I see what the initiatives of Cameco have done in terms of 

the leadership of Gary Merasty at Cameco, and how other 

resource companies are looking at their model and adopting it. 

So I find, you know, the work he’s done quite commendable. 

And I’m a big fan of Gary anyway, even before he worked at 

Cameco. So you know, and also the initiatives that Areva and 

what they’ve been able to do in the North. So this is one of the 

main reasons why I’m, you know, very happy to speak to this, 

you know, to the uranium mining in the North. And also not 

only employment, you know, and education. I’m also thinking 

in terms of procurement and how people can tap into the 

procurement of the different mines. There’s a lot of economic 

spinoff as well, and we talk a lot about economic spinoff in this 

legislature. 

 

And I fully support the expansion of the North. I’ve had my 

own family members, and I’ve spoken about this before, who 

have made their careers in the resource industry whether it be 

working on the pipeline or, you know, oil extraction. Or you 

know, for lack of a better of word, I call one of my brothers a 

rig pig man. And that’s exactly what he is, you know, but he’s 

been able to look after his family, you know, doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — It’s good work. 

 



3190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2013 

Ms. Campeau: — Yes. And it’s hard work so, you know, he 

always tells me he doesn’t need to go to the gym because, you 

know, he works for a living. So, you know, seeing how people 

can basically regain their confidence from, you know, in terms 

of the past and then the effects of colonization, you know, that 

have gone on in the last 125 years or so. 

 

So I also, you know, had a friend. My friend Jason Wilson, 

who’s got his own company now, he used to be the, you know 

. . . worked for the Prospectors and Development Association of 

Canada. They, you know, are a national organization and 

they’re quite respected, and they are based in Toronto as he 

always, you know, used to remind me. 

 

So Cameco, you know, they were the recipient of this year’s 

Environmental and Social Responsibility Award for its 

outstanding accomplishments in establishing good community 

relations in its exploration and mining operations. And what I 

talked about there, you know, their model that they’re using and 

other companies are adopting it, they have a five pillar 

corporate social responsibility model designed to ensure local 

community support and proactive environmental stewardship. 

 

The five pillars are: community engagement. They engage 

communities through project development phases to ensure 

local people are aware and understand the company’s activities 

and have opportunities to provide input. And environmental 

stewardship, they create proactive plans wherever it operates to 

minimize its impact on the environment. And workforce 

development. It focuses on training, education, and recruiting in 

northern communities and seeks to employ as many northern 

people as it can for its Saskatchewan mining operations. And 

business development, they prefer northern-owned businesses 

in procuring goods and services for its Saskatchewan operations 

as part of a strategy to build sustainable local enterprises that 

will continue to generate opportunity for local people after 

mining ends. And community investment, and they invest in 

key areas that will assist in community development, education 

for literacy, youth health and wellness initiative, and they’re 

recognized an industry leader in CSR [corporate social 

responsibility] by Aboriginal association and industry rankings. 

 

And you know, there was a few events that I had put on, you 

know, while I was working at the university, and Cameco was 

very responsive and willing to, you know, to help out at these 

events for sure. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just maybe should maybe go into a little bit 

of, you know, the history. I always love to look back at the 

history. So you know, Saskatchewan has been the site of all 

major Canadian uranium discoveries in the last four years. And 

earlier today I looked at a map at all the uranium deposits in the 

world. And in 1968 the Rabbit Lake deposit was discovered in 

Northern Saskatchewan by Gulf Minerals and the 

German-owned Uranerz Exploration and Mining Limited in 

1975. And the mine and the mill were in operation. And I 

always hear, you know, many people speaking about, you 

know, and when they have to go fly up to Rabbit Lake. And I 

even had a friend whose wife would teach up there, so she 

would go up there as well and support some of their education 

initiatives. So it’s not just miners who were going up there to 

work. 

 

So you know, when we talk about the mine expansions . . . And 

you know, I guess I should talk about our customers, right? Our 

target market, which are China and India because, you know, in 

terms of population and always thinking from a marketing 

aspect in terms of looking at their populations. And you know, 

China has a little over 1.3 billion people and India has a little 

over 1.2 billion. And in 2009 I had the opportunity to go to 

India for two weeks on a trade mission with the Edwards 

School of Business, so I was able to tour and meet with a lot of 

people from many different industries. So they’re quite 

progressive and moving forward and, you know, they are in 

need of energy. So forecasted by 2050, we’ll have 9.1 billion 

people on Earth so, you know, as our potential customers. 

 

So I want to talk a little bit about regulation because, you know, 

there are people out there who fearmonger in terms of uranium, 

and they, you know, make sure that their voices are heard, 

that’s for sure. And when I hear the fearmongering that’s going 

on, I always think about, you know, are you the same people 

who are complaining about Aboriginal unemployment? And 

how are, you know, what are we going to do about the 

problem? And meanwhile you’re working to shut down, you 

know, what their bread and butter comes from basically. And in 

terms of jobs and the resources that are in the North, you know, 

what alternatives would they have? 

 

[12:30] 

 

And when I ask these questions directly to those people who 

ask me, they don’t have an answer. An answer is usually 

government. But you know, we’ve had, in terms of the policies 

in the last 125-plus years which has created a cycle of 

dependency, that’s not the answer. You know, more 

government definitely is not the answer, and being 

self-sufficient and economic development certainly is. 

 

So the expansion of these mines is welcome news to me and, 

you know, I directly, I correlate it to the amount of jobs that we 

could have and the training and in terms of contributions, 

economic contributions to the province. 

 

So, you know, the people who are fearmongering really have to 

think about that, you know. And those who are fearmongering, I 

often wonder how many Aboriginal people have you had at 

your supper table? So, you know, and have you actually heard 

the stories? And have you seen the poverty of some of the 

communities? You know, at one point growing up I, you know 

. . . and I discussed with some of my colleagues who kind of 

were in the same boat, when I’d go live with my grandparents 

we didn’t have running water. So that’s a reality to some people 

still today. 

 

So you know . . . And those who are working now for Cameco 

which are pretty decent paying jobs, they don’t have to go 

through that. And they don’t have to . . . You know, their 

children don’t have to see what their realities were when they 

were growing up. And I certainly worked hard to make sure my 

child didn’t see the realities I had when I was growing up. 

 

So in terms of . . . You know, I go back to history and to policy 

and . . . I’m still trying to find my paper. So I always go back. 

And you know, and it’s just in my academic training and going 

to the root causes and trying to figure out why and where, you 



April 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3191 

know, why some of our economic conditions are the way they 

are, because I grew up . . . My dad grew up in a trapping family, 

you know. He grew up by Hudson Bay in a cabin. And a lot of 

people are aware that I’m from a big Métis family and, you 

know, they . . . His family basically looked after their family 

through trapping and they were self-sufficient. 

 

In some policies, you know, past policies which date back to 

1948 . . . When you come back to, you know, the reality is, 

which wasn’t that long ago, and basically the North was a 

testing ground for the party’s most — the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] party — most controversial 

assimilation programs, which was called the ultimate solution. 

This was very disruptful in, you know, the economy. So you 

know, this is, you know, a few years have gone by, but we still 

see the effects of that policy and definitely see a lot of change in 

the North in terms of, you know, coming back and people, you 

know, being able to, you know, secure employment through 

mining employment. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to . . . I look forward to 

continuing this discussion, however I would like to move the 

motion to adjourn debate. And that is: 

 

That this Assembly support further uranium mining 

development and expansion in northern Saskatchewan, 

especially given the positive track record of 

Saskatchewan’s uranium industry in creating opportunity 

and employment in the North, and particularly for First 

Nations and Métis people. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved a motion: 

 

That this Assembly support further uranium mining 

development and expansion in northern Saskatchewan, 

especially given the positive track record of 

Saskatchewan’s uranium industry in creating opportunities 

and employment in the North, particularly for First 

Nations and Métis people. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Deputy 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Government House 

Leader has moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:36.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3167 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3167 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3167 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3167 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3167 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3168 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3168 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Seniors’ Housing in Saskatoon 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3168 

 Resort Recognized by Reader’s Digest 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3169 

 Aboriginal Artist and Activist’s Lecture and Biography 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3169 

 Yorkton Kids Expo 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3169 

 Saskatchewan Athlete in National Biathlon Competitions 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3169 

 Student Housing 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3170 

 Public-Private Partnerships 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3170 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Combatting Discrimination and Bullying 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3170 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3171 

 Support for Post-Secondary Institutions 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3173 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3173 

 Response to Job Loss 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3174 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3174 

 Leadership 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3175 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3175 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3175 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 901 — The Orange Benevolent Society Repeal Act 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3175 

 Bill No. 902 — The Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon Amendment Act, 2013 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3176 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Standardized Testing in Saskatchewan Schools 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3176, 3187 

  Phillips ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3179, 3187 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 3180, 3186 

  Moe ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3182, 3187 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3183, 3187 

  Makowsky...................................................................................................................................................................... 3185, 3188 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3186 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3187 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3187 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Apology 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3188 

 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Support for Uranium Mining Development 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3188 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


