




















































Hansard: March 05, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 27B  TUESDAY, MARCH 5, 2013, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2537 

 March 5, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 7 o’clock, this 

House stands resumed. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 81 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 81 — The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this evening to talk about Bill No. 81, The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is legislation that creates a Crown corporation 

or a Crown entity around the economic activity which people 

see developing to the west of Regina. And as it’s been 

portrayed by the minister, this legislation is being introduced to 

provide the authority for the province to be the main director or 

organizer of how this project proceeds. 

 

We know that this project has been in development over quite a 

number of years and some of the original ideas have come to 

fruition in what we see to the west of the city. And it’s always 

interesting to see how ideas that have been developed 

eventually come forward into actual buildings and roads and 

facilities are there and also into legislation, which is what we 

are discussing here tonight. 

 

The legislation that we have here in Bill 81 takes a broad 

perspective and brings together all of the powers that are 

necessary to make sure that this project can be managed in a 

more straightforward manner. I think it’s worth going back and 

taking a look a little bit at where this project is, what it is, and 

where it’s going. 

 

Quite a number of years ago in the city of Regina there was a 

discussion about how we could move some of the industrial 

lands in use for the Canadian Pacific Railway, which are 

located right in downtown Regina, out to the edge of the city. 

And so discussions around how that change might take place 

have generated many ideas. 

 

Now we know that in Saskatoon that activity took place when 

they built the shopping mall right in the centre of the city in the 

main rail station area in Saskatoon. And the passenger rail side 

of that was moved out of town, and also much of the rail yards 

were moved out of the downtown of Saskatoon. The same thing 

did not happen in Regina during that same time period, and so 

there continues to be discussion about how and what could be 

done to get this land back into the hands of the city for 

development. 

 

Now as you can see already, that piece of land, which is located 

just north of the post office or just south of Dewdney Avenue 

between Albert Street and Broad Street, has had many ideas, 

many discussions about what could be done with it. And I’m 

sure probably it could be as far back as 15 years ago there were 

discussions about how and what could be done. About five or 

six years ago there became some very real options — I guess 

maybe seven years ago — some very real options that could 

include municipal participation, provincial participation, and 

federal participation in having sufficient funds to move the 

infrastructure out to the edge of town. 

 

And in that discussion it became clear that one of the main 

activities for Canadian Pacific Railway in downtown Regina 

was the off-loading of goods into transport trucks to go onto the 

highway system and that this was done in quite small space but 

in an efficient manner. So the goal was to develop some bigger 

space that would allow that to happen. And in fact now in 2013 

there is a major facility with access for many of the 

transportation companies to off-load goods from the railway 

onto other systems. And as we all know, that usually means 

containers full of products which are taken to the transportation 

hub and then distributed. At the same time there were 

discussions about other businesses that would be interested in 

locating in the same area as Canadian Pacific Railway might 

want to do, and that’s where the bigger and broader concept of a 

transportation hub was developed. 

 

What we also knew was that in Vancouver, where much of the 

container unloading had taken place with the use of the 

longshoremen who were the traditional people who unloaded 

ships, the space there had . . . They had run out of space. What 

happened in Vancouver then is that much of that unloading of 

containers into trucks was moved out to the Port Kells area in 

north Surrey, British Columbia along the Fraser River. But that 

area became filled up as well, plus the land ended up with 

having other values because of the increasing population and 

many other activities were there. So the rail lines and the people 

who were involved in transportation of goods moved to look 

across the country where would make the most sense to do 

some of this kind of activity. And clearly in Manitoba they 

could see this discussion going, and they have their inland port 

facility which does something similar to what happens here. 

 

But we had people within the provincial government and within 

the city government and within the industries who recognized 

that if we could build something here just outside of Regina, we 

could deal with the movement of the CP [Canadian Pacific] rail 

yards out of the centre of the city. We could provide more 

distribution space for some of our companies that were trying to 

locate on the Prairies, and a number of positive activities have 

taken place. 

 

Now in that process, the method of organizing how this facility 

would be built included the city of Regina, the rural 

municipality of Sherwood, and the provincial government and 

also the federal government, for two reasons. The federal 

government is involved because they had some funding 

initiatives that related to what I think were called the border 

expansion kinds of issues. They were basically realizing that the 



2538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

pressure for trade on our borders — whether it’s 

Windsor-Detroit or Pembina south of Winnipeg or areas south 

of Calgary or, more importantly in some ways for us, the area 

around Vancouver, Blaine towards Seattle — those areas had 

incredible pressure on them. And there was a recognition that 

there were some other options that could be called border 

options, even though Regina, Winnipeg are located a long ways 

away from ships and a long ways away from the normal entry 

points of containers. 

 

So what we had then, in successive budgets when we were still 

in government, was the exploration and discussion about how 

one might organize this type of activity. And I know that in the 

discussions in the 2007 budget, when the New Democrats were 

still government, there were initial amounts set aside that would 

allow this project to go ahead subject to the financial 

involvement of the federal government. And a good thing for all 

of us in Saskatchewan is that there was that ability to bring 

money in from the federal government, working together with 

provincial funds and then co-operation from the city of Regina 

and the RM [rural municipality] of Sherwood. The net effect, as 

the minister stated the other day, was the creation of the 

legislation that created the Global Transportation Hub, and this 

was established as a Treasury Board Crown. 

 

Then in June of 2009, that was the time when the money came 

together, the possibilities of what could happen, and originally 

created by an order of council in the cabinet. And its goal there 

was clearly to facilitate this project but to continue to monitor 

and see what kind of corporate institute, what kind of method of 

creating authority would make the most sense in the long term 

as this project developed. 

 

Now as we know from some of the stories that would hit the 

front pages from time to time, there were growing pains. There 

were difficulties that arose. And some of the first ones related to 

acquiring the land and trying to figure out the appropriate price 

for land that was effectively taken for the use of this project. I 

think some of those cases and some of those issues are still not 

totally resolved, so there were a number of things that arose 

then. 

 

There are also issues around how decisions were made and how 

quickly they could be made when particular businesses might 

have wanted to set up shop in that particular area. And I think 

the most public example was the one last year where Kal Tire 

ended up wanting to be somewhere close to this whole project 

but in a visible site along the highway. And so some of the 

issues there aren’t directly related to this particular piece of 

legislation, but they do relate to the necessity of having clear 

ways to make decisions in an orderly and transparent fashion. 

 

So the legislation that we have today is effectively legislation 

that sets up The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act. And 

this is effectively a Crown corporation, and it will be a Crown 

corporation in the world of the Crown Investments Corporation 

and will have the reporting structures that other Crown 

corporations that we have in the province presently use. So 

that’s a good thing. And it’s a method that we have a strong 

tradition in the province of following. And so we need to make 

sure that how this is done will make sure that there’s a 

transparency to what they do. 

 

Now we know that one of the issues that’s related to this 

legislation as it relates to transparency is whether or not it will 

be added to the list of government institutions for the purposes 

of The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

And the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy Commissioner 

has written to the minister identifying that this should be done 

before this legislation is proclaimed and so that it will be part of 

what we know is going to happen as this Bill goes forward. And 

so at some point very soon, we would appreciate hearing from 

the minister or officials that the Global Transportation Hub 

Authority corporation will be added to that list of government 

institutions so that it will be governed by the transparency rules, 

by the disclosure rules that will then make sure the public gets 

the information that they need to evaluate what happens in this 

particular project. 

 

[19:15] 

 

We also know that there have been some changes in the senior 

management of this particular file. The deputy minister of 

Highways and Transportation had followed this file right 

through from some of its initial concepts, and that’s Mr. John 

Law, who then eventually became the president and CEO [chief 

executive officer] of this particular Global Transportation Hub 

Authority. He was let go in that role last summer, and new 

administrative people were put in place. We don’t totally know 

all of the reasons for that, but we have been watching fairly 

carefully because we know that Mr. Law was a long-time civil 

servant who had a great interest in this particular project. 

 

So now the matter is going forward. We have this new 

legislation being introduced by the minister, and we’re wanting 

to make sure that the transparency of what’s going to happen 

with the authority is entirely clear and that it will be run in a 

professional, businesslike manner like our other Crown 

corporations. 

 

And the legislation seems to follow the standard Crown format. 

And so at this stage we don’t necessarily have any questions — 

or I don’t have any questions; some of my colleagues may — 

about how the legislation is drafted, but as with anything, you 

need to see which rules or which other laws this particular 

legislation effects. 

 

And what we do know is that this legislation gives the authority 

the ability to make approvals that trump, if I can use that word, 

The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, or The Planning and 

Development Act. And so any time that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Greystone 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in your gallery there are a couple of guests from the 

college at Briercrest. We have in our gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

Marie-Hélène Caron from Quebec and Breanna Bowker from 

Ontario. They are here for the first time visiting the 

Saskatchewan legislature tonight, and they are learning about 

Saskatchewan’s history and, as a result, about Canadian history 

and the significance of this building and this province within 

our great country. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these two fine young 

students to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just getting into the 

discussion about how this legislation trumps other pieces of 

legislation like The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, and The 

Planning and Development Act. And what it does do is allow 

for the authority to have possibly super powers compared to 

some other of our Crown corporations as it relates to land use 

and planning. And so what we then have is this island of land 

that has the possibility of its own rules. 

 

Now what we hope would happen is that those rules around 

planning and use will be developed in conjunction with the 

neighbours so that there won’t be issues of a conflict. But when 

we look at the legislation, it gives quite sweeping powers to the 

board and I think ultimately to the minister to put in place 

things that are for the purpose of the Act but may not 

necessarily make them the best neighbours for the RM of 

Sherwood or the city of Regina. 

 

Now we don’t think that’s going to happen because this is a 

project that has been developed over a number of years, but our 

task is to understand what it is in this legislation that may cause 

disputes down the road. And when you see what happens, 

effectively the legislation gives the Global Transportation Hub 

Authority the ability to register their orders or their plans or 

what other things that they do in the same way that a 

municipality or a city would do, which then gives it control 

over the use of the land. 

 

And what also the legislation says is that the land within this 

authority area must be used pursuant to section 5 of the 

legislation. But when we go and look at section 5 of the 

legislation, it lists the uses that can be made of the land. And 

they’re kind of straightforward in a way, but it says: 

 

. . . the transportation logistics hub may be used as the 

location of any or all of the following: 

 

(a) facilities and premises used for or required by any 

mode of transportation, including rail, road, water or air. 

 

So I assume that they could actually build their own heliport or 

airport right in this area and not end up using the Regina airport. 

“Facilities and premises used for . . .” quoting again: 

 

(b) facilities and premises used for or required by industry, 

warehousing, distribution, manufacturing or logistics 

operations that require or utilize the services of a mode of 

transportation operating or located in the transportation 

logistics hub; 

 

(c) public improvements; 

 

(d) facilities and premises that service the things 

mentioned in clauses (a) to (c); 

 

(e) any other prescribed use or purpose. 

 

So effectively this is pretty wide open but with clearly the 

intention that it relate to transportation and this use. So as we 

can see, there’s really no space here, I wouldn’t think, for 

perhaps the building of a hotel, having a subdivision with 

people living in it, but it’s not restricted because you could add 

it as “any other prescribed use or purpose.” 

 

But it’s interesting when legislation is created that tries to set 

itself apart from all the existing rules that we have for 

development. And that is what this does. Now whether . . . We 

give some powers to SaskPower or SaskTel or others that allow 

them a bit of a trump card, but this one gives a little bigger 

trump card than what we’re used to for Crown corporations. 

And then it goes through all of the different procedural kinds of 

things that you need to for developments. 

 

Now I don’t know if, I think . . . I haven’t looked at it, but this 

would be a question we could probably ask when we get into 

committee. But it, you know, it looks like the Global 

Transportation Hub will have to adopt building code standards 

and other things that we just kind of assume are part of 

municipalities or cities within the province, and there are 

methods for doing that. And I know practically that the lawyers 

in Justice would have been looking at this one pretty carefully, 

as well as the lawyers at Crown Investments Corporation, to 

make sure that they didn’t miss anything. But it begs the 

question again about this is really a piece of legislation that 

trumps or is laid over all of the existing laws that we have. And 

so therefore we need to be especially vigilant to have all of the 

information about what’s happening but also make sure that that 

information is available to the general public. 

 

Now we also see in the legislation that the authority will pay 

grants in lieu of property taxes, which is what Crown 

corporations normally do, and that’s I think reasonable that they 

should do that. They will be paying for the services that they 

receive, whether it’s water and sewer from that system used by 

the city of Regina or any other services that are provided. 

 

So we have legislation. The purpose appears to be clear that this 

is to facilitate the development of an economic activity which 

we all can see is positive for our province and it’s positive for 

this part of North America — because I’m sure we have the 

possibility of distributing into the northern states as well — and 

that this kind of operation is something that we have the 

knowledge and the ability to organize and manage, and so I’m 



2540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

appreciative of the fact that we have it here in the legislature. 

 

I know that there may be details that we don’t fully understand 

now that we may have to ask questions about. My request at 

this point, after making some general comments about the 

legislation, is that we would hear from the minister very soon 

about the request made by the Privacy Commissioner to have 

this entity added to the list of government institutions for the 

purposes of The Freedom of Information and Protection of 

Privacy Act. And if we could have that now during second 

reading, it would probably make it easier for us to move it on to 

the committee. 

 

But otherwise I’m going to be suggesting that this is the 

continuation and further development of the positive idea which 

has come from many different angles and is good for the 

economy of our province. And we need to make sure that it’s a 

robust solution to all of the particular challenges that are there. 

And we look forward to seeing the positive development of the 

Global Transportation Hub and want to make sure that it’s done 

in a way that benefits all of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

So with that, I will move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 81, The Global Transportation Hub Authority 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Bill No. 82 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 82 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am glad 

to rise tonight to join in the debate on Bill No. 82, the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  

 

I should state right off the top I am a member of the plan and 

can attest to the fact that when the plan set out to provide 

benefits — the attractive option for people with irregular or 

seasonable income, seasonal earnings such as students, 

part-time workers or people who are self-employed certainly — 

when I first enrolled in the plan in the early ’90s, that was part 

of the appeal for me at the time. And I continue to contribute to 

the plan. And so I have a theoretical and legislative interest in 

this matter, Mr. Speaker, and of course I have a dollars and 

cents interest in terms of my own pocketbook. 

 

So in terms of making sure that the pension plan is 

well-administered, that it’s keeping up with the times in terms 

of meeting that initial mandate to provide a savings and pension 

vehicle for again people such as students, part-time workers or 

the self-employed, it’s interesting to see how this rolls. Of 

course the Saskatchewan Pension Plan in Saskatchewan, it’s 

interesting to see how it works in combination with other 

income security vehicles for our seniors, those federally and 

again those provincially — things such as, be it the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan on a provincial basis or the old age 

security on a federal level or the Guaranteed Income 

Supplement or indeed the Canada Pension Plan. 

 

And again, as changes are made on the federal level such as the 

recent intention announced by the federal government to change 

the age of full subscription to the CPP [Canada Pension Plan] 

from 65 to 67, how that will impact the pressures on the plan. 

Again, as the thinking clarifies on the part of the federal 

government regarding things like the CPP, the GIS [Guaranteed 

Income Supplement], and the OAS [old age security], it will be 

interesting to see how that impacts something like the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. So we expect that the Finance 

minister is diligent in addressing those concerns at the federal 

level, and we follow that with definite interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the changes announced in the Act: again following in the 

train of changes that have been made commencing in December 

2010, at which point the contribution limit was raised from 

$600 to $2,500; where members were allowed to transfer up to 

10,000 per year from an RRSP or registered retirement savings 

plan or an unlocked registered pension plan, building now to 

transfer from locked-in vehicles; retirement options being 

moved from the Act into regulations to allow the plan to be 

more responsive to the needs of members as the array of 

retirement products evolves. 

 

Again referencing the minister’s second reading speech on this 

but again, modernizing, making sure that the plan is keeping up 

with the demand, meeting the need as initially set out. The other 

amendment, again referencing the second reading speech, to: 

 

. . . allow funds payable to a member of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan to be transferred to the General Revenue 

Fund in the event that the member cannot be located. 

[Again referencing the minister’s second reading speech.] 

This would only be done after all other avenues have been 

exhausted, and the funds would continue to be held in the 

member’s name. This protocol is similar to the process 

used by other financial institutions when clients cannot be 

located. 

 

Again, closing the quote from the second reading speech of the 

minister, again seems to be a straightforward proposition, but 

again it would be interesting to get an accounting of how often 

that particular protocol is invoked and what kind of dollar 

figures are involved, the number of individuals, and if there 

isn’t something that can be done to safeguard or to better 

connect individuals to their pension plan. But again we’ll see 

how that rolls out. 

 

The other thing is in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, with the 

modernization of some of the language. Again, hurray for 

modernization. Good to see that’s happening as well. 

 

So as the minister had touched on in his second reading speech, 

with the 32,000 members of the plan — again to state, Mr. 

Speaker, of which I am one — the $318 million under 

trusteeship, the principles of simplicity, consistency, voluntary 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

flexibility, affordability, and making sure that they are 

professionally managed. Again Saskatchewan Pension Plan has 

done some unique things of which I think the people of 

Saskatchewan can be proud, and that the government is looking 

to work to make sure that this continues to meet the need that is 

out there, that the fund continues in a strong and growing way 

as it should be. 

 

I know that other of my colleagues are interested in joining into 

the debate, so with that, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move 

to adjourn debate on Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 83 — The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 

into the discussion about Bill No. 83, An Act respecting Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services. 

 

This bill has been set out to ensure that newcomers, people who 

have been recruited to Saskatchewan to either work as 

temporary foreign workers or in the immigrant nominee 

program, will be protected from perhaps unscrupulous 

recruiters or immigration consultants, or when employers have 

struggles as well in properly supporting their employees. Just to 

mention what the minister says in his second reading speech, he 

says here: 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, as the title suggests, is being 

introduced to protect foreign workers and immigrants from 

exploitation by recruiters, immigration consultants, and 

employers while being recruited to Saskatchewan or are in 

the process of immigrating to our . . . [process]. 

 

So that is the gist of this bill, Mr. Speaker. Obviously in 

Saskatchewan in recent years, from the introduction of the 

immigrant nominee program onward, we’ve seen a huge 

increase in newcomers coming to our province to make a home 

here or to come and work temporarily. I know in my own 

constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale the changing face of 

Saskatchewan. Actually it’s interesting: I’ve got schools in my 

constituency where there are more than 20 different countries 

represented and even more languages spoken at two particular 

schools in Saskatoon Riversdale, which has made for a very 

interesting dynamic culture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the reality is when people come to Saskatchewan to work 

that there may be some challenges. Sometimes there’s language 

barriers. Sometimes there’s a lack of understanding of the 

culture. And it can leave you vulnerable to those who perhaps 

want to take advantage of you, Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker, 

I’m still in afternoon mode here. Mr. Speaker, this leaves 

workers open to the possibility of being treated poorly and 

unfairly. 

 

Imagine coming to Saskatchewan from a place like Mexico 

where the climate obviously is very different. Sometimes you 

will leave family behind and you’re in . . . Imagine coming 

from Mexico to Saskatchewan in January. It would be a climate 

shock, first of all, but then being told about fees that you’re 

supposed to pay. So a recruiter or a consultant might tell you 

that there are things that you’re supposed to do, and then you’re 

not quite sure about the lay of the land and what the rules are. 

And even if you think the rules are unfair you might not . . . you 

might have come from a country where approaching authority 

isn’t the easiest thing to do. So for some individuals who’ve 

travelled from other countries to work here and support our 

businesses that are facing labour force shortages, some people 

aren’t always comfortable going to authorities, whether it’s the 

police service or any others who might be in a position of 

power. So it leaves you extra vulnerable. 

 

And we’ve heard cases actually here just outside of Regina at a 

coffee shop where there were some workers who weren’t 

getting paid vacation pay, who were being housed in one of the 

owner’s friend’s basement, multiple people living in a basement 

dwelling, being told all kinds of things about housing. 

 

So it’s a good thing that Bill No. 83, An Act respecting Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services, it is absolutely 

imperative that we ensure the playing field is levelled for those 

who come to Canada and come to Saskatchewan in the pursuit 

of a better life, whether they’re coming here just temporarily to 

work or if they’re coming to hopefully, eventually become 

permanent residents and make Saskatchewan their home going 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know we have a huge labour force shortage and it can be very 

difficult for employers to find people. But the one thing that this 

bill doesn’t do and doesn’t talk about here, and the minister 

didn’t talk about because this bill is very much focused on 

foreign workers, but here in Saskatchewan we have a huge 

untapped resource of Aboriginal employees and people who are 

interested in being active citizens and an active part of our 

economy, Mr. Speaker, who are not given the opportunity and 

are not given the supports to be able to . . . a fair opportunity to 

become an active part of the economy. 

 

I want to point out the record of this government when it comes 

to local homegrown individuals who would like to work in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. Year over year, from 2000 on, the 

government has not had a good track record when it has come 

to First Nations and Métis employment. Right now here in 

Saskatchewan, First Nations unemployment is at 22 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, and Métis unemployment is at 11 per cent. This 

has been a year over year constant increase. 

 

I’d like to point out that, I believe it was in 2010, this 

government cut the Aboriginal employment development 



2542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

program, which was by all accounts working, Mr. Speaker. It 

makes absolutely no sense, contrary to common sense, to cut a 

program that was working very well connecting industry and 

the workforce. And what would happen, Mr. Speaker, is it was 

a partnership that would see industry training, partnering with 

government and training Aboriginal employees who would 

have the opportunity then, if the relationship worked out well, 

there would be the opportunity for the employees to stay on 

perhaps past the program. And it was having huge success. 

 

So we have a huge group of people here, a young First Nations 

and Métis population here in Saskatchewan, the fastest 

demographic. And I think, although we do need to fill some 

pressing labour force shortages, I think one of the best ways 

would be to concentrate on ensuring people who live here also 

have opportunities, fair opportunities to be employed. 

 

It was interesting — several years ago in about 2007 when I 

was working for the work and family unit, I had the opportunity 

to work with employers, some very good employers, in fact a 

Tim Hortons owner in Saskatoon who was very interested in 

supporting her employees in getting child care. She was very 

frustrated that at one point I think she had four staffers on 

maternity leave, and she wasn’t frustrated that they were on 

maternity leave but she was worried about what it would look 

like when her employees came back because there isn’t . . . 

There are not too many places, Mr. Speaker, where licensed 

child care starts at 6 in the morning or earlier, and that’s what 

time the Tim Hortons shifts at this particular restaurant started. 

So this employer, along with actually a very reputable hotel 

chain in Saskatchewan, was very interested in supporting their 

employees in child care. And this goes to supporting our local 

labour force, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what had happened is . . . Actually this was great to be able 

to connect these employers with the provincial government at 

the time so the people in child care who, because it’s the 

provincial government who regulates, licenses and regulates 

child care, and then the Catholic Family Services of Saskatoon 

who happened to be a child care provider. So putting these three 

partners together — Catholic Family Services of Saskatoon, the 

province child care folks, and the employers who wanted to 

support their employees and try to create some non-standard 

child care so their employees would have access to child care 

when they needed it because there is not a lot of licensed child 

care offered outside of the Monday to Friday, 9 to 5 workday, 

Mr. Speaker. That is a huge gap that’s missing in child care 

here in Saskatchewan which would go a long way to supporting 

employment in this province. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So these three people, these three organizations connected and it 

took years to get the child care off the ground. I remember 

having a couple of conversations with the Tim Hortons owner, 

who is a fine employer and really wanted to do right by her 

employees. And I actually at an MLA reception I believe two 

years ago, I ran into her here at the restaurant association’s 

meeting with MLAs. And we hadn’t chatted in quite some time. 

She had been working on this proposal to get child care for her 

and other employees outside of the non-standard times and 

finally gave up and went the route of bringing in temporary 

foreign workers, which has worked out very well for her, and 

she is a very good employer and now is working on trying to 

get family members here — or had been until the government 

cut the family class in the immigrant nominee program. But the 

point is, I know this Tim Hortons employer would have been 

very happy to support Saskatchewan residents in keeping their 

employment at Tim Hortons. She was very keen on doing that, 

wanted to support them, wanted to help them have child care 

that allowed them to have some work-family balance and allow 

them the opportunity to be good employees, and gave up 

because it was such a long and slow process. 

 

So there are ways to support local people as well. So this Bill 

No. 83, with respect to foreign worker recruitment and 

immigration services, is absolutely imperative for ensuring that 

those who come to Saskatchewan are protected and well served 

and are not . . . as vulnerable as they are, that they aren’t taken 

advantage of. But I need to emphasize that there are things that 

we could and should be doing here to support local people in 

employment as well. I don’t believe that we’re doing enough to 

ensure First Nations and Métis people have opportunity and 

access to employment. Not nearly enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Actually it was interesting. I had an opportunity to talk to some 

steel workers probably about a month ago who were talking 

about a new program that the province is participating in around 

training for the uranium industry. And it’s a good program. 

They weren’t negative about the program. But it was a post 

adult basic education program, so it was once you had your 

grade 12 or your GED, this is a program that would apply to 

you. And it was about industry training, which was good. But 

the steel workers had pointed out for me that there are many 

people still, because there are many students who are not 

graduating from grade 12 and the supports for adult basic 

education are not in place and — actually if you walk it right 

back to early learning and care — that we are not investing in 

education the way we need to at the front end, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that people are well prepared and ready for the labour 

force. 

 

So I know these steel workers had said that they really believe 

that a place where more emphasis could be put is on adult basic 

education and making sure that people had all the skills that 

they needed with respect to grade 12 or an equivalent, so then 

they could pursue some of these post-secondary education 

opportunities or some of the skills training that some of the 

companies offered. But if you have trouble with literacy it’s 

hard to participate in . . . or literacy and numeracy, it’s hard to 

participate in other training programs, Mr. Speaker. So they had 

some concerns that we really need to back up and place some 

emphasis on ensuring that we have people graduating from 

grade 12. 

 

It’s interesting. We also have had the debate in the House for 

. . . We’ve only been sitting now for two days, Mr. Speaker, but 

around education. And we have some concerns on this side of 

the House around the government focusing on testing and not 

teaching. And I know the minister has referenced the not great 

graduation rates of our Aboriginal people here, Aboriginal 

citizens here in Saskatchewan. But we would argue, and the 

evidence illustrates, that testing isn’t the way to ensure people 

are getting their education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So although Bill 83 is necessary and will offer some protection 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

to newcomers, we really need to ensure that we’re placing the 

emphasis also on our local workforce, Mr. Speaker. There’s so 

many opportunities. The reality is that the fastest growing 

demographic is our First Nations and Métis population. And 

this is a wonderful opportunity. This is an opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that we all have an opportunity to participate 

fully in our economy. 

 

So again just taking you back to Bill 83, just imagine what it’s 

like to be a vulnerable worker in a country, in a city that you 

don’t know. You don’t know where you are. Or the climate is 

brand new, the language is brand new, the customs and the 

culture are brand new, and you become a very easy target. And 

there are some great employers out there but there are also some 

people who will take advantage when they can. So Bill 83 is an 

important bill to ensure that we protect all people who come to 

Saskatchewan and who live in Saskatchewan, and make sure 

that there is a level playing field. 

 

So I do know I have colleagues who will also want to wade into 

the debate on Bill No. 83 at some time in the very near future. 

So with that I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 84 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 84 — The 

Common Business Identifiers Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased this evening to rise in the Assembly and speak to Bill 

No. 84, which is a new Act that’s being introduced, An Act 

respecting Common Business Identifiers. This was introduced 

by the Minister of Justice in the last portion of the session and it 

was . . . sorry, one moment please. I want to find his comments. 

That was on December 4th, 2012. And what he indicated in his 

opening remarks was how this government is working on 

creating a business-friendly environment. 

 

So these are the types of things that we see happening as a 

modernization of businesses through normal government 

processes, where we can have streamlining of services for 

businesses, especially in the fairly electronic age that we’re in 

right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we can see there’s a lot of opportunities presented to us by 

the various services that you can do over the Internet now, and 

that obviously streamlining of how Canadian businesses do 

business, not only in Saskatchewan but in other provinces, is a 

way to share business information effectively and efficiently on 

the Internet. 

The word that’s being used here in the introduction is, he refers 

to this as a hub. And the hub in this case is a hub, not the one 

that our leader was speaking to previously in Regina, but this is 

a hub for sharing business information. And the idea is to bring 

all of these services into some sort of usable format across the 

country so that there can be common identifiers for business 

that can allow information to be collected. It will allow 

information to be shared between the CRA or Canada Revenue 

Agency and then other government programs to use a common 

business identifier known as the business number. And for 

anyone who has a business in Saskatchewan or have done 

payroll or anything like that, they will know how ubiquitous the 

CRA business number is in all the forms that you fill out, 

certainly anything to do with taxation, but also income tax, HST 

[harmonized sales tax], GST [goods and services tax], all of 

those things that we use a federal business number for. 

 

So we can see other provinces have done this already, and 

although the minister himself didn’t make a lot of comments 

about what kind of impact this single business number would 

have, or the common business identifiers, the website for the 

British Columbia business registry has some good information 

on the project they enacted about 10 years ago. Their bill has 

been in place, I believe, since really 2003. But it’s just the effect 

is to harmonize service delivery among various levels of 

government, and the hope is that it would result in less red tape 

for businesses. According to the British Columbia materials it 

was already being used in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia and 

Ontario, and that Manitoba was also working on a common 

business identifier project. All these were attempting to use the 

federal business number. 

 

Now it’s not clear to me from the minister’s comments whether 

he’s planning to use the federal business number that all 

businesses have for taxation through CRA [Canada Revenue 

Agency], but I’m assuming that that would be the intent of the 

bill, and the minister has talked a little bit in his opening 

comments about indicating it would be an exchange of 

information between the CRA and the corporate registry. So 

again I’m assuming his goal and the plan of the ministry is to 

ensure that it’s the common business number is the one that’s 

used by Revenue Canada. 

 

So we see British Columbia has done this a few years ago. We 

also see that New Brunswick has done it and their bill was 

passed in 2002. And these are short bills, Mr. Speaker, that just 

sort of set up the system for doing that. So in order to 

understand what the proposal is here, we need to take a look at 

the bill itself. 

 

The first section of the bill, as always, is a section of definitions 

and there’s a various number of definitions, more in this bill 

than in the other provinces’ bills which makes you wonder. 

Sometimes the use of definitions is an art in and of itself, I 

think, when it comes to drafting legislation. So the drafters, in 

this case, in the ministry have chosen to have a number of 

definitions that are laid out there. 

 

When we look at what the common business identifier 

definition . . . it refers actually to section 6 and I want to jump 

to that right away before we get into the other sections. And this 

section, basically in section 6 it says that to assign a common 

business identifier — so this is the commonness part of it — if 



2544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

they provide information in order to get the number, if they 

need to provide information to a public body under the bill and 

then the public body can ask for some information from them, 

and for the purpose of assigning the common business identifier 

to the entity, the public body may then use that information and 

provide it to the Government of Canada. 

 

So the definition of common business identifier, in my view, is 

not very clear. And I think if the drafters take a close look at 

that, there’s . . . It’s difficult to understand what the definition is 

other than it’s one that’s being assigned pursuant to section 6. 

So there’s some maybe lack of clarity, and perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, not having had an opportunity to work with this 

section, that may be the reason for the lack of clarity. But it’s 

something that I think is a bit muddy right now. 

 

And it would be helpful if we understood right off the hop in 

the bill if this is indeed the business number that’s being used 

by Canada Revenue Agency or not. It is somewhat vague. And 

again maybe this government doesn’t want to be pinned down 

to using that actual number and may have plans for a different 

common business identifier, but I think that leaves the reader 

somewhat at a loss to understand exactly where it’s going. 

 

Section 2 then is the definition section, and section 3 is the fees 

section. And this allows the cabinet through the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to fix fees. And again, the minister 

through this section can also engage with a person to provide 

special services if they want to give those services. And I’m not 

sure what that special service would be, but it’s there in section 

3(2) of the proposed Act. 

 

And then section 4 is titled the “System of common business 

identifiers.” So that’s where again the Governor in Council or 

the cabinet is going to have the ability to make regulations for 

establishing their system of common business identifiers for 

business entities. And again this is one of those sections where I 

am a bit uncomfortable because the actual process itself is not 

identified. It only gives the authority and the power to the 

cabinet to make those regulations. So it’s a bit lacking in detail, 

and I think it’s something that merits further examination once 

the regulations are passed. But unfortunately there won’t be any 

comment by the public on the regulations until after they are in 

fact law, which makes it a little more difficult to provide 

feedback from our perspective in the opposition but also from 

the public’s perspective if they’re not consulted prior to the 

considerations that will be found in the regulations. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Section 5 sets up a system that the minister can enter into 

agreements with public bodies to access the information 

collected by the minister. So this is sensitive information, 

business information that will need to be protected, and 

presumably this agreement would identify how that information 

will be protected if it’s handed over to a public body. And the 

section identifies what provisions that the agreements need to 

have, which is a fairly straightforward clause. 

 

I’ve already spoken to number 6, section 6, which as I said is 

the nub of the definition of what a common business identifier 

is and, as I said, it just . . . Once it’s assigned, it becomes a 

common business identifier, but this section doesn’t really 

clearly identify what that would look like. 

 

Section 7 is just basically how these identifiers will be used and 

when they may be required. Now public body is also defined, 

and it’s referred to frequently throughout the bill, and in this 

case public body is defined as “. . . any of the following with 

which the minister has entered into an agreement pursuant to 

section 5,” which we just talked about. So once the minister has 

entered into an agreement with this body, whatever it may be, it 

becomes a public body under the Act. And in this case it could 

be either a government institution, a local authority, or any 

other prescribed body. 

 

So it may be someone like the corporations branch that’s 

currently doing and working with information related to 

business identification. I would expect that may be the kind of 

agency that the government would want to manage this kind of 

common business identifier registry, although it doesn’t . . . 

There’s no registry mentioned, but I would assume there would 

be some record or way of keeping the data stored. 

 

Section 9 in the Act talks about how information can be 

disclosed by the minister, and section 10 deals with the filing 

and accessing of information. So what this section says, and it’s 

of interest for those who are worried about the information: 

 

[Any] Information that business entities are required to file 

or are authorized to access pursuant to a designated 

enactment may be filed or accessed . . . [by people] 

authorized to do so in the . . . agreement between the 

minister and the public body. 

 

So again we see the details will be more evident once the 

ministry has actually entered into an agreement with a public 

body and has brought that public body into the provisions of the 

Act. 

 

Section 11 is an immunity clause, and then finally section 12 

. . . Or sorry, the second last clause . . . Section 12 allows the 

minister to delegate the exercise of any of the powers within the 

Act. 

 

And section 13, which is the longest section of the Act, is the 

one that allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council and cabinet 

through the Lieutenant Governor in Council to do a whole 

bunch of things. And again, we won’t know what those actually 

look like until after this is law, so it’s a bit difficult to comment 

on that at this point in time. 

 

But there’s, for example, the very first authority that they can 

make regulations about under section 13(1)(a) is to define, 

enlarge, or restrict the meaning of any word in the Act. So you 

can see, Mr. Speaker, this is a pretty broad, broad section that 

allows the cabinet to change the meaning of any word in the 

Act. And that’s something that I think, you know, the members 

of the public maybe somewhat concerned about because it gives 

cabinet basically ability to amend the law without ever having 

to amend the law. And it gives them great powers. So if people 

are concerned about that, you know, we would ask that they 

bring that concern to the government, and certainly as we are 

making comment here as the official opposition and holding the 

government to account, we will be able to bring those concerns 

forward as well. 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

They can prescribe what a body is. They can prescribe dates. 

They can prescribe Acts or regulations or portions of Acts or 

regulations as designated enactments. They can establish 

standards under regulation. 

 

The forms, now that’s a normal thing you would see in 

regulatory powers is what kinds of forms, and that’s not 

something that changes the substance of the law. It’s just how 

you fill out the form. That’s the appropriate use of regulations. 

 

And there’s other ones that talk about the format, electronic 

format that’s going to be used. Procedure for paying fees, that 

makes sense in a regulation, how the fees are going to be 

collected, who you make the cheque out to. Procedures for 

business entities to file information, again, those types of things 

make sense, how to make financial and statistical reports, 

common dates or periods to file, all of those things that are 

required. 

 

It’s not clear to me within the provisions of the Act where this 

information will be stored or who will be responsible for it. 

Presumably those are the kinds of things that would be covered 

off in the public body’s agreement with the government. But we 

don’t have a lot of clarity on that either. So we’re not exactly 

sure how that’s going to work. 

 

Just finally to go back to . . . That’s basically the substance of 

the bill. Just to revisit the comments of the minister when he did 

the second reading on the bill, to move the second reading on 

the bill, he said that this information here is only going to be 

“general public information” and information about their 

involvement with the specific program or details with its 

interaction with a government agent would not be shared. So I 

think that will bring some comfort to these companies when 

they realize how widely their information could be shared. 

 

But it allows the government and all the agencies . . . And he 

says municipalities will have access to this as well. So again, 

I’m not sure how that’s going to happen. It’s not clear in the 

Act how municipalities will be provided this information, but 

somehow through this hub that he describes. 

 

And again, the Act itself does not seem to describe how this hub 

will operate, but he’s calling the hub a “secure database.” So the 

hub I guess is some form of database that certain public bodies 

and agencies will have access to. He even identifies in his 

comments about the “. . . extensive regulation-making powers 

to establish or adopt the business number system . . . [and] 

standardize procedures to file information . . .” etc., as I referred 

to earlier. 

 

So basically I think there may be other comments. Many of my 

colleagues have not had an opportunity to address this bill yet, 

since it was introduced late in the session last December. But I 

think at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made pretty much 

all the comments I want to make, and I would like to adjourn 

debate on this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 84, The Common Business Identifiers Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 45 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m happy to rise to speak this evening, again, to Bill No. 45 

which is An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act and The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. There’s a 

couple of changes that are being introduced by this bill. And I 

guess whenever we get an opportunity to come and speak to the 

Assembly about our Crown corporations, we like to take an 

opportunity to do that and maybe raise some concerns that we 

see happening with our Crowns these days. 

 

There’s different things that are happening with the Crowns. 

One of the articles I have here that we talked about last fall was 

the concerns we raised in this House about using a company 

called Huawei, and the Sask Party, or sorry, SaskTel entered 

into a contract with this company despite the fact that the 

United States intelligence committees were quite concerned 

about the company and security risks. So we did raise some 

concerns about that last fall in relation to the Huawei deal, and 

so I think basically we’ll be watching that with interest to make 

sure that our information isn’t being somehow compromised by 

entering into this kind of contract. 

 

Another issue that we raised in relation to SaskTel was the way 

Internet service was being delivered to many of the rural 

customers, and there was even editorials written about that and 

concerns about SaskTel’s inability to plan ahead. We’re not 

happy to see that our Crown corporation’s been put in this 

situation, and we’re still wanting to see SaskTel be able to 

deliver the products and the services that we feel are appropriate 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that it’s not easy to access every community in a 

meaningful way. And certainly to ensure that Internet services 

are available to the SaskTel customers in far-flung corners of 

the province, Mr. Speaker, is something that needs to be 

monitored and a vigilant eye be kept on it. 

 

We’re worried, and in fact the editorial itself raised the 

question. It says . . . And this is an editorial from the 

Leader-Post from September 27. And the question was why the 

federal decision on taking back the broadband spectrum 

allocation that SaskTel was using, why was SaskTel caught off 

guard? And why, the question is why a profitable corporation 

whose net income since 2007 has ranged from 84 million to 

more than 150 million a year, why they haven’t invested in 

alternatives to provide uninterrupted rural Internet services. 

And the question they had was what effect the government’s 

policy of carving out for its own use most of the profits has had 

on the utility’s ability to properly serve the needs of rural 

customers. And the editorial noted that that’s the interesting 



2546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

question. What effect has this government’s policy of carving 

out for its own use the profits from our Crowns is having on the 

Crowns themselves? 

 

And this is something, Mr. Speaker, that I hear, you know, 

pretty much everywhere I go, no matter if I’m out visiting some 

of our rural people in some of my activities as critic for 

Agriculture. We hear the issues coming up there. I hear them 

certainly within my own constituency, and just in any sort of 

public setting that I end up in. People are concerned about the 

net effect of this government’s continual, as they said here, 

carving out of the profits of these Crowns in order to deal with 

the government’s own fiscal woes. 

 

And I think we know that SaskPower has a looming 

infrastructure deficit in the billions, and yet we still see this 

government, however you want to characterize it, using the 

profits of these companies to bolster its own flagging budget 

estimates. And this is not something I think that is going to 

serve the Crowns well, and it certainly won’t serve the people 

of Saskatchewan well if we continue to deplete the assets of the 

Crowns in order to bolster up a budget that’s flimsy to begin 

with. So that’s a real concern I think that SaskTel customers 

need to be worried about and citizens of Saskatchewan certainly 

need to be concerned about. 

 

In order to address the bill itself, I want to first of all look at the 

comments of the minister as he introduced it. It was introduced 

on November 5th. That was one of the first bills that we looked 

at this session. And basically the essence of the bill, according 

to the minister, is to deal with the “. . . housekeeping matter of 

monetary limits of orders in councils and the length of the term 

of borrowing by SaskTel.” 

 

In his estimation, you know, this is to reflect what’s happening 

in the bond market in Canada, where bonds are now being 

issued for 30 years or more. And the current bill has a limitation 

of 30 years on some of these borrowing limits. So now because 

of credit upgrades, based on the hard work of the previous 

government and ensuring that our finances were in order after a 

difficult time in the ’80s, the credit rating was actually 

improved quite a bit in the ’90s and the early 2000s. So now 

because of the improved credit rating and the upgrades, then 

this government is able to take advantage of that, and now 

SaskTel as well can also get availing of financing that goes 

beyond 30 years. Whether someone wants to borrow beyond 30 

years, I think that’s a question in and of itself.  

 

And maybe for the large types of infrastructure upgrades that 

our Crowns are not only required to do but are able to do 

because of the strength of the Crowns, the time frame itself is 

something that I think we see a lot of people going into personal 

debt for longer than 30 years, and it is of concern. So whether 

or not it’s prudent for Crowns to do the same type of long-term 

debt, that’s perhaps a discussion for another day. But we see 

that the Department of Finance itself is now borrowing at 

longer terms. And who knows what the economy will be like in 

20 years from now or 25 years from now or 30 years from now, 

but this is something that is binding our government for a much 

longer period of time. 

 

[20:15] 

 

At any rate, the Minister indicated that in the last fiscal year, 

from 2011 to the end of September 2012, SaskTel spent about 

300 million on its network here in Saskatchewan. And certainly 

I’ve been fortunate to have the fibre optic line installed in my 

own home and are appreciative of the extended broadband 

width that me and my family can access. So these are things 

that customers are looking for. We know now that the new LTE 

[long-term evolution] network is available for cellphone users 

and smart phone users and anyone who’s got the new iPhone is 

able to access the LTE. Long-term evolution is what LTE 

stands for.  

 

So we see the benefits of having that wireless network already 

being introduced here in Saskatchewan. These things cost 

money and so the housekeeping matter that this bill is intended 

to look after is to align the dollar limit that the Crown has with 

the order in council for the Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan model. 

 

So currently, if SaskTel spends . . . purchases lands in excess of 

a hundred thousand dollars, they need to go to the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to get an order, go to Cabinet. And for 

what happens there, is that will delay the purchase of the land 

for cell towers. And certainly I think that kind of change is one 

that makes sense and will help. If it will help our Crowns move 

more quickly and provide better service in the competitive 

cellular market then, especially in the larger cities when you can 

easily spend over $100,000 for a piece of land, that would make 

a lot of sense. 

 

So the amendment itself in the bill basically deals with section 

11(3) of the SaskTel Act and section 28(2) of the SaskTel Act. 

And the current section indicates, on 11(3), it’s the limit of 

$100,000 for purchase of real property, and that Lieutenant 

Governor in Council approval needs to be obtained. So what 

they’re doing here, they’re suggesting that we would delete or 

repeal that section and just say that the corporation needs to get 

the approval of the Lieutenant Governor if the purchase price or 

sale price of real property exceeds the amounts fixed by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

So here again, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know now what the limit 

is because that’s something that’s been taken out of the Act and 

won’t even go to regulations. It’s just the discretionary approval 

of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. So who knows what 

level is going to be too much for purchase of a price of real 

property. But that’s something that we are now passing out of 

the legislation into the hands of cabinet, and it will be solely 

within the power of cabinet to make that kind of decision. 

 

Right or wrong, it’s something I think that the public needs to 

be aware of. And certainly, hopefully if anyone has concerns 

about these types of passing off of power to cabinet, they will 

indicate their concerns. It’s a technical thing maybe for a lot of 

people, but I think it’s a definite shift of decision-making 

authority and power from this Assembly to the closed doors of 

the cabinet room. 

 

Section 28(2) is the one regarding the monies that are . . . the 

term of the borrowing of the money. And as I said, it currently 

is not to exceed 30 years. They’re going to repeal that section 

28(2) and they’re going to substitute a new section that just says 

any monies that they are authorized to borrow are to be 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2547 

borrowed according to The Financial Administration Act, which 

is how the Crown Investments Corporation’s financial limits are 

established. So it just basically follows the limits that the Crown 

Investments Corporations are following. 

 

So the same thing is being proposed in this bill to The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 

So not only is The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act is 

being amended, but also The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. And it’s the 

same kind of changes. The section 11(4) of that Act has a limit 

of $200,000 for a purchase or sale of real property in one 

transaction, and now we are going to see cabinet allowed to set 

the dollar amount rather than approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. Sorry, it could be any amount. I guess it 

could be less than $200,000 as well, but I presume that cabinet 

would be more interested in setting a level of higher than 

$200,000. Otherwise why amend the Act? 

 

And then the other change that’s going to be done is the change 

to allow, to bring it in line with The Financial Administration 

Act and to get rid of the 30-year term. So currently in that bill 

— this is the SaskTel holding appropriation Act — it’s saying 

that the 30-year term is being removed and they are now to 

borrow, the term is going to be in line with The Financial 

Administration Act. 

 

So that’s the essence of the changes I think that the government 

is proposing in this bill. Again you know, the idea of extending 

financing beyond 30 years is one that I think may be a topic for 

larger discussion with the public, when we see the concerns that 

we are now seeing families face when they are now looking at 

those longer borrowing terms, and whether or not that’s 

appropriate for a Crown corporation.  

 

You know, as long as the profits of the companies are being 

drained to bolster the provincial government’s budgets, this is 

something these utilities are going to be forced to do, especially 

in the face of significant upgrades to any of their systems like 

the LTE or any other services in relation to delivery to homes 

like the new fibre optic line. Or in the case of SaskPower, we 

know that a lot of the power generating plants are old and tired 

and are going to need renewal in some form, if it’s retrofit or 

actual rebuild. 

 

So those are the kinds of concerns I think that we need to keep 

an eye on. And we certainly look to the listening public and 

people who follow these kinds of things to raise their concerns 

as well, and certainly provide comment to us in the opposition 

or to make sure their concerns are directly relayed to the 

government as well. 

 

At that point, Mr. Speaker, I think I am prepared to . . . I’m not 

sure anyone else in our caucus is going to speak to this, so I 

think I am going to suggest that we move this bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? To 

which committee shall this bill be referred? I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that this bill be moved to the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This committee stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 46 — The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in on Bill 

46, the amendment Act, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Act, there’s a number of different things in the minister’s 

comments, proposed changes that are coming ahead. And one 

of the first ones on there is allowing the chairperson or 

vice-chairperson to be appointed for an additional year, 

one-year term. 

 

And I know there’s been a question, why has this come 

forward? And there was an argument based on it and I guess 

colleagues, for myself, wondering in that provision why we 

would allow that provision in there? Like what would be the 

purpose of it? If you’re looking at the term, wouldn’t you, when 

you appoint them to a term, provide them with a time whether 

it’s three years, five years to look after and to be on the 

committee that would look after the pension plan? You would 

think you have provisions in there, Mr. Speaker, to provide for 

that, but apparently that’s not so and they want to have the 

ability to appoint the Chair or Vice-Chair for an additional year. 

So we’ve tried to ask a little bit of questions. And I know 

there’s more work on that area will be asked, and when it does 

go to committee they’ll ask that. But I guess for now that’s one 

area that people are wondering about. 

 

Now I want to talk about the pension that we’re talking about. 

It’s the government employees’ pension, municipal pension, 

teachers, school divisions. There’s a number of different 

municipalities belong to this pension. And they talk about, I 

think there’s about 16,000 members belong to this pension, 

currently 4,000 utilizing the pension, getting a monthly pension 

from there as it is. So they’re making sure that the provisions in 

there with the committee . . . When they’re dealing with 

pensions like this, you have a committee that’s appointed, and 

the government and the minister appoints the individuals on this 



2548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

committee. There’s a 10-member committee that looks after, 

you know, the administration, the daily operation, and the fund 

to make sure the funds are secure. And that’s what I can take 

from this. That’s kind of what it’s doing. 

 

Now they’re asking in a provision in here, Mr. Speaker, to 

provide for a majority of, I guess, the committee to make 

decisions, and with a simple majority that group would then 

carry on. So they’re looking at different options in this 

provision and that’s one area that, you know, will require a 

decision made by the MEPP [municipal employees’ pension 

plan] pension plan. 

 

Now having said that, it’s like anything else: individuals that 

pay into this pension want to make sure that the pensions are 

protected. They want to make sure the government does all it 

can to appoint, I guess, competent . . . to make sure that 

individuals that serve on this look after the assets that 

somebody has worked maybe 30 years, 25 years of their life. 

They want to make sure that that pension is protected for them. 

 

So I know there’s a lot of questions that will go on on how it’s 

managed. And not that individuals want to manage it, but I 

think sometimes we’ve seen some of the pensions, they have 

done very well for people who have retired, individuals that are 

looking forward to a pension. Some of the pension plans out 

there do an excellent job of administrating the pension plans, 

overseeing them, making sure that individuals’ pensions are 

well taken care of. But unfortunately sometimes we’ve seen 

some areas where pensions are . . . How do we say people’s 

lifetime earnings and their pensions have been . . . Well I guess 

some of the reports that are in here have shown some challenges 

and I guess some real concerns to individuals who have seen 

their pensions disappear in different ways — the assets they’ve 

had to work for years, then they’ve seen them dwindle away, 

you know. So I think it’s clear that we want to make sure that 

the provisions in here and the questions that we would have 

cover those individuals. 

 

But having also said that, I guess it also refers to individuals in 

here who, let’s just say you’re planning your retirement and 

something would happen to you. There is a provision here 

they’re looking at for a spouse, if their partner happens to pass 

away, that there’s provisions in there to protect the spouse to 

make sure that that individual is going to receive the benefit that 

the person that owns the pension plan or had worked for the 

years who had paid into it, that their family, their loved one 

receives the benefit of their years of, I guess, of work that 

they’ve put in. And I think that’s good that we’re looking at 

those options. And there are some provisions in there that the 

minister is clearly bringing forward that we have to do some 

work on. 

 

But having said that, there’s another area, you know, we’ll go 

into and we can discuss that. But I want to use some examples 

and it’s clearly, whether it’s pensions, whether it’s the public’s 

dollars, and when I refer to public and I want to show examples, 

people expect in their pension plan the government to appoint 

individuals to look after their assets. It’s the same thing, Mr. 

Speaker: individuals want their tax dollars, they want the assets 

they own — whether it’s in Crown corporations, whether it’s in 

tax that they pay — they want those assets protected. They want 

to make sure the government protects those assets. They want to 

make sure the government uses those assets to the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people and to the benefit of the province. 

 

And a lot of times we’re seeing some of the challenges that the 

current government is not doing the best it can with the people’s 

assets. And we’ve seen light of that today. We’ve seen light of 

that yesterday. And I think we’re going to see more of that as 

we go on where the assets that belong to the people of this good 

province — and you know, many people are really proud of this 

province — the government makes decisions. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And just like this committee will look after assets that I guess 

individuals pay to their pension plan, and it’s in there. Having 

said that, I want to show the comparisons. It’s no different than 

our northern trappers. It’s no different than individuals who 

have, whether it’s SaskTel, SaskPower, SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance], here’s Crown corporations that the 

people own. It’s their asset. They pay. And sometimes, you 

know, they want to make sure those assets are being taken care 

of. We see the mismanagement of the government who takes 

their assets and doesn’t always do right with them and that’s 

clearly . . . that’s coming out more and more. And people are 

paying attention, the public is paying attention to that. It’s 

public dollars. 

 

So I want to show the comparisons when there are assets that 

belong to people, individuals. They expect the government to 

do the right thing. They expect governments to take care of 

those assets. They expect government to have provisions to 

protect those assets from some of the challenges that we’re 

seeing, and they’re coming out clearly. And I think the 

questions that the minister, you know, were asked today clearly 

show that the government’s making its choices on some of 

those assets. And some of those decisions the government has 

made has not been good for the people that own assets. Whether 

it’s pension plan, whether it’s the public’s dollars, the public 

expects better of their government, and they want to make sure 

their assets are protected. And clearly there’s provisions in here 

that the government’s strengthening, but I think maybe we have 

to have more strength with the public dollars and more 

accountability on the government, on the politicians, that people 

are saying, here, we trust you politicians with our dollars. We 

want you to do the right thing. And we don’t want to see those 

. . . We work hard for those dollars to be paid in. We work hard 

to pay our power bills. We work hard to put food on the table, 

so we want our assets looked after. 

 

We want the money that we pay in as taxes to provide good 

service for all Saskatchewan people, whether that’s bus routes 

to communities . . . And we’ve seen that today where routes are 

being cut, where you have seniors who are going to suffer. You 

have small business that may not see the opportunity of having 

STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] coming in 

because clearly the government is making choices. And I guess 

it boils down to individuals and it boils down to people and 

community, and we’re looking at the rural community and this 

government, unfortunately, with the cuts it’s making, clearly. 

 

But it has money and it has all the assets of the people to have 

more politicians, to elect more politicians, clearly. My 

colleagues have talked about that today when we talked about 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2549 

some of the bills, that we’ve had concerns raised to us by 

individuals, concerns raised to us by our colleagues, by 

members of the public about their assets and making sure. So 

those concerns are clearly being raised. 

 

So when I say that the public’s watching, the public wants to 

make sure their assets are being taken care of. So we see 

decisions this government is making, impact decisions. So 

when we look at this bill, Bill 46, and we’ve asked and the 

government asked a committee to look after it, and they asked 

them and they put in provisions to make sure that these 

individuals protect the assets of the pension plan of the 

individuals. It’s no different than the individuals electing the 

members of the Sask Party in this House to look after their 

assets and to make sure that they do right with those assets. 

 

And I’m telling you, people are watching, and they’re not 

happy with some of the stuff they’re seeing and they’re very 

concerned. And we see some of the decisions, whether it’s 

roads in northern Saskatchewan, the trappers’ association 

getting nothing. They’ve asked for a little bit of help. This 

government has chosen not to utilize those assets to assist our 

trappers, whether the trappers want to apply for funding . . . 

 

So I’m trying to show examples how Bill 46 . . . When you’re 

talking about the assets of individuals, those are assets of the 

people of the province. When I talk about our trappers, our 

commercial fisherman, our municipalities, there is a lot of 

examples I can use to show people’s assets. And I want to make 

it clear. 

 

So the people have asked the government to make sure that they 

take care of those assets. And if they don’t, you will pay a price. 

The people will send a message to the politicians. The priorities 

that this government has had, and again it goes back to assets. 

And that’s why I’ve talked about Bill 46. And I want to be very 

clear — they are showing the assets owned. We are providing 

protection. I think there’s more protection needs to be put on 

the public’s dollars that this government’s been using. And I 

mean, it can spin it the way they want but, Mr. Speaker, clearly 

the people want a government to respect the hard-earned dollars 

that they pay into the government coffers, that those dollars are 

managed properly, that those dollars are taken care of, that 

those dollars have accountability on them because of 

hard-working people out there that are trying their best to make 

ends meet. 

 

And we’ve seen, today we’ve seen our seniors coming in here 

that rent, and individuals, and you look at their assets. They 

want to make sure their assets are taken care of. When they look 

at paying out the rent that they’re asked and the increases and 

those questions that were raised today, it goes back to the same 

thing. People are preparing for their retirement, and here’s a 

pension plan that will provide certain assets to be paid to 

individuals when they retire. They’ll be on fixed income. And if 

this is what we’re telling them, well here’s what your fixed 

income will do, you’re going to have rent increases because 

we’re not providing, you know, incentives with rent controls or 

to even consult and talk to individuals. And that’s unfortunate, 

Mr. Speaker, that in these times and hard times that individuals 

on fixed income are facing. 

 

So when I see provisions like this to protect pension plans, 

which is good, and they want to make some adjustments, then 

that’s fine. We need to amend some of the policies. But maybe 

we can come up with a bill that would protect renters, like with 

rent control for students, for people on fixed income, for our 

seniors. That would be nice to see happen. And that would be 

nice to see, another way of protecting so we show this. 

 

But at this point, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to share a little bit of, I 

guess of information on pension, on assets, and I want to talk 

about the people’s assets out there and clearly what they expect. 

And they expect better from a government than to worry about 

their government’s own area, and I mean their priorities are 

this: millions for more politicians while others out there with 

the assets are suffering to maintain, keeping those assets 

coming in to the government to deal with. 

 

So having said that, at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

prepared to really seriously look at moving this bill to 

committee at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 46, The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 47 — The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise this evening and speak to Bill No. 47, the third 

bill that was introduced by the government in this current 

portion of the session. It was introduced back last November 

actually when we started sitting. And it’s a fairly uninteresting 

bill actually; there’s not a whole lot going on in this bill. 

 

Basically what the minister is doing is just changing the name 

of the organization. And we can look to his comments a little bit 

when he introduced it back on November 5th. The minister 

spoke at length about his 25-year plan for water. And what we 

see here is I think more a form of lexicon that is creeping into 



2550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

the vernacular of North America really, and it probably started 

back when we heard the phrase homeland security. 

 

So after 9/11, we started hearing a lot about security and what 

we heard about then was homeland security. So we had all 

kinds of bills and things being introduced in the United States 

and in Canada dealing with what we call homeland security. 

And then now another term that you hear a lot that we didn’t 

hear a few years ago is food security. And I think food security 

means a lot of things to a lot of different people. We see this 

government committing money along with the Potash 

Corporation to establishing a food security agency or institute at 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

We also hear a lot of people talk about food security when it 

comes to poverty issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and how I think 

when we want to talk about a healthy society and what that 

might look like, we have to talk about people’s access to food. 

And various studies have shown that if people have a stable and 

secure access to food, other things flow from that in terms of 

proper housing and proper education and all the other things 

that flow when we have all the determinants of health looked 

after. So security, the word security itself is just a word. And 

what’s being proposed here is to change the name of the 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, which brings to mind a 

certain image. I mean, we know what a watershed is. When we 

fly over Saskatchewan we can see the watersheds there, the 

actual physical geographic features. So we know what a 

watershed is. And this authority since its inception has been 

dealing with the flow of water through the watersheds in 

Saskatchewan. Obviously the watershed corporation, or 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation, was hived off of that agency 

a few years back, and it has its own purpose as a Crown 

corporation now. But we had the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority; I think people had a sense and an understanding of 

what its responsibilities were. 

 

I’ve spoken often in the Assembly here about concerns that this 

authority isn’t able to meet its legislative obligations to protect 

citizens from illegal drainage, for example. And we had people 

here in the legislature last year that demonstrated the kind of 

damaging effects that can happen downstream when people are 

illegally draining. Unfortunately we haven’t seen any real 

action on the part of this government. We know the previous 

minister wrote a letter to farmers asking them not to do it. I 

don’t know how that’s worked out for them. I don’t hear that 

it’s actually succeeded in reducing the number of drainage 

ditches, nor mitigating the damage that’s been done by those 

that have already been drained. The backlog is immense, and in 

fact I think it’s maybe insurmountable at this point in time 

because there’s simply no political will on the part of this 

government to deal with that particular issue. 

 

So when we talk about Watershed Authority, and then we see 

the minister wanting to change the name to water security, we 

have to wonder what the intention is behind the semantics, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This raises a lot of concerns. Does this 

minister just want to bring it into terms with food security and 

homeland security and provide that sort of comfort to the 

people of Saskatchewan that maybe their water is now secure 

because we’ve changed the name? I’m not sure the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to understand that or even recognize 

what the heck is the Saskatchewan Water Security Agency. 

And I actually asked the minister, why agency and not 

authority? And he said, well, because. So it seems a bit strange 

that we would take the time in the legislature to make these 

changes, but the minister, that seemed important to him at the 

time. What he said when he rose to speak to the bill, he said, 

“. . . I wish to mention briefly the concept of the Water Security 

Agency.” He said, the concept itself has been developed among 

the world’s water experts for the last ten years, and water 

security refers to ensuring sustainable water supplies to support 

our society’s needs. So now, rather than protecting the 

watershed itself, it looks like the intent is to protect water. 

 

Unfortunately I don’t think that’s what we’re seeing because 

many of the industrial projects that we see coming forward 

seem to be a huge drain on our water resources. We see what’s 

happening in Alberta with the development of the bitumen there 

in the tar sands or the oil sands, and the concerns that are being 

raised in northern Alberta about the quality of the water because 

of the industrial development. 

 

We have heard plenty of concerns on this side of the border 

about the use of water for things like the potash mines that use 

water-saline solution to produce the potash, and what happens 

to the water once it’s contaminated. How is that water restored? 

So despite the fact that we are calling it water security, I think 

there are more demands on the security of our water because of 

the extensive industrial development and perhaps the lack of 

baseline knowledge about what the current status of the 

watersheds should be. And we’re not sure that just because you 

change the name that it means the water’s secure. So there 

could be a disconnect there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

although the minister has introduced his 25-year water security 

plan, what we’re hearing from people on the ground is they 

don’t feel all that secure. 

 

Certainly in terms of the illegal drainage issues that this 

ministry has simply done nothing about — allowing people to 

suffer in silence or take it out with their neighbours, which is 

actually not the Saskatchewan way — we need some support 

from the government. And this is a ministry that has lost staff. 

They simply don’t have the resources to deal with the backlogs 

that exist, and that’s something that’s very concerning. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And I want to go back a little bit to water security in the sense 

of a healthy society, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And last week I was 

very pleased to be invited to attend part of the We Day in 

Saskatoon. And it was mentioned in the members’ statements 

where 15,000 young Saskatchewan people came together to 

celebrate their work that they’ve done to bring water security to 

countries like Kenya, where young girls are not able to go to 

school because they have to walk to get water all day and then 

come home with the water that’s needed to survive. So those 

are the kinds of things I think that have inspired not just 

Saskatchewan youth but I think anyone who’s come into 

contact with this particular program. and it shows the 

empowerment of a community when water is secure. 

 

Building a well. I have an uncle, he’s well into his 80s now. 

And he was born in southern Saskatchewan and did ministry 

work in Africa as a young man, came back to Canada, raised his 

family. But when his wife died of Alzheimer’s about 10 years 



March 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2551 

ago he went back to Kenya, and he’s showing people there how 

to build wells. And this is bringing security, water security, to 

those families and those communities, and he’s just doing it 

with the basic, kind of rudimentary well-digging methods that 

are available to those people so that they who have nothing, 

literally nothing when it comes to that, other than a bucket to 

carry their water in if they have to walk. So that’s the kind of 

work I think that the We Day celebrates and certainly gives 

hope for those people in those communities. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we have so much water, and it is so 

amply provided for us, and not just in Saskatchewan but in 

Canada. We have 100,000 lakes in Saskatchewan. You know, 

you could fish every day in a different lake for 100 years and 

still not reach all the lakes that we have. So it’s the abundance 

of richness that we have here. And I think maybe we can take it 

for granted to a certain extent, but we know with climate change 

and all the things that is happening in the environment that there 

could be risks. 

 

And when I worked with the federal government for a number 

of years, certainly the arrangements between Canada and the 

Unites States, we saw the Rafferty-Alameda dam being 

constructed and all the water, the trade agreement when it 

comes to water. I know there is considerable concern out there 

in the populace about the security of our water and whether or 

not through the trade agreements that exist whether we even 

have water security anymore. 

 

Those kind of questions weren’t addressed in the 25-year plan. I 

did read through the plan or I tried to read through it, but I 

found it was heavy on words but light on substance, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And although the minister spoke glowingly about the 

goals of the plan, I just feel that in many ways it was words on 

paper. So we will be looking and trying to hold this government 

to account for that plan and ensure that if they are going to call 

it the Water Security Agency, that they are talking about water 

security and not about ways to divert it into overuse in one 

particular area and damaging the environment in other areas. 

 

So he went into detail about what the Water Security Agency is 

mandated to do. And I think it’s changing the goals and the 

previous goals of the Watershed Authority Act or the 

Watershed Authority, but he’s now saying that the agency “. . . 

is mandated to ensure protection of water quality, maintenance 

of aquatic habitats, and sustainable water supplies.” 

 

I think what we would look to here is how is the minister 

planning to do that? And if he is going to continue to withdraw 

services and cut staff in the environmental area, monitoring and 

enforcement and compliance are always the areas that seem to 

be immediately affected when governments want to look for 

cuts and efficiencies in the public service. So we know that the 

numbers of staff in the ministry have declined, and we’ve 

certainly seen it in terms of their ability to look at complaints 

regarding illegal drainage. And we’re not sure that if the 

government says this is our goal, but if they don’t really put the 

manpower behind it to ensure that it happens, we’re not sure 

that they’ll be able to meet their goals in the enforcement of the 

bill. 

 

So he goes on to say that: 

 

The Water Security Agency brings together for the first 

time all of government’s core water management 

responsibilities and technical expertise to ensure a 

comprehensive and integrated approach to water 

management. 

 

And he said what they’re going to do is bring together staff and 

programs from the Ministry of the Environment, Ministry of 

Agriculture, Health, and all the responsibilities and staff from 

the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 

 

So it sounds like a pumped up watershed authority, that there’s 

going to be an inflation of the resources that are going to be 

available to the agency. We’re certainly going to want to ask a 

lot of questions about that in committee when this bill does get 

moved to committee. Because I think that’s where the proof is 

in the pudding: if the plan is to bring all these, what he calls 

core water management responsibilities and technical expertise, 

if he actually brings that together and shows us and 

demonstrates to us how this new agency is going to better do 

the work that the Watershed Authority wasn’t able to do. 

 

So he’s going on to say that it’s going to provide a stronger 

focus on water issues. Again this may be just words. We’re not 

sure exactly how he’s going to do that. He’s going to have 

regulatory authority in this agency over water supply including 

water allocations, water quality, municipal drinking water and 

waste water systems, and similar large private systems, work 

such as dams and channels, drainage is there in protection of 

aquatic habitat. 

 

I know that when the new solution potash mine is coming on 

stream, there’s two or three that are coming in that are going to 

be draining water from the Qu’Appelle Valley water system. 

And what we’re told, Mr. Speaker, is that this government’s 

view of how to protect the water supply there is simply to let 

more water through the Gardiner dam to replenish the 

Qu’Appelle Valley, the Qu’Appelle River. 

 

And then you have to think about where does the aquifer, the 

Diefenbaker aquifer get its water from. You go further upstream 

and we see it comes from Alberta and we know that the source 

for those rivers is depleting as well. The glaciers, it’s clear, are 

depleting and that in fact there may not be a steady supply of 

water for much longer. So without factoring in climate change, 

it’s difficult to see how the agency will be able to manage the 

allocations and the work, the dams and channels that have been 

established to date. So it’s all part of a bigger picture and, you 

know, it ties in with food security. So we need to see the 

government’s approach to this on a much more global scale, 

although obviously we are limited to the geographic boundaries 

of Saskatchewan. The notion of securing our water is intricately 

tied with all the water systems that feed into our geographical 

boundaries. 

 

So we’re going to have to watch from this side of the House to 

see how this government plans to achieve the goals it set out in 

this plan. He’s talking about a number of principles that the 

plan establishes. He says the plan is going to have a long-term 

perspective, and he indicated he doesn’t shy away from setting 

goals and having a long-term perspective. We’re glad he’s not 

afraid to shy away from that and we certainly look forward to 

how he will meet those long-term goals. He is talking about 



2552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2013 

water for future generations. Again that ties into the long-term 

goal. He’s looking at an integrated approach to management. 

That’s again, kind of motherhood types of statements. 

Partnerships and participation are other things he talks about. 

Shared responsibility. Continuous improvement. So those are 

all good words, Mr. Speaker, and they are all are lofty words for 

a minister to be putting out in this type of 25-year water 

security plan. But I think, as I said earlier, the proof will be in 

the pudding or, in this case, in the pond. And we’ll see what 

happens with the plan once he starts implementing it. 

 

He says the plan provides guidance to all of government on 

work related to water. So he’s saying the work is going to be 

directed to achieving those seven goals that he talked about 

earlier. And he was talking about the day he released the goal 

on the South Saskatchewan River in sunny Saskatoon in 

October. It was a lovely day. And I think that’s the kind of day 

where we have hope, where we think that maybe it is possible 

to achieve these goals. 

 

So again from this side of the House, we are just going to watch 

and pay attention to this. We’re going to ask questions in 

committee, and we’re going to hold this government to the 

promises that it’s made to the people. 

 

So I think at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that would 

be the extent of our comments from this side of the House on 

this Bill 47. We know we have a new name. We don’t know 

exactly how that’s going to look, but at this point we’re going to 

be able to ask those questions in committee and I would like to 

refer this bill to the committee at this time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 47, The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:56.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2537 

 Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2540 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2541 

 Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2543 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2545 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2547 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2547 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2549 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2549 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2552 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2539 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


