




















































Hansard: March 18, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 34A  MONDAY, MARCH 18, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2727 

 March 18, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to introduce to you and through you to all members in 

this Assembly, some special guests that have joined us in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. Today joining us is Norbert Steiner, the 

chairman of the board of executive directors of K+S Group, one 

of the world’s leading fertilizer companies. And with him is Dr. 

Ulrich Lamp who is president and chief executive officer of 

K+S Potash Canada and a member of the parent company’s 

board of directors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members in the House will know that about nine 

months ago, K+S broke ground on the Legacy Project located 

near Bethune, just north of Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, later this 

day, Minister McMillan and I will be meeting with these 

officials from K+S to get an update on the project. 

 

This is the first greenfield potash project in the province since 

Elvis was still healthy, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a very long time. 

They, I think, were the last company that built a greenfield 

project in Saskatchewan. This particular one will be about $3.25 

billion. It’ll employ 1,500 workers in terms of construction and 

then 300 in the permanent workforce. 

 

And members are welcoming them here. We do welcome this 

company back, Mr. Speaker. They were here before, but they 

were driven indirectly or directly driven out of this province for 

reasons members opposite will know well. We’re grateful now 

though that they want to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming the representatives from K+S Potash. 

We’re happy that they’re here today in the Assembly, and we’re 

happy that they’re here in Saskatchewan. And we wish them all 

the best as they have discussions today with the Premier and the 

minister and wish them all the best with their project here in 

Saskatchewan. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 

these folks to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to everyone in the House today, I would like to 

introduce 22 students from SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] Wascana Campus who are 

enrolled in the Aboriginal police preparation program this year. 

 

Accompanying the students today are two instructors, Jim Pratt 

and Marlene Dormuth, both of who I worked with at the Regina 

Police Service, and both bring a wealth of knowledge to the 

classroom. I would like all members to join me in welcoming 

these students and instructors to their Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming these students to their 

Legislative Assembly, from SIAST, the Aboriginal police 

preparation class. A big ride coming up, April 4th I understand. 

And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, I’d had the pleasure of 

attending with the minister the Regina Police Service feast. 

They did a fine job serving, and they’re ready to move on to 

serving and protecting, I would imagine, in terms of police 

work. 

 

But I also want to say a special welcome to Marlene Dormuth 

and of course Jim Pratt. Jim did many years of good service for 

the people of Regina, heading up the cultural liaison unit with 

the Regina Police Service and taught a lot of good lessons to a 

lot of good moniyas. Anyway it’s good to see these people here 

at their Legislative Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to join with my colleagues in welcoming 

Jim and Marlene to the Assembly. My contact with Marlene 

Dormuth of course is through the constituency of Regina 

Douglas Park but it goes back a long way, a lot farther than that. 

I had the opportunity and good fortune to work with Marlene as 

teacher and principal away back when, and I have to thank her 

for all the good work that she’s done for all of the youth of the 

city of Regina. 

 

And I also want to thank her for lending me Annie, her 

daughter, during the campaign. Annie was my rock star. So 

thanks, Marlene, and welcome to the Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

proud today to rise to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage, and the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

of course Birch Narrows First Nation and the community 

of Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring 

communities in each of those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition that I am 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

signing today are primarily from Turnor Lake, but the great 

news is people have signed this petition all throughout 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for the reconsideration of passing Bill 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we know that the proposed 

Saskatchewan employment Act introduced in December 2012 is 

a sweeping rewrite of our labour laws, including but not limited 

to The Labour Standards Act, The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act, The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act, 

and The Trade Union Act. 

 

But since the employment Act has been introduced, literally 

hundreds of hours of studying comparisons have been carried 

out in the interests of due diligence. But we know, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s no labour relations crisis to fix and no necessity to rush 

this omnibus bill through that will likely govern workplace 

relations for decades to come. I would like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Spring Free From Racism Family Day 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise today to speak about the 14th annual Spring Free From 

Racism family day celebration that took place at the Italian 

Club here in Regina yesterday. 

 

Thousands of people attended this wonderful event which 

offered a great selection of food and entertainment to a full 

house. This event brings all cultures together in celebration and 

fun, making it easier to recognize the creativity of our diversity. 

As a multicultural province, it’s important for us to take 

advantage of these opportunities to learn about other cultures 

and experience their uniqueness but also, Mr. Speaker, to 

experience the sameness. 

 

The Spring Free From Racism committee was formed in 1995 

to address the racial issues of our First Nations people, new 

immigrants, and visual minorities. Now 18 years later, this 

committee is still emphasizing the importance of respect in our 

community and recognizing the importance of diversity and 

celebrating our cultures. 

 

I would like to ask all members to join with me recognizing the 

outstanding efforts of the Spring Free From Racism committee 

for organizing this wonderful event, the sponsors who backed it, 

and the volunteers who provide wonderful cuisine, first-rate 

entertainment throughout the day. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Outstanding Principal Provides Leadership 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to congratulate Principal Starla Grebinski of Sacred Heart 

Community School for being recognized by The Learning 

Partnership as one of Canada’s outstanding principals. Her 

strong devotion to the community of North Central as well as 

the families of Sacred Heart Community School is tremendous, 

and the recognition entailed in this prestigious award is most 

certainly well-deserved. 

 

Principal Grebinski and the teachers and staff of Sacred Heart 

have seized upon the importance of literacy and have fostered a 

fiercely proud reading culture that has caught students’ 

imagination and enthusiasm. Last summer Sacred Heart 

achieved their goal of 200 students involved in the accelerated 

reading program. And once a month Sacred Heart hosts reading 

nights where families come together at the school to spend time 

reading with the kids, and the average amount of books read per 

night is over 300. In total Sacred Heart students have read over 

20,000 books. 

 

Principal Grebinski and her team have positioned Sacred Heart 

Community School as a literacy leader. To quote Regina 

Catholic School Division Director of Education Rob Currie, 

“That school, under her direction, has really, really worked with 

the philosophy that if you can read, the world is open to you.” 

 

Starla Grebinski truly deserves the award as one of Canada’s 

outstanding principals for providing amazing leadership to an 

amazing team in a school of readers and learners, a school of 

which students, teachers, staff, and community are very proud. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Aboriginal Police Preparation Program 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the House today 

are 22 students and two instructors from the Aboriginal police 

preparation program at SIAST. This important program was 

developed by SIAST and the Saskatchewan police Aboriginal 

recruitment committee to assist potential Aboriginal recruits in 

gaining entrance into policing careers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first course was offered in the fall of 2007 at 

the SIAST Woodland Campus. Today this program is offered to 

both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal students at five locations 

throughout the province. Highly trained instructors bring their 

own experiences with the policing system to the classroom and 

teach students the professional skills required to successfully 

gain entrance into policing careers. Graduates are able to find 

employment with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], 

municipal police, Border Services, private security, corrections, 

and a number of other agencies. 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2729 

Mr. Speaker, these graduates will help keep Saskatchewan a 

safe place to live, work, and to raise our families. The Premier’s 

growth plan calls for 60,000 new jobs. There’s no better way to 

fill these projected jobs than by ensuring the people of 

Saskatchewan have the education to access these jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this class will be graduating on April the 4th. I’m 

looking forward to participating in their graduation, and I ask 

that all members join me in congratulating them and wishing 

them all the best in their future endeavours. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Social Work Week 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, March 

17th to March 23rd, is Social Work Week. The Canadian 

Association of Social Workers and the Saskatchewan 

Association of Social Workers have declared the theme for this 

year as Defending Social Programs for a Stronger Canada. 

 

Dr. Carolyn Campbell, CASWE [Canadian Association for 

Social Work Education] president, explains that: 

 

At their minimum, strong, equitable and accountable 

social programs are society’s strongest security against 

crime and exploitation of others. At their best, they permit 

people and society opportunities to reach our potential. 

 

One positive step we could take to ensure all people have the 

opportunity to reach their potential is by putting in place a real 

and meaningful poverty-reduction strategy. Shamefully 

Saskatchewan remains one of the only provinces who have 

failed to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, social workers work across the spectrum of 

community involvement. They are present in policy work and 

in community development. They are working in our schools, 

our hospitals, in transition houses, in correctional services, and 

in child protection. Social workers are working with people in 

their communities and coming up with creative solutions to 

many of today’s challenges. We need to listen to the voices of 

social workers and the individuals with whom they are working 

in order to address the poverty and inequality we see present in 

so many of our communities. 

 

I would ask that members of the House join with me in 

thanking the more than 1,300 social workers across 

Saskatchewan who make a difference in the lives of people here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Army Reservists Receive Arctic Response Training 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 

this Assembly today to share a recent event in my constituency. 

Last month, army reservists from Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 

northwestern Ontario congregated at Candle Lake to train a new 

arctic response company group. 

 

The camp set up in northern Saskatchewan was designed to 

facilitate the soldiers’ arctic training. The blistering cold 

temperatures allowed soldiers to learn cold-weather survival 

skills in preparation for operations on the Canadian arctic 

tundra. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Candle Lake location offered numerous 

advantages for this training, as it’s an ideal simulation of the 

sparsely populated arctic regions. The members were also 

trained to identify signs of hypothermia and maintain weapons 

in the cold. In addition to training, the three platoons spread 

over 250 kilometres to meet local civilians and participate in 

community events in Choiceland, Christopher Lake, and 

Smeaton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the frigid temperatures we have endured this 

winter, I’m certain we can all appreciate the extraordinary 

efforts of these soldiers. I ask this Assembly to join me in 

praising all members of the new Arctic Response Company 

Group for advancing their expertise to help protect our country. 

Thank you to them, and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Team Canada West Wins Gold at Special Olympics 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise 

today to recognize the Team Canada West floor hockey team 

winning gold at the Special Olympics World Winter Games in 

South Korea. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from January 29th to February 5th, 16 

Saskatchewan floor hockey players competed in South Korea 

for the Special Olympics World Winter Games. Mr. Speaker, 

13 of those players are from Saskatoon, two from Prince Albert, 

and one from Debden. They all made their communities and 

province proud. These determined players practised hard in 

Saskatoon and attended a training camp in Lake Placid, New 

York which obviously paid off for bringing home the gold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Team Canada West qualified to represent Canada 

last February at the Special Olympics Canada Winter Games. 

They did a spectacular job representing Canada and 

Saskatchewan in South Korea. The team played against 

Singapore and Monaco and beat out Mexico 4 to 2 in the gold 

medal game, and the Canada East team cheered them on from 

the stands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

Team Canada West floor hockey team on their gold medal win 

in South Korea. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

T.rex Discovery Centre Unveils Display 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday 

evening, I had the pleasure to host the Lieutenant Governor and 

the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport at the unveiling of the 

completed Scotty display at the T.rex Discovery Centre in 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

Eastend. This unveiling was a celebration of the many years of 

hard work invested in making this project a stunning success. 

 

The 1991 discovery near Eastend of the first T. Rex skeleton 

found in Saskatchewan — and one of the most complete in the 

world, I might add — was the catalyst for the building of the 

centre to showcase the area’s rich paleontological history. The 

centre is community owned, contributes to the economy of 

Eastend, and is an excellent expression of community pride. 

And it’s also an important tourist draw to the area, indeed to all 

of southwest Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Royal Saskatchewan Museum has played a 

role in the T.rex Discovery Centre since its inception in 2000. 

And now because of a new arrangement, the RSM [Royal 

Saskatchewan Museum] is well positioned to operate the 

facility, capitalizing on its experience in paleontology, in 

exhibits, programming, and visitor experience. The T.rex 

Discovery Centre is also an excellent venue for the RSM’s 

travelling exhibits and other outreach programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing the 

T.rex board of directors and the local staff of the Royal 

Saskatchewan Museum for all of their hard work and tireless 

dedication to the T.rex Discovery Centre. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Courthouse Security 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be hearing a lot 

this week about how the government is spending taxpayers’ 

dollars on what projects, and we’ll certainly be bringing a lot of 

scrutiny to those discussions. 

 

It’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to look at what investments the 

province has made and to see whether those investments are 

being neglected or wasted. The province has invested millions 

of dollars in making our provincial courts more secure. There 

are metal detectors installed in the Provincial Court House and 

the Queen’s Bench buildings in both Regina and Saskatoon. 

We’ve been informed however that the metal detectors in these 

buildings sometimes sit idle. The buildings remain open, Mr. 

Speaker, proceedings go on, but the metal detecting machines 

are not always in operation. 

 

My question to the Premier: can he please confirm for the 

House that the installed metal detectors at courthouses are 

sometimes not used? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

aware of the particular concern that’s been raised by the 

member opposite, but we’re certainly prepared to look into it. 

We take courthouse security very seriously in our courthouses 

in this province, Mr. Speaker, not only for the protection of 

witnesses but for the protection of courthouse staff. So it’s 

obviously a concern for us, and I will look into the matter, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that courthouse safety is 

hugely important for judges, lawyers, staff, and the general 

public. And we’re reminded of an incident just a couple of 

weeks ago in Alberta where a sheriff was shot, Mr. Speaker, in 

a provincial courthouse. It’s because of concerns like that that 

metal detectors were installed here in Saskatchewan courts. If 

the metal detectors are there, Mr. Speaker, the necessary dollars 

also need to be there to properly staff the machines and ensure 

that everyone is in fact safe. 

 

My question to the minister — he sounded quite concerned 

about the possibility that machines were not being used — is it 

the government’s position that metal detectors in provincial 

courthouses ought to be used every day around the year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we do take courthouse 

security very, very seriously. I mentioned that. And those metal 

detectors are there for a reason. They’re there to protect the 

staff. They’re there to protect the witnesses. They’re there to 

protect everyone that’s coming to and in and out of those 

courthouses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m prepared to look at it. I’m not aware of it, but we will 

certainly raise it. As I say, courthouse security is very serious. 

We take it very seriously. We do audits of the security of the 

courthouses from time to time, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we 

are protecting the people that use those facilities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Provincial courts 

obviously deal with a wide variety of matters. And for issues 

where there’s gangs involved or organized crime, of course 

there needs to be the highest level of security. But it’s just as 

important, Mr. Speaker, to have adequate security at times for 

more routine proceedings. Family law matters, for example, can 

be very emotionally charged. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same 

judges, the same lawyers, the same staff that are working in the 

facilities whether the case is deemed high risk or not. 

 

My question to the Premier: in the upcoming budget, will the 

necessary resources be put in place in order to ensure that we 

have proper security in our provincial courthouses, including 

the full operation of metal detectors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we work with our 

courthouse staff; we work with people that use those facilities 

to ensure that we do have proper security in our courthouses, 

Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said, we take it very, very seriously. When 

issues of security are raised with our ministry, we look at them, 

we analyze them, and we’ll make sure that there’s resources 

available to deal with those things. 

 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we take this issue very, very 

seriously, and we’ll continue to look at the issue to make sure 

that we provide the adequate level of security, not only to staff 

and judges but everyone using those facilities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Lawsuit Regarding Technology Contract 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been 

calling for straight answers and accountability from this 

government and its IPAC [International Performance 

Assessment Centre for geologic storage of CO2] affair for the 

better part of a year. It’s been like pulling teeth and we’ve 

received misleading statements. Conflicts of interest and waste 

have been exposed. Investigations are currently under way by 

the federal government while the Sask Party government sits on 

its hands, denying accountability. 

 

Now today we’ve learned as a result of further investigations 

that the University of Regina is suing two companies over 

rights to carbon capture technology developed through 

partnership with the province as well as provincial, federal, and 

private dollars, taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 

government: when did that government learn of the lawsuit that 

was filed in November of last year by the University of Regina? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — It’s quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 

the members opposite continue to try to spin this tale of 

government involvement when in fact all of the audits that were 

done on IPAC-CO2 demonstrated quite frankly that it was 

under the management of the U of R [University of Regina], as 

is this lawsuit that he mentions, which by the way was a 

contract that was entered into when the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the Meyers Norris Penny 

forensic audit of IPAC-CO2, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote 

some statements because perhaps the member opposite hasn’t 

read it. And it states, Mr. Speaker, “The assets were purchased 

with funds that the University of Regina controlled on behalf of 

IPAC.” “Financial oversight of IPAC was through the 

university industry liaison office.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of more quotes from the forensic audit 

that was done on IPAC-CO2 that clearly identifies that the U of 

R was managing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the question 

was really straightforward. All we need is a direct answer from 

that minister. Did that minister and that government . . . When 

were they aware of the lawsuit that was brought forward in 

November by the University of Regina? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

report to the House that in fact Energy and Resources, starting 

in 1999, gave some funds to the university to look at carbon 

capture, carbon sequestration. The university has become a 

world leader in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that in 2005 the university 

signed a contract with a private sector, Mr. Speaker, to 

commercialize this technology. The government has not been 

involved in this contract or in this relationship in any way, Mr. 

Speaker. My understanding is that on the date put forward by 

the member opposite that the university entered a legal suit 

against the private sector, Mr. Speaker. We do not have any 

interest in this whatsoever. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Again, not answering the question and 

suggesting that government has no interest with the millions of 

public dollars that are at play is awfully interesting. And this 

disturbing information that’s exposed today involving 

taxpayers’ money and some of the same players as the IPAC 

affair . . . In this case, though, it’s not a question of a $600,000 

computer that was paid for with taxpayers’ money and then 

claimed by a private company that was set up by the Sask Party 

with private money as part of the concern in the IPAC affair. 

But the concern is very similar. 

 

In this case the U of R alleges that the carbon technology, the 

intellectual property, was taken inappropriately by two private 

companies, technology that was developed through partnerships 

and provincial dollars, taxpayers’ dollars, public and private. 

When did that minister learn that the companies in question had 

claimed exclusive rights to the carbon capture technologies that 

were paid for in part with taxpayers’ dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, directly to the member 

opposite: the university, a stand-alone, autonomous agency that, 

Mr. Speaker, has entered into an agreement with the private 

sector . . . Just for interest, Mr. Speaker, that arrangement was 

entered into at a time that the NDP was in government. Mr. 

Speaker, it has transpired in a manner that leaves the two parties 

in court. 

 

I again would confirm that the Government of Saskatchewan 

has no standing and is not in any way named in this suit. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that is very clear for the members 

opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Another question and another 

non-answer from that minister, this time relating to when he 

learned that two companies had claimed exclusive rights of the 

technology that had been built together in partnership and with 

taxpayers’ dollars. I guess my question to the minister would 

be, does he share the university’s concern that this technology 

that’s been paid for with taxpayers’ money, and other private 

companies, should not have been claimed exclusively by the 

two private companies in question? 

 



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s questions 

are, as my understanding is, the nature of the lawsuit. And it 

will be the courts that decide the issues of what the university 

and the contract between the university and this private entity 

. . . I will again confirm for the member opposite that this 

contract was entered into and was, Mr. Speaker, was signed 

under a time when their party was the government. Mr. 

Speaker, the nature of that information was defined at that time. 

 

As far as the nature of the lawsuit, there is no standing by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, no involvement by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is just the 

reality of this case. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — There’s a lot of public money that’s 

been involved in this file, and there’s certainly provincial 

dollars. There’s a role and responsibility of that government to 

investigate and make sure that those dollars are being utilized in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people. In this case, a lot of 

the same players exist that exist in the IPAC affair. 

 

To the minister: does the government have concerns over 

taxpayers’ money that’s public money that’s on the line in this 

lawsuit, and if so what’s he doing about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, we have gone through 

this a couple of times. If the member opposite is concerned 

about whether the university should commercialize technology, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a fair argument. But the reality is that they 

commercialized it under a contract in 2005 when those 

members, Mr. Speaker, were the party in government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the simple fact is the university is an 

autonomous agency that enters into contracts on a regular basis 

and, Mr. Speaker, in this case it has found its way into the 

courts. The Government of Saskatchewan is not involved in this 

lawsuit, Mr. Speaker, with standing or with interest in any 

particular form. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Federal Rail Freight Service Bill 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The federal 

government is finally considering Bill C-52, the fair rail rate 

service Act, a bill meant to strike a fair balance between 

shippers and the railways, but as drafted has potential to 

damage Western Canadian shippers. 

 

Currently farmers, forestry, and mining companies are suffering 

because railway companies have a virtual monopoly when it 

comes to the vital rail lines that Canadians need to get goods to 

market. There needs to be better power balance between the 

shippers and the railways because agricultural rail customers’ 

needs are not met by the rail companies with the current status 

quo. But the proposed bill doesn’t get to the heart of the 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Agriculture update the House 

on where this government stands on this bill and whether it is 

supporting the shippers and their concerns. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

And I thank the member for her question. 

 

Truthfully, you know, these days we haven’t heard a lot of 

feedback from producers on this particular point. But we are 

interested and working with the federal government to get the 

best deal that we can for Western Canadian producers. And we, 

while we don’t always agree with the federal government, we 

do have a working relationship that’s constructive. And I think 

some good news will come out of this. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At first glance, the 

bill looked like it would be positive for shippers because it 

recognized the market dominance that the railways have in the 

provinces. But the more shippers see what changes have been 

made to the bill, the more they see how the railways seem to be 

pulling the power strings to get the changes they want. Now 

indeed the railways themselves are arguing against the bill in 

general. 

 

One of those big changes that will affect Saskatchewan 

producers and that will be detrimental is the introduction of a 

captivity test. The test is for shippers to prove they are stranded, 

away from options for shipping their goods. The shipper would 

have to go through an onerous process to get protection under 

this proposed legislation, which will lead to the shippers being 

worse off. 

 

The shippers have proposed amendments to fix several of the 

problems in this bill. What is the Minister of Agriculture and 

the Government of Saskatchewan doing to persuade the federal 

government to support these amendments and take the proposed 

captivity test out of the proposed legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member. Our officials have certainly been in contact with the 

federal government on this matter. And you know, while the 

proposed bill may not be perfect, we think that it’s generally an 

improvement over what has existed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with the grain 

shippers, the Mining Association of Canada and the Forest 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

Products Association of Canada have also submitted 

amendments to the bill. And they represent the largest 

customers of the national railways: our producers and our 

miners and our foresters. 

 

They see the bill needs amendment in the way it defines the 

service obligations the railways have. Mr. Speaker, these 

concerns echo those of the Coalition of Rail Shippers who want 

to see the railway companies fulfill their service obligations on 

time and transparently, which is costing producers millions of 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province needs to stand up for the interests of 

our shippers and our producers and the economic development 

of our mining industry. Even SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] has weighed in about 

fairness and, in the arbitration costs, the way the provisions are 

now written. The bill needs to have better protections for 

shippers against the duopoly that exists in Canada’s rail system. 

What will the Sask Party government be doing to correct the 

shortcomings of the bill before it gets full-speed approval by the 

federal government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

continue to assure the member that our government and 

certainly, certainly officials from Agriculture are doing all that 

we can to influence Ottawa, to the federal government, to bring 

forward the best possible legislation in the interests of our 

producers. And you know, it’s a negotiation and it’s . . . We’re 

dealing with the federal government and trying to get the best 

deal we can for our shippers. And we don’t how that’s going to 

play out. There is proposed legislation but it may be plenty of 

time for changes yet. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know the bill has 

already received second reading and we know that the 

committee hearings are under way. In fact most of the hearings 

have already been completed, when they’ve heard from the 

shippers and the railways. But the problem is, is the key 

demands from the shipping community have quite simply not 

been addressed. 

 

Bill C-52 creates loopholes because of its ambiguous language. 

The conservative language is weak. Its protective measures do 

not cover existing contracts between shippers and rail 

companies and offers only a narrow, costly arbitration process 

for failed negotiations for new contracts. 

 

Does the minister support this legislation? Will he support the 

amendments being made? We want to see your support for the 

amendments being made at the committee stage to protect 

shippers from the abuse of market power through the right to 

comprehensive service agreements and conflict resolution 

processes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — While the proposed legislation is not 

perfect, Mr. Speaker, we believe that at least in the interests of 

agriculture and probably other shippers in the province, that it’s 

an improvement over what has existed in the past. I can say that 

we have had no representations from agricultural groups made 

to me or my officials about the inadequacies of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Prince Albert Bridge 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

week the province brings down its budget, and the people of 

Prince Albert are looking for one specific commitment on 

Wednesday. They want to know if the province will build a 

second bridge for the city and the region. 

 

Remember, Mr. Speaker, the P.A. [Prince Albert] Chamber of 

Commerce, the RMs [rural municipality], the city council, and 

the people who live in and around Prince Albert all know that a 

second bridge is the top priority for the infrastructure needs of 

the city. It’s number one. 

 

The Sask Party government has totally ignored the build a 

second bridge campaign from the people of P.A. On budget day 

will the Premier finally listen? Will he and they commit to a 

second bridge for Prince Albert in this year’s budget, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered this 

question a number of times, not only in this Assembly but also 

in the SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

gathering. 

 

A study was done, a study that was commissioned by the RMs 

and the city of Prince Albert as well as the Ministry of 

Highways, Mr. Speaker. The city and the RMs put a total of 

$40,000 into this study. The study came back and it was quite 

strong on saying that a second bridge is not needed in the Prince 

Albert area right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting because this is not an 

anomaly. This study also coincides with a study that was done 

under the NDP in 2008, Mr. Speaker. In 2008 a study was done 

by the NDP that said a bridge was not needed at that time — 

same as the study that’s done right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting the members opposite are 

saying we need another bridge. Mr. Speaker, if we go through 

their campaign, if we go through their platform, if we go 

through their platform, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see that they’ve got a 

tree, and it doesn’t talk about forestry. Mr. Speaker, that same 

document should have a bridge because their platform didn’t 

talk about a bridge either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, with the province walking 

away from a second bridge, the P.A. City Council is looking at 

how much life is left in the Diefenbaker bridge. On Saturday 

the city staff requested $45,000 from council to study how 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

much life is left in the bridge’s piers. City Councillor Ring 

wants to have the province pay for that study. And the local 

paper quoted Councillor Cotterill saying, and I quote: “I like the 

idea of going back to the minister and saying, ‘you told us it’s a 

good bridge, prove it.’” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the minister’s response to the poor 

relationship that he’s developed with the P.A. City Council? 

How has he let it come to this point, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that over the 

last year or so this government has stepped forward and taken 

over responsibility for that bridge to the tune of about $4.2 

million. Mr. Speaker, we don’t have to go too many years back 

when the NDP were in power and they simply washed their 

hands of responsibility. They wouldn’t take responsibility, Mr. 

Speaker, not whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a standard across Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

that we follow through on that kind of dictates as to whether the 

piers should be further inspected. We don’t have those 

conditions on the P.A. bridge right now, Mr. Speaker. In fact 

there are two, really, areas that we have to see. The bridge has 

to settle. There has to be settlement on the bridge, Mr. Speaker, 

or excessive, extreme excessive water flow. Those conditions 

haven’t presented themselves over the last two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting because one of the councillors in 

Prince Albert, Don Cody, was the mayor for many years, for 

nine years, Mr. Speaker. They felt the bridge was perfectly safe 

then. We believe the bridge is perfectly safe now because these 

conditions have not been met. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Saskatchewan 

Party government wouldn’t listen to its own members when it 

came to keeping the burn treatment chamber in the new Moose 

Jaw Hospital. And now the Minister of Highways once again 

turns his back on the two members from Prince Albert who 

once claimed they were lobbying to build a second bridge, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The city of P.A. wants the province to pay for this new study 

because they want the Saskatchewan Party government to prove 

it’s safe to the people in the region. If the minister won’t listen 

to his own MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], he 

should listen to the business community, the city council, the 

RMs, and the citizens of Prince Albert when he tables his 

budget. Mr. Speaker, once again, to the minister: will he build a 

second bridge for Prince Albert? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we believe that bridge is 

safe. We go by the expertise of engineers in the area, Mr. 

Speaker, and we have no doubt that that bridge is safe well into 

the future. I would say that it could be questionable if the NDP 

ever got back in power. When there were repairs to be done, 

they completely backed away from it, Mr. Speaker. That isn’t 

what this government does. It has assumed responsibility, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I will tell you that the P.A. members have done a great job 

for the P.A. area — on revenue sharing alone, 149 per cent 

increase. That’s what they delivered for the P.A. area, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those MLAs have delivered a new gym 

at the Carlton Comprehensive High, Mr. Speaker, something 

that those members never did. Mr. Speaker, these members 

have also contributed and lobbied hard for a water treatment 

plant in the P.A. area, an alcohol rehab facility in the P.A. area, 

Mr. Speaker. These MLAs have done more for the P.A. area 

than the members on the opposite side when they served in 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that the 

Saskatchewan Party government is turning their backs to the 

region and the city of Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, the two 

members of Prince Albert refuse to stand up for their 

community. Even after they campaigned on the need for a 

second bridge, they don’t bring those concerns to this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Yet the Saskatchewan Party campaigns 

on the bridge and takes donations and gives great speeches 

about the bridge, all to lead the city down the garden path. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why can’t the Saskatchewan Party get with the 

program, commit to a second bridge in this budget? Why can’t 

they do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have a long list of 

accomplishments by these MLAs, Mr. Speaker, over the last 

number of years. Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the water treatment 

plant, whether it’s capital funding for a family addiction centre, 

whether it’s construction beginning on a youth addiction centre, 

whether it’s affordable rental accommodations — 36 

low-income families, Mr. Speaker — St. Ann’s long-term care 

replacement facility: that’s what these MLAs have been 

lobbying for over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, and 

they have done a very good job for the P.A. area. 

 

I find it really, really curious, though, that the new leader wrote 

a platform . . . This is a glowing platform of the direction and 

the vision of the NDP, but it forgot one thing, Mr. Speaker. It 

forgot a second bridge for P.A. In fact, as I said last week, Mr. 

Speaker, they couldn’t build a second bridge because they 

couldn’t even fix the one they had. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave to make a motion regarding attendance at a CPA 

[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] convention. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a motion regarding the Commonwealth 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

Parliamentary Association. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley and Saskatchewan Rivers for 

Wednesday, March 20th and Thursday, March 21st, 

inclusive, to attend the Commonwealth Women 

Parliamentarians outreach program in Quebec on behalf of 

this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley and Saskatchewan Rivers for 

Wednesday, March 20th and Thursday, March 21st, 

inclusive, to attend the Commonwealth Women’s 

Parliamentary outreach program in Quebec on behalf of 

this Assembly. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 85 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate on a bill that’s actually of significant 

importance, great importance to the people of this province: Bill 

No. 85, a bill that’s been pushed forward with the heavy hand 

of government, with selective hearing being exercised by 

government opposite, with the interests of workers and families 

and communities denied, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I find it to be important to enter into debate and discussion 

for a short period of time in this Assembly. But the important 

work is going to continue across this province with our 

opposition working with the workers of this province, with 

communities across this province, with the work of our critic 

leading that work. The points that our critic’s going to be 

bringing to the floor of this Assembly, but also the questions 

and the points he’ll be bringing to committee structures, are 

going to be the key aspects of this discussion. But it certainly is 

of value to me to enter this debate and discussion at this point in 

time. 

 

What we’re looking at here is a significant, a massive overhaul 

of labour legislation in this province, legislation that impacts 

the safety and rights of workers all through this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and an overhaul that was done without adequate 

consultation, without . . . It’s improper to call what was done 

consultation at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to commend the many thousands of Saskatchewan 

people, workers, organizations, unions, businesses, 

communities that have come out and had their say, Mr. Speaker, 

through this process, and have done so using the official 

opposition as the vehicle to bring forward those concerns, those 

potential areas to strength.  

 

And I commend our critic, the member for Saskatoon Centre, 

who set out a structure called your work, your say, Mr. Speaker, 

and who out of frustration that the voice of Saskatchewan 

people was being denied on something so important to him, that 

we as an opposition undertook a process to listen all across this 

entire province to the workers, to the families who were 

impacted by the legislative changes being proposed by this 

government. 

 

It was an extensive tour that was held. I attended all but one of 

those sessions, Mr. Speaker, in all parts of Saskatchewan. And 

what I heard from Saskatchewan workers and in Saskatchewan 

communities, whether it be North Battleford or Humboldt or 

Yorkton or Regina or Saskatoon, was a common sense voice of 

workers who care deeply about their province and who care 

deeply about their employment terms — the conditions that will 

allow their families to prosper, the conditions that will allow the 

safety that they deserve, Mr. Speaker, the conditions that will 

ensure that workers have rights in Saskatchewan. 

 

We see this massive overhaul taking 12 pieces of labour 

legislation, overhauling that, fitting it into one massive bill, 

over a 1,000-page piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. We see this 

all coming on the heels of legislation that was rammed forward 

by this government earlier, that’s now been proven to be 

unconstitutional by the courts here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is sort of a very sad circumstance for our 

province that once had a proud record of being a leader in 

setting terms, in setting workers’ rights, Mr. Speaker, setting 

rights for labour organizations and roles, and that balance that 

we know is so important in a society where you can build out a 

strong economy but also the protections and rights for workers. 

 

Here we see a government that pushed forward with legislation, 

as I say, in their first term that’s still on the books as 

unconstitutional, Mr. Speaker. And if you can imagine in this 

massive overhaul, Mr. Speaker, that government didn’t even 

address the fact that we have unconstitutional legislation on our 

books. It makes an international embarrassment for our 

province, but certainly, more importantly, it has walked 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

backwards workers’ rights here in this province. 

 

Now Saskatchewan people are starting to wake up to what’s 

going on under this government and the agenda they have that 

doesn’t include the working men and women of this province 

and the approach that has disrupted a balanced labour 

environment in this province. When we’re looking at the 

upsetting of that balance, I guess we don’t need to look far 

beyond the actual 12 pieces of legislation rolled into one in this 

massive overhaul without any listening to Saskatchewan 

people, with selective hearing to a few friends and insiders, I 

suspect, Mr. Speaker.  

 

But we also know that it reflects the approach of this 

government on so many fronts — no consultation. We see that 

through this process where, I think, last summer, in the heart of 

summer they opened up a little tab on a website and said they’re 

taking submissions electronically from people of this province 

as it relates to labour laws. And now that’s being sold as this 

government has a sufficient consultation with the working men 

and women of this province. And of course, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

utter nonsense. 

 

When we look as well at all of the opportunities to make 

changes or to address this, this government hasn’t slowed down. 

And it seems crystal clear now that this government’s 

bulldozing ahead with this piece of legislation just as they did, 

Mr. Speaker, when they pushed forward legislation that was 

found to be unconstitutional, that took away workers’ rights, 

that certainly cost Saskatchewan people many public dollars, 

taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the rushed 

environment, the poor legislative structure that was pushed 

forward by that government. 

 

And we see even when the minister brings in a few advisors and 

sets up a committee, Mr. Speaker, he pretends he’s going to 

listen to them, Mr. Speaker. Then we see when those committee 

members have actually said, members of his own committee, 

Mr. Speaker, have said, you’re pushing this ahead too fast. The 

changes are too sweeping and too significant. You need to slow 

down. You need to rethink this. You need to pull this legislation 

back and do this the way that you need to, which is in concert 

with Saskatchewan people, listening to Saskatchewan people, 

all of the province Mr. Speaker. This government continues to 

ram forward with their own agenda, listening to few. 

 

We also see a government that’s intent on creating divisions 

and upsetting labour relations in this province. We saw that 

when they rammed forward Bill 80, Mr. Speaker — something 

that hasn’t been addressed in this piece of legislation — 

rammed forward Bill 80 that has significant risk to upsetting the 

construction industry itself, the important aspects of our 

economy, but also undermining the skills within that industry, 

the protection, the safety in that industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see that all again here, where we see provisions, Mr. 

Speaker, that are put forward in a very deliberate way to simply 

hive out members of a union or a bargaining unit and to create 

division and separateness between workplaces, when what we 

should be doing is working together to find better solutions 

about how we address these challenges. It is creating a fractious 

environment in workplaces. 

 

And there’s so many questions that exist as it relates to 

provisions around supervisorial responsibilities that have been 

put forward by this government in what that actually, what that 

actually means in practicality once this bill is pushed forward 

and implemented, and how this government will, in essence, 

give significant control to itself as an employer and to other 

employers to peel out or hive out union members from their 

environment. 

 

And certainly as I say, this legislation doesn’t do anything to fix 

the gaping hole that is the unconstitutional legislation that’s on 

our books, that legislation that was pushed forward in the first 

term by that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I say, a massive, a massive overhaul — something that 

once this government pretended was going to be a 

simplification, Mr. Speaker. That has pretty much been 

debunked by all that have analyzed it as nothing more than a 

more complex environment and an environment that’s pushed 

forward that creates division in our workplaces, Mr. Speaker, 

that has a direct impact on the ability of workers to organize 

and workers to ensure that rights are protected and a 

government that’s intent on certainly driving an agenda that’s 

not in the best interests of the families all across this province, 

the working men and women in communities across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What we know is, and when I went out and we had the chance 

to listen where our critic held the your work, your say 

consultations, Mr. Speaker, something that was interesting to 

note was the constructive approach that workers and families 

were willing to take to consultation. And had government been 

sincere in any interest of consultation, there would have been a 

tremendous opportunity to speak with the workers and families 

all across this province and to seek circumstances that could 

have been improved. Instead we see, as I say, a government 

with selective hearing that’s done nothing more than advancing 

its own agenda. 

 

But I will say to the hundreds of workers that did connect, with 

putting forward their ideas about how to strengthen workers’ 

rights, about how to protect their livelihoods or abilities to seek 

a livelihood, Mr. Speaker, I say thank you to those individuals. 

And whether it was a health care worker up in North Battleford 

or a construction worker here in Regina or a potash worker up 

in Humboldt that took time out of their busy lives on a weekday 

evening to come out and participate in the your work, your say 

consultation, I say thank you to those individuals. And they 

need to know that their contributions have been valued by the 

official opposition, that their voices will be carried forward by 

the official opposition, and that those voices, those inputs 

certainly form the positions that we’ll be bringing forward, both 

in the Assembly here by way of our critic but also in the 

committee structures where we’re looking for opportunities to 

improve workers’ rights. 

 

And you know, I guess it’s very problematic to even look at 

how do we potentially strengthen or amend this legislation. I’ve 

sat down with legal experts who have dissected this information 

who have said really this is quite impossible to amend this 

legislation because there’s so many changes, sweeping changes 

where there’s words and clauses that have been completely 

removed, Mr. Speaker, that had in the past established 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2737 

jurisprudence and allowed individuals and employers to have a 

clear understanding of case law. All of that has now changed; 

so much of it removed. So to be able to go and amend 

something that has omissions, that has subtractions, that has 

changes, is awfully difficult, and something that, as I say, is 

pushed forward with this 1,000-page bill, Mr. Speaker, with no 

consultation with Saskatchewan people and with little 

understanding of the legal impacts as well. 

 

And that’s one of the concerns of taxpayers as well. It’s not just 

that rights have been walked backwards under this government 

— that certainly is a large concern — but also the fact that this 

government seems to be willing to go to no end to push forward 

legislation that hasn’t been derived in a fashion that allows it to 

have the scrutiny that it allows to understand both its intended 

consequences and its unintended consequences and cost, not 

just on people but then on taxpayers. And we’ve seen that with 

the expensive, expensive process caused by the ramming 

forward of Bill 5, of, as I say, a piece of legislation that still sits 

on our books in this province as unconstitutional and a piece of 

legislation that wasn’t addressed in this major overhaul that has 

been brought forward by this government. 

 

We see a government that is sort of taking . . . We have a lot of 

good economic activity going on in our province, and in fact 

many workers in certain sectors are quite busy. And it seems 

that this government is almost taking advantage of that 

circumstance to walk backwards the rights that have been hard 

won, hard fought, hard-earned by working men and women all 

across this province. And it’s something that’s important for us 

to take a strong stand and for us to be able to represent all of 

Saskatchewan and certainly all of Saskatchewan families. 

 

We see a government that’s certainly intent on this idea of the 

right to work for less, Mr. Speaker: the right to work for less, 

the right to less protection, the right to less security, Mr. 

Speaker, for themselves by way of safety for themselves and 

their families by way of their livelihood and their earnings, Mr. 

Speaker, and that instead of simple, basic terms of fairness that 

would be the right to collective bargaining, Mr. Speaker, 

something that creates strength in our province, that creates a 

stronger position for families, allows circumstances of 

workplace safety but also the earnings of a family to be 

addressed. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And certainly I’m a believer that in a prosperous province, 

Saskatchewan families and the workers deserve to share in that 

prosperity. And I find it wrong that this government is actively 

intervening at a time of opportunity within this province and 

denying Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan workers, 

Saskatchewan people the opportunity to share in that prosperity, 

Mr. Speaker, which is, in the end, the intent of this legislation, 

creating an unsettled environment between workers in the job 

place and colleagues, creating an unsettled environment 

between business and labour when what we need to be finding 

is a more constructive, more balanced, more co-operative way 

forward in working with the challenges that exist. 

 

So it’s fair to say that in Bill 85 there’s going to be a lot of 

scrutiny that’s brought forward by our critic, and certainly our 

critic’s been asking questions and listening to people all through 

the province. You’re going to hear those on the floor of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. You’re also going to hear those 

through the committee structure. We’re going to be looking for 

— finally, Mr. Speaker — some straight answers from that 

government, a government that certainly hasn’t been 

forthcoming with the answers that have been brought forward 

by our critic and brought forward by working men and women, 

brought forward by labour organizations and unions, brought 

forward by businesses, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be seeking those 

sorts of answers to their questions, Mr. Speaker, along with our 

own. 

 

I know that in this 1,000-page piece of legislation that’s been 

rammed forward without consultation, it’s fair to say that the 

devil is certainly in the details. And it seems that the more 

analysis by legal experts, by workers, Mr. Speaker, continue to 

expose other aspects of this legislation that’s of great concern to 

the people of our province, Mr. Speaker, and of great concern to 

this opposition. 

 

We see, we believe in taking a strong, balanced, common sense 

approach to deriving legislation. We believe in building labour 

laws that are fair and necessary and built through consultation, 

Mr. Speaker, not ones that have been built, as I say, through a 

one-sided process, a one-sided agenda from a government with 

selective hearing and really listening to the very few, Mr. 

Speaker, and those few being insiders of this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have concern around the shifts of rights that have tilted this 

balance in an unfair way to that of the employer, Mr. Speaker. 

We believe in a balanced labour environment where workers 

have rights, where workers have levers and tools as well to 

make sure their interests are heard. 

 

Have significant concerns over what’s occurred by way of 

supervisors, where there’s deliberate actions of this government 

to hive out members from bargaining units to weaken the union 

or weaken the bargaining unit, Mr. Speaker. And certainly an 

environment that’s brought forward by this government that is 

more than subject to manipulation and games by the employer, 

and that employer in this case being the provincial government, 

Mr. Speaker, for many in this province. 

 

I know I’ve chatted with many firefighters across this province 

and communities across this province that are hugely concerned 

with the complete scrapping of the historic platoon Act, Mr. 

Speaker, and something that has provided rights to those, to our 

firefighters for many years, Mr. Speaker. It’s provided them 

tools of fairness in the workplace and certainly workers, not 

unlike all other workers, Mr. Speaker, that fulfill a very 

important good to the people of this province. 

 

And when I sit down and I chat with the firefighters across this 

province who are telling me that that there was absolutely no 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, as this bill was pushed forward, as 

their piece of legislation was scrapped, that dismissive 

approach, disrespectful approach of government is something 

that those firefighters are certainly calling out that government 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know and I think in the Regina Fire Department is just 

one example. It’s about 25 per cent of the firefighters who in 



2738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

fact have supervisory responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. So out of 

200, as example, of firefighters, 25 per cent or a whole 50 of 

those would have supervisory responsibilities, including 

captains, Mr. Speaker. And these firefighters have described to 

me that peeling out these individuals with some additional 

duties or those of the captains from the role that they were as an 

equal member, as a firefighter, Mr. Speaker, is very destructive 

for their workplace, a workplace that requires a sense of unity 

and equality in dealing with circumstances that place 

themselves and their lives at risk, and are there in response to 

the lives of others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly this isn’t in the best interest of Saskatchewan 

people, whether you look at it from a perspective of community 

safety and the public safety that’s provided by firefighters, Mr. 

Speaker, or whether it’s the firefighters themselves. Those are 

hard-working individuals that put their lives on the line every 

day for the good of the public. And having that undermined by 

way of creating a more divisive workplace, one that has less 

unity, and one with . . . where a government is making changes 

that impacts their safety, their livelihood, their ability to 

collective bargain, the rights that they have, Mr. Speaker, the 

protections that they have, and doing so with no consultation. 

 

Now I know I can identify as well in the field of education the 

value of equal membership within the STF [Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation] for example. And I understand this 

government’s not making that change right now. It’s one of the 

only changes they’re not making, where a principal or a 

vice-principal is an equal member of the STF. That is 

something of value that, within education, of that level of 

equality, that level of unity, that sense of cohesion, that level of 

understanding, that sense of sameness by way of an equal 

member. And I wonder why this government thinks, why it 

should be different for other workers, particular firefighters, and 

also all the civil servants and workers through this province. 

 

And I think of the health care sector, Mr. Speaker, where I’m 

hearing from health care workers that you might have a simple, 

additional responsibility that would then put you into a 

supervisorial category that this government can then peel 

somebody out of that bargaining unit, weaken the worker’s 

organization, weaken the environment for workers to represent 

their best interests. So fair to say, I’ve got many, many 

concerns, and that is just one aspect that we’ve identified. 

 

There’s also concerns to overtime and the days, the statutory 

holidays, and concerns around regulations that are now in place 

where this legislation goes and shifts a lot of what was 

enshrined in legislation and shifts it into regulation, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is really, really undemocratic. Not only is it 

not democratic to not consult, it’s also not democratic to be 

peeling out important protections, important rights of workers 

that have been enshrined in legislation, to be sticking them into 

regulations that can be changed at the whim and whimsy of 

government and without the direct discussion and debate on the 

floor of this Assembly. And a government that has been 

unwilling to consult with workers when they’ve even brought 

legislation forward, you can understand why so many workers 

are concerned with this shift to regulations. 

 

I know there’s many that are concerned about how the new shift 

structures occur and what the impact may be on the elimination 

of overtime. And I know many workers and organizations are 

doing analysis on this front. I know that I hear from some 

workers and organizations that are very concerned about the 

undemocratic nature of voluntary recognition and the new 

changes that have been brought forward. And these are all 

concerns that should’ve been heard through a consultative 

process before legislation was ever derived or built. And 

certainly it’s disappointing that this government continues to 

thumb their nose at the workers of this province and push 

forward this legislative environment or this agenda. 

 

As I say, this is 12 pieces of legislation that have been 

overhauled, everything from The Assignment of Wages Act to 

The Fire Departments Platoon Act, as I’ve mentioned, to The 

Labour Standards Act to The Trade Union Act. Mr. Speaker, 

something that was a first in this province, something that we 

were so proud of, Mr. Speaker, and something that in its 

language itself, the very language, The Trade Union Act was all 

about rights, Mr. Speaker. And now we see that shift, and we 

see those changes. 

 

And you know, when we’re talking about the changes, the 

changes in many cases are change in language, in many cases 

omissions of language, simple removal of language, and 

reframing our labour legislative environment which, as I’ve 

said, really confuses the case law environment. Mr. Speaker, 

that removes the ability to work effectively with jurisprudence, 

Mr. Speaker, with precedents that have been set through the 

courts, and creates a very unmanageable environment for 

workers, for employers, a more complex environment, one that 

certainly takes away workers’ rights. 

 

As I’ve mentioned, I’m pleased that we’ve been able to give the 

chance to give voice to workers. What’s disappointing though is 

that, you know, we’ve had a government that’s been unwilling 

to listen to that voice. They’re unwilling to listen to workers in 

the first place. But even when our critic went across this 

province along with his caucus colleagues and, as I say, 

attended all but one of those consultations and the productive, 

constructive approach that was brought forward by workers, 

that voice has been denied, has never been listened to by this 

government. 

 

And there’s a very important role to protect workers, to protect 

vulnerable workers. That’s something that could have been 

strengthened through this legislation, something that never 

occurred. In fact this rolls back measures, rolls back 

protections. And I think of an example being young workers 

that are out there working in, many cases, precarious 

environments with their full futures before them, Mr. Speaker. 

We need to make sure we’re doing all we can to protect those 

young workers, not walking back the protections that they have, 

making sure that they can earn the living they need to for 

training or for raising a family or getting started in life and able 

to be safe and secure, to be able to have that full, bright future 

ahead of them that we speak about. 

 

It also doesn’t address non-standard work situations, 

circumstances such as artists, Mr. Speaker, and a real missed 

opportunity to show great value to some of those non-traditional 

workers in this province, some of those non-traditional careers 

in this province. And that’s disappointing. And you know, we 

think of the Sask Arts Alliance, Mr. Speaker, and this is 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2739 

something where there was an opportunity to show some 

leadership and make some improvements, something that 

government didn’t have any interest in. 

 

We see the ability to work towards making sure that we have 

increased participation of low-income mothers in the workplace 

and making sure the supports are in place to really support that 

balance of being able to raise that family, earn that living 

through the hard work that Saskatchewan people certainly know 

how to do, and make sure that they have some support and 

protections while doing so. 

 

So these are really big changes with little consultation. It 

reminds me a bit of the federal cousins of this government, the 

Harper Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, who continue to push 

forward omnibus legislation, Mr. Speaker, that has massive 

changes and overhauls to all sorts of Acts and provisions 

without consultation with the people of Canada. In this case, 

massive overhaul, massive impacts for the workers of this 

province, impact on our economy, Mr. Speaker, in a negative 

way with little to no consultation with those throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when I think of some of the other areas that we had the 

opportunity to strengthen through this, or the government does 

on a day in, day out basis, where I think of that labour force 

here in Saskatchewan and the ability to make sure we’re 

strengthening circumstances for apprenticeship and for the entry 

of workers into the trades for example, Mr. Speaker, and the 

headway we should be able to be making, and making sure that 

we’re unlocking the human potential in this province and able 

to serve the needs of our full economy as well while doing so, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think of good, new projects like K+S 

Potash, Mr. Speaker, for which we need to make sure that we’re 

supportive of making sure we have the workers in place to 

address those circumstances. 

 

And I get, you know, and I get heckled by government opposite 

and on an issue that’s important, Mr. Speaker. When you look 

at the circumstance of addressing the skilled labour force 

challenge that is faced in this province, we should be taking 

steps to be addressing that, understanding that for our potash 

companies, for our construction industry, we need to do a better 

job of preparing the next generation to be entering into those 

careers and fulfilling the roles needed in those companies but 

also being able to build out a livelihood for themselves and their 

families, Mr. Speaker, deriving a quality of life that’s second to 

none, something we’ve been so proud of in Saskatchewan. And 

we need to do frankly a better job, a much better job of 

preparing skilled trades in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many changes that we see here . . . As I say, this shift to . . . 

Maybe the Premier wants to keep heckling, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

nice to have him back in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

There’s many, there’s many shifts from, many shifts from 

which were in legislation to regulations, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s a concern to Saskatchewan people because they can be 

changed, as I say, on the whim of government as opposed to 

through thoughtful consultation. 

 

And we are going to continue to work toward making sure 

we’re bringing forward balanced working environments that 

respect workers’ rights, that protects important provisions such 

as overtime, Mr. Speaker, making sure that families have the 

balance that they require and to make sure that overtime is 

something that is earned, accrued, and maintained by workers. 

 

We see an approach that’s one of a divisive way of going about 

building an economy, a divisive way of dealing with labour 

force needs. We see a fragmentation of bargaining units, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s all disappointing. And we see a government 

that’s failed to fix the mess they created with the 

unconstitutional legislation that they had brought forward. We 

believe there’s a chance to bring forward common sense 

changes. We believe there’s a chance to support work such as 

indexation of minimum wage and making sure decency of 

payment for workers. 

 

We need to make sure that we’re making these steps. And I 

know that the member from Saskatoon Centre has made some 

solid points that I think need to be heard. And some of those 

points are simply that this government . . . We shouldn’t be 

caught up in a circumstance now where we’re forcing 

Saskatchewan people to try to amend legislation that, legislation 

that’s been rammed forward by this government, Mr. Speaker, 

legislation that really can’t be fixed. We should be able to start 

over this process. We should have a government withdrawing 

this legislation, legislation that has a direct impact on 

Saskatchewan people and making sure that those workers are 

there from the get-go and that all of Saskatchewan’s engaged in 

those discussions. 

 

We also believe that we should have a new value placed on 

balance, Mr. Speaker. A government that’s pushed forward 

changes that are slanted and tilted away from the interests of 

workers, Mr. Speaker, and that’s in no one’s interest to deny 

Saskatchewan people the accountability that they deserve. 

 

We’d suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this government shouldn’t 

change the eight-hour workday or the 40-hour workweek, Mr. 

Speaker, that we believe this is something that’s built the kind 

of quality of life that we’ve come to appreciate and value in 

Saskatchewan. And we don’t want to walk that quality of life 

back either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We believe that sick time for all employees is something that’s 

important, making sure basic provisions of fairness exist, and 

that we should be leaving the rules of overtime the same, not 

pushing forward changes, Mr. Speaker and as I say, not pushing 

forward changes that cause the ability or create the ability for 

government to make significant changes to the rights of 

workers, not through legislation, but simply by quick change, 

stroke of a pen, Mr. Speaker, by way of regulation. We believe 

workers’ rights are something that, if they’re going to be 

changed, should be given full scrutiny and debate of this 

Assembly, and it’s of concern to see a shift away from that 

approach. 

 

We continue to support, in this province, an economy that’s 

built, a strong economy that’s built out of middle-class families 

doing well, Mr. Speaker, where you have a thriving private and 

Crown sector, Mr. Speaker, but where workers have rights as 

well and where, at a time of tremendous opportunity in this 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

province, we allow families as well to realize that potential to 

see meaningful improvements in their lives as well. And 

certainly the kinds of, the type of legislation and agenda of this 

government is denying families that here today, but certainly 

well into the future, and walking backwards at a time of good 

economic activity in this province where many workers are 

busy, walking backwards the rights that have been hard won. 

 

We certainly believe in making sure that keeping the mandatory 

collection of union dues is something that’s important and 

really making sure that members themselves of a respective 

union have the democratic rights that they should have. 

 

And certainly applying the principles of the Rand formula, Mr. 

Speaker, that is . . . It’s a concern by many that this government 

was going to challenge the Rand formula, Mr. Speaker. Now 

they haven’t in essence done that in this legislation. But the 

concern is that possibly their federal cousins are going to do 

that work for them, Mr. Speaker, and working together really in 

a hand-in-hand way that’s not there for Saskatchewan families, 

not there for workers. And certainly I can understand why 

Saskatchewan people are calling out this government for its 

heavy-handed approach to the rights and safeties they’ve been 

afforded. 

 

So we believe in an important discussion with workers and with 

all within our communities and all within that environment, 

whether it be workers, whether it be employers, to derive 

legislation. We believe that legislation should be built in a fair 

manner, in a consultative fashion, and necessary, Mr. Speaker, 

not unnecessary changes pushed forward by this government at 

the taxpayers’ expense, and then in the circumstance of Bill 5, 

as an example, pushed forward in a reckless way — a piece of 

legislation that’s now been ruled unconstitutional here in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, denying Saskatchewan people the rights, 

the fair rights to collective bargaining, something that’s so 

important to workers and important to our economy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as I said before, we need to do a better job of prioritizing 

skills training in this province, supporting apprenticeship, 

unlocking the potential of all workers, certainly our Aboriginal 

population, our First Nations and Métis in this province, but all 

workers, Mr. Speaker, and making sure that that next generation 

is able to take those steps into meaningful employment and 

careers and that our economy certainly will be stronger for it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know Eric Howe, out of the University of Saskatchewan, has 

put forward some important work on this front that talks about 

closing the unacceptable educational gap between non-First 

Nations and First Nations students, Mr. Speaker. And what 

that’s worth to the province just from an economic perspective 

has been suggested to be 90 . . . or quantified to be $80 billion 

to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, something that’s 

massive by way of economic opportunity for all, something that 

we need to be addressing, and something that he’s also 

suggested would save the province of Saskatchewan $90 billion 

of expenditure into areas where we pay for poor health or where 

we pay for incarceration or where we pay for addictions or 

where we pay for court costs, Mr. Speaker. So an $80 billion 

boon to the economy, a $90 billion reduction in expenditure of 

government able to allocate those resources in other places, not 

to mention it’s simply the right thing to do, providing that level 

of fairness and extending opportunity to young people and to 

families all across this province regardless of ethnicity, 

regardless of race, regardless of where they come from, Mr. 

Speaker. And these are the kinds of provisions we’re going to 

continue to call for. 

 

I’d like to thank at this point the thousands of people and 

workers and organizations and businesses that have connected 

with the official opposition to share their thoughts as it relates 

to this piece of legislation, whether it was someone who came 

out to make a presentation in North Battleford, whether there 

was an organization that put together an analysis and put that 

into our hands to provide a legal understanding of the rights and 

how they’re impacted as to their specific members or workers 

or employees, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s some of the 

discussions that we’re going to continue to count on. 

 

And I know we’ll be counting on the strength of all 

Saskatchewan people and workers to bring forward the voice 

that we must on this file. I know, I look forward to the speech 

from our critic on the floor of this Assembly. And I look 

forward to the questions that we’re going to be able to bring 

forward on behalf of Saskatchewan people through the 

committee structure as it relates to this piece of legislation that 

represents a massive overhaul of rights, protections, fairness 

that’s been hard won, hard earned by Saskatchewan people. 

And we’ll certainly do all we can to be that voice of fairness for 

all through this process. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I certainly have a lot more to 

say on this legislation, and certainly I look forward to seeking 

many more questions through this legislative process. Certainly 

the right thing to do for government is simply to withdraw this 

legislation, to start over, to get it right, and to make sure that 

they’re doing so in a fair way. If they continue to push forward 

this legislation that was built with the listening to the very few, 

Mr. Speaker, well then we’ll be here to challenge that 

government, to ask the questions that are important, and to 

make sure we’re bringing that voice of all communities to the 

floor of this Assembly. And certainly I look forward to being 

able to do that through the committee structure. 

 

But at this point in time, I’ll adjourn debate as it relates to Bill 

85. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 61 — The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2741 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To get in 

on debate and discuss Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, 

2012. Looking at the minister’s comments, and he did have his 

comments, it’s interesting. And I know the idea was to give 

certain provisions in here for the Highway Traffic Board to find 

some I guess solutions to some of the problems that apparently, 

when rail companies are going to shut down or they want to 

abandon the railway line that they’ve been using into certain 

communities, there’s been obviously, by what I’m getting, there 

has been some issues and maybe . . . 

 

And the wording in here . . . And I’m going to go through some 

of the wording, use examples and . . . [inaudible] . . . and using 

some of the wording the minister used and just show some 

comparisons with the Sask Party government handling of some 

of the items. And I’m going to use some of the words from the 

minister and some of the comments he’s made when he talked, 

you know, in this. 

 

And you know, it’s very interesting. You talk about 

abandonment. And that’s how a lot of people feel right now 

with the Sask Party government — abandonment, in the words 

in here. People feel abandoned by this government. The 

government, they abandon the people. So whether it’s working 

families, middle class, whether Aboriginal, whether northern, a 

lot of rural, members are feeling abandoned by this government. 

 

So the government can sit there and talk about all the issues and 

brag. But at the end of the day here’s another word — remedy. 

Find a remedy for Prince Albert. Maybe they could build a 

second bridge. There’s a remedy city council would really 

enjoy, and the people in the Prince Albert area would really 

enjoy that, clearly. 

 

So they’ve got some provisions that they would like to address 

and that would give the Highway Traffic Board the opportunity 

to I guess have the authority. And we’ll get into that, more of 

the authority, the power to evaluate disputes — interesting. 

 

We should be having somebody who would evaluate the Sask 

Party when the dealing of constituents, when there’s disputes, 

instead of the way people are bullied and treated by the 

government of the day. They’re not being treated with respect. 

If you have a dispute with them, look out. Don’t raise it in the 

media. Don’t bring it to this Assembly because they may just 

have some bullying on you, you know, bulldozer mode. You 

know, go ahead with whatever they want without consulting. So 

that’s just some of the things that are in these opening 

comments. I just want to share with that. 

 

But the Highway Traffic Board is going to have — and this is 

what this bill — provisions to remedy when they’re going to 

abandon a certain line or the municipality would be taking over. 

And then sometimes they talk about, you know, negotiating in 

bad faith is one of the other comments that he refers to. Well 

we’ve seen that right now how some of the negotiation is in bad 

faith, whatever it means, at the end of the day. We’ve seen 

some of that, and that’s how people feel when they express their 

frustrations with some of the government. They figure they’re 

at the table and negotiating in good faith. Well think about the 

northern trappers. You sit around a table and you discuss your 

issues. And you hope that the minister and the department, the 

ministry, are going to, you know, in good faith negotiate and 

come up with some of the answers to the problems. And 

unfortunately we find out later, well that isn’t the case after a 

time. 

 

And the people who negotiate in good faith are hoping the 

government will do the right thing, and unfortunately we see 

that. So that’s just another area where we see northern trappers 

negotiate in good faith but don’t feel like they’re getting I guess 

at the end of the day, in negotiating in good faith, they don’t get 

the respect they deserve and don’t get the response to that. So 

that’s interesting to see. 

 

Now everybody . . . In here it also talks about this bill would 

give provisions for the Highway Traffic Board to actually help 

those groups — whether it’s the seller, the buyer — to come up 

with a fair agreement, a fair agreement. And sometimes the 

people of this good province would just like a fair agreement 

from the Sask Party government, but we see unfortunately that 

doesn’t happen too often. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now let’s give them credit. Once in a while they do. Insiders do 

get a fair agreement that they say they’re happy with. That’s 

fine, depending where you’re hanging out. If you’re an insider, 

if you’re friends of the current Sask Party, then yes you might 

get a fair agreement. But if you’re somebody that’s not in the 

loop, you know, that inner circle having the ear of certain 

government officials, certain ministers, you may not get a fair 

deal. 

 

So having said that, this agreement talks about that. So 

Highway Traffic would work out a fair agreement. So this 

provision in here again that would allow the Highway Traffic 

Board to come up with solutions when there is I guess the seller 

and a buyer cannot come up with a . . . and doesn’t hold the 

municipality, for instance, if it’s a municipality. 

 

And they talk about, you know, salvage of the line, whether 

they’re going to buy that and salvage the line or if it’s going to 

be the municipality or an individual — whether it’s a company, 

private, whoever — to buy the line and maybe they want to 

continue to operate that line or whatever, hauling grain. Maybe 

they want to use it in that way. And that’s a good thing, 

continue to operate because there’s provisions in here to operate 

things. 

 

It’s just like some of the cuts that individuals, organizations are 

going to feel and have felt — feel like they’re getting cut, so 

they can’t continue to operate. Like this line, the same thing. 

And I want to use those examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

show that. Some individuals and organizations out there 

currently dealing with the current government feel the same 

way. They feel abandoned. They don’t have the resources to 

continue doing the good work they’re doing because of the 

government has its own priorities. It doesn’t care about some of 

the community issues, some of the people that are out there. 

 

So those are some of the challenges that people are being faced 

with. So I can use these examples to show a relation to some of 

the situations, the way people in this province are being treated 

by the current government. And again that word, abandonment, 

abandoned, you know. 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

So having said that, there are some provisions in here, in this 

document. And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there will be 

more questions in committee. But I just wanted to . . . Just 

looking through this document, they’re going to give some 

provisions to the Highway Traffic Board to give them some 

strength, to find some remedies, solutions to some of the . . . 

when they were negotiating maybe in not good faith, to make 

sure that it’s a fair agreement. So it’s trying to help the partners, 

whether it’s the buyer or seller, come to an agreement that’s fair 

for everyone. 

 

And whether it’s a municipality, and like I said, they want to 

continue to run. Whether it’s farming, you know, you’re 

hauling grain on a rail line. Depending what communities are 

being . . . that the rail line is deciding, and those companies I 

guess get the decision to look at . . . But there is provisions in 

there that they have to, before they abandon a line, they must 

make sure they’ve done an advertising. Is there anyone, 

interested party wanting to take over that line? So that allows 

some of the provisions in here to do that. And clearly, it’s said. 

 

But I just wanted to use some of the wording. And it was 

interesting, you know, some of the comments and just the 

wording. It’s amazing how, if you compare that to how 

Saskatchewan people are feeling abandoned . . . They want a 

fair deal. They want remedies. You know, I guess when they 

don’t agree with the current government, like I have said that, 

they want a remedy to that. So there’s been a lot of . . . You can 

use a lot of the wording in here to use some examples. That’s 

all I was trying to do, to use the comparison to find answers. 

But at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn 

debate on Bill 61. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 61, the railroad amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 62 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 

pleasure to rise this afternoon in debate on Bill No. 62, The 

Parks Amendment Act. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What are you talking about? 

 

Mr. McCall: — I hear my colleague from Moose Jaw North 

already, quick off the mark, chiming in with a “What are you 

talking about?” — classic Moose Jaw North, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But I guess my request back would be, you know, give 

me a minute. Let me tell you what I’m talking about, if you 

would. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll get into my remarks. And 

I don’t know if that’ll satisfy the member from Moose Jaw 

North, but we’ll do our level best in any event, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But the bill before the House, of course, Bill No. 62, An Act to 

amend The Parks Act, four or five main sort of components of 

the bill being brought to force. Before I get into that too far, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I should state in the interests of full disclosure, 

as a kid being brought up, there were many great excursions in 

the McCall family station wagon out to many of the fine 

provincial parks in this province, and certainly that has 

continued into my adulthood. And this past summer I was able 

to spend some quality time out at Buffalo Pound, out at Lac La 

Ronge Provincial Park up at Missinipe, and certainly memories 

of heading out as a family to Echo Valley where we spent a fair 

amount of the summer commuting back and forth into the city. 

Or you know, pick your provincial parks, be it Meadow Lake or 

Rowan’s Ravine, Wood Mountain, Greenwater, Good Spirit, 

Duck Mountain. 

 

We are blessed with an abundance of beautiful terrain and 

environments and ecosystems in this province. And certainly I 

am very thankful, having had the opportunity as a child and 

growing up to have had the chance to experience the wonders of 

sitting around the campfire while the stars shine brightly and 

just the great opportunity that is for a family. And again as is 

the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think different of the things that 

we seek to do in this legislature. Having had those wonderful 

opportunities, we seek to give something back. We seek to 

make sure that those tremendous opportunities are there for 

those yet to come and those coming along. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m very interested in the legislation that 

is before us today in terms of The Parks Act. Of course The 

Parks Act is the governing legislation for the provincial park 

system. Certainly there are different policy changes made from 

time to time. 

 

Not too long ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remember an argument 

made just out in the rotunda in defence of the admission fee, 

that if you raised the price of admission to the different 

provincial parks, people would appreciate them more — an 

argument advanced by the member of that government across 

the way, Mr. Speaker. And it’s again pretty interesting logic on 

display. 

 

Or the different work that’s gone on over the past couple of 

years in terms of the digital or the computer, the electronic 

register-a-site system which I had the opportunity to use, 

registering a site up at Missinipe this summer. Again we 

understand that there are often challenges that come with any 

new system, Mr. Speaker, any new electronic system such as 

this in particular. But it was interesting being in attendance at 

SARM and hearing the concerns that were raised about the 

different problems with the rollout and the shakeout and the 

notion that Telus users were somehow able to get access to the 

system ahead of those in the queue already from this province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again, we’ll be sure to follow that up 

in committee with the minister to make sure that this program is 

rolling out as it should. 

 

It was also interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to hear that 

referenced not a few days ago by the member from Regina 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

South who, as we all know in this Chamber, is quite fond of 

things that are all teched up. And again one of the sure signs 

that you’ve got to take a closer look is to hear that member talk 

about how great things are. So it was interesting to hear one 

thing in the House on the one day in terms of that member 

reading off the prepared statement, and then at the bear-pit in 

SARM, hearing something a little bit different in terms of how 

the rollout of the electronic registry is going for the parks. But 

we’ll certainly, you know, follow that up and continue to take it 

with a grain of salt. 

 

As for the legislation itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a 

number of components to it, but there’s one dealing with Steele 

Narrows Provincial Park — again Steele Narrows dating back 

to some pretty historic events, the 1885 North-West Resistance. 

 

The second main component of the legislation is the creation of 

a new park in Anglin and Emma Lake’s provincial park. And I 

have some specific questions about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that I’ll be raising in my comments and following up later in 

committee. 

 

A bit of a land swap that winds up 34 hectares to the good for 

Danielson Provincial Park, again on the face of it, seemingly a 

decent thing. But we have some questions in the opposition 

about the land being utilized to make up the sum total in that 

regard and who is affected. 

 

And then more of a policy change as regards the authorities of 

enforcement officers as regards problems with wildlife and the 

like, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So as regards to the explanatory 

notes that accompanied the legislation, the first item deals with 

what I’d mentioned last in terms of the new 27(j.1) wherein: 

 

. . . the existing section that will provide authority for an 

enforcement officer to remove to a secure storage location 

any wildlife attractant or container in which it is found 

when the officer feels it presents an unsafe situation for 

park visitors and when the owner cannot be located. 

 

The explanatory notes go on to state that: 

 

In 2011, there were nearly a thousand calls regarding 

nuisance bears, with about 850 occurring on park lands. In 

most instances bears . . . [were returned] to the wild but 

. . . many instances where bears must be trapped and/or 

dispatched to ensure the safety of park users and staff. 

 

Again this summer, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to be out 

at Ness Creek for the traditional music festival and workshops, 

tried to get to rosin up the bow a bit — and again not in a 

provincial park but certainly in a beautiful portion of the boreal 

forest. And that was something that the folks that do such a 

great job with Ness Creek — one of which is our colleague 

from Saskatoon Nutana — where they had to deal with a bear 

that was on site and the different sort of steps that were 

undertaken with a bear.  

 

But of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important to have the 

appropriate regulations in place, and it’s important to have the 

tools in the kit for enforcement officers to make sure that what 

is a potentially dangerous situation doesn’t evolve into what can 

be a tragic, fatal, and the kind of situation that no one wants to 

encounter. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as regards to the new section, on 

the face of it that would seem to be a fairly straightforward 

measure and worthy of support. And we’ll look to see how this 

is further explained by the minister come the committee. 

 

I guess moving along in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, something 

else of interest is of course the Steele Narrows Provincial Park 

wherein the existing description is to be repealed for Steele 

Narrows Provincial Park and wherein they substitute an 

amendment to accurately map the area of the park, confirming 

the lands lying between the waters of Makwa Lake and the 

current park boundary being identified as parkland. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The explanatory notes reference an orphaned piece of land that 

lies south of Highway 699 and west of the waters of Makwa 

Lake that will be removed from park status, the land holding no 

value to Steele Narrows Provincial Park. But it does, again by 

the account in the explanatory notes, have value with the 

federal-provincial initiative to exchange lands to accurately map 

the Makwa Sahgaiehcan Indian reserve to the high water mark 

of Makwa Lake. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in the explanatory notes, currently the 

reserve and lake are mapped using square township gridlines 

resulting in square edges and not following the curvilinear 

nature of Makwa Lake’s shoreline. Once deregulated, this 

portion of land can be transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture 

for exchanging with the federal government, the amendment 

itself resulting in a small net gain to the park of .03 hectares of 

land. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, as regards particular concerns on the part 

of the official opposition and certainly the people who’ve used 

the park, people of Saskatchewan, people in that immediate 

region, we would be very interested to know what the impact is 

in specific terms as seen by the members of the Makwa 

Sahgaiehcan First Nation, and what sort of impact it has on land 

concerns for the members of that First Nation. 

 

Carrying on, again a new provision in the legislation wherein 

the amendment designating a new provincial park in the 

Anglin—Emma lakes area — again, a beautiful part of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. Again, being a guy born and raised 

down here on the plains, it doesn’t take me too far north where 

I’m not just sort of astounded by all the rocks and the trees and 

lakes and all the water. It’s a really, really amazing part of 

creation and certainly this is something that is well-known by 

the many people that have used the Anglin and Emma Lake 

recreation areas over the years. So to see this being upgraded 

into a full provincial park, we’re very interested to see how this 

works out. 

 

But this of course, it’s . . . you know, in the explanatory notes 

there are discussions that are ongoing with local jurisdictions as 

regards the name, local jurisdictions and Aboriginal 

communities looking to finalize a name before the third reading 

of the bill; the recreation sites being folded in along with 

adjacent Crown land to form one new provincial park of 16,010 

hectares; that the park protects additional watersheds and 



2744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

natural resources of the mid-boreal upland ecoregion of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something that we’ll be 

particularly interested in as regards this, what is the impact of, 

what were the concerns around the existing Crown land being 

folded into that park? What were the implications for not just 

the immediate sort of municipal jurisdictions but also other 

special interest groups, users’ groups, the general public, and in 

particular First Nations and Métis groups, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Again in the explanatory notes, and this begs further 

explanation, it states that: 

 

First Nations have voiced concern regarding continuance 

of treaty rights and traditional uses. PCS continues to work 

with First Nations to alleviate these concerns and will be 

engaged with all groups to determine future management 

planning for the park including ensuring the continuance 

of treaty rights and traditional uses. 

 

Close the quote from the explanatory notes. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how this specifically impacts, 

we’ll be interested to see. We know there have been some 

things done in the history of the province as regards the 

assembly of land for different of the parks in this province, be it 

provincial or national. And you know, one of the hopes is, in 

terms of history, Mr. Speaker, is that we learn the lessons of 

history and see if there isn’t a way to pursue initiatives like this 

so that those concerns are addressed and that they’re done in a 

good way that brings people together, as opposed to continuing 

to divide people in this province. And we’ll be very interested 

to see if that is in fact the case so that the First Nations 

immediately impacted by this have their concerns not just 

alleviated but addressed, and that, again, so that mistakes of the 

past are not repeated. 

 

Another thing I’d add parenthetically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

the world-famous Kenderdine Campus at the University of 

Saskatchewan, which is located at Emma Lake, and the fact that 

that is being liquidated, I guess is one way to put it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Again the University of Saskatchewan is put in a 

tough circumstance where they’ve got some very hard decisions 

to make in terms of covering shortfalls and making up with 

budget allocations that are not there, as have been undertaken 

by members opposite in the lead up to the last election. 

 

And again there are some very tough decisions that will need to 

be made to make up for those budget shortfalls, but to think that 

Kenderdine Campus — which has decades of good work done, 

and the way that that has served as such a tremendous platform 

for many artists and educational students and scientists, and the 

way it has worked in conjunction with the University of 

Saskatchewan campus — I can full well imagine how tough 

that decision was to make. 

 

And you think for all we hear about the new Saskatchewan and 

what a bold, new era the province has entered into, and at the 

same time see something like this which has been such a 

lodestone for innovation and creativity for people through the 

University of Saskatchewan and affiliated with the University 

of Saskatchewan at Emma Lake, and that it’s being brought to a 

close and that no more exciting chapters will usher forth from 

that tremendously beautiful setting is, you know, cognitive 

dissonance is one way to describe the hype about the new 

Saskatchewan. But when you see decisions, tough decisions, 

hard decisions being made like that, you scratch your head and 

you think, how the heck does this work? If things have never 

been better, if things are so great, why is something that has 

been such a valuable institution for this province over decades 

now being done in? 

 

So again, how the land is assembled for the proposed 

Anglin-Emma Lakes Provincial Park, we’ll see how that works. 

We’ll see how that, in terms of the land being assembled, what 

other sort of impacts that may have, what sort of . . . You know 

again, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t too long ago we had the debate 

about The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and the removal of 

lands therefrom, and undertakings that were made in committee 

and in this House about consultation that had been supposedly 

undertaken but that, it turned out, was not the case, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when it comes to doing the homework on where they’re 

getting the land to do things like this, that on the face of them 

seem good and proper, we’re not just going to be taking their 

word for it in terms of, you know, everything’s fine, nothing to 

see here. Because quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve 

seen that movie before. 

 

So we’ll want to have some very detailed questions answered in 

terms of where the land comes from, what other sort of 

encumbrances might accompany those lands, and what the 

impact those lands have for things like the amount of land 

available for wildlife habitat protection, or lands that should 

more properly be going or should be attached to the treaty land 

entitlement process. What is the impact there? And then on top 

of it, Mr. Speaker, again, that this action accompanies the end 

of something like the Kenderdine Campus is, in a word, sad. 

 

Moving on through the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

provisions regarding the Danielson Provincial Park. Again it’s 

sort of an interesting bit of history as regards to the province. 

For many years there’d been many different proponents for the 

dam at Gardiner Park and the possibilities that would arise from 

the irrigation possibilities. And again in a way that . . . There’s 

been a pretty good book written on this about the negotiations 

that went back and forth between Diefenbaker and Jimmy 

Gardiner and Tommy Douglas, and of course the way that 

Jimmy Gardiner had, you know, long sort of promised, but 

whether or not he delivered is a matter of some historical 

question. 

 

But certainly the Gardiner dam took the name as the Douglas 

camp area was given its name earlier. Diefenbaker of course got 

the lake and Danielson sort of came in as part of the package. 

But the Gardiner, Diefenbaker, Douglas work that was done, 

the interprovincial, interjurisdictional wranglings that took 

place to make this happen was a pretty interesting part of our 

province’s history. 

 

But as regards the legislation itself, wherein (c)(iii) is struck out 

and then substituted with an amendment to add an additional 65 

hectares of land containing native prairie ecosystem to 

Danielson Provincial Park, quoting from the explanatory notes, 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2745 

again I know this is something that a lot of people have a 

definite concern about, is how this relates to the whole question 

of community pastures. And again, referencing in an earlier 

discussion that was had inside this legislature around The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, again we’ll be looking to gain 

better insight into this. Where is this land being assembled 

from? What are the impacts? What the divestiture of the 

assemblage process that was undertaken, what’s all involved 

there? 

 

And again if you’ve got 65 hectares on the one hand and the 

removal of 31 hectares on the other with a net of 34 hectares 

gained for the park, again that would seem to be a fairly 

interesting proposition, a worthy proposition, but how that plays 

out on the ground and in terms of other actions that had been 

taken by this government, we will be looking for more detail, 

more information from this government. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been a pleasure to join in the 

debate on Bill No. 62, the amendments to The Parks Act. These 

parks we hold not just in trust for today, but for tomorrow and 

the day after that and decades down the line, we hold them for 

your grandchildren, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for those to come. 

And we should make sure that we’re doing right by them so that 

that protection isn’t just theoretical, but that years from now 

we’ll look back and say there was some good work done in 

terms of making sure this was here to share for us and for those 

to follow. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know other of my 

colleagues are looking to participate in the debate, and as such I 

would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 62, An Act to amend 

The Parks Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 62, 

The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 63 — The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to weigh into the debate on Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks 

Act, 2012. 

 

I think I’m going to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by talking a 

little bit about regional parks here in Saskatchewan and my own 

experiences as a child growing up here. I don’t know if you 

knew this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but there are almost 100 

regional parks here in Saskatchewan. They’ve all been 

designed, developed, and built by local communities, so they 

really are the strength of local communities. The local regional 

park is the hub of recreational activities in many communities 

in the summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

They provide great affordable holiday options for local people 

but as well attracting tourists who are travelling across the 

province. I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, myself, growing up, I’m 

the youngest of seven kids, and there’s a bit of a gap between 

the six other siblings and I, so I don’t have strong memories of 

all the locations we visited, but we would pile into our red 

station wagon, the seven of us and my parents, and we would 

tour Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With an at-home mom 

and a father who was a police officer, touring provincial and 

regional parks was an affordable option for my family, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And sort of more recent memories actually, I had an 

opportunity . . . Well growing up, we would always be heading 

to P.A., actually to a national park. We had friends who had a 

cabin at Prince Albert National Park. But on the way up to 

Prince Albert National Park, we would hound my parents — it 

was always my mother actually who was the driver; my dad 

would join us when he wasn’t at work — but we would hound 

my parents to stop at Valley Regional Park. My mom was 

always a woman with a mission and always wanted to get to the 

destination. But the kids in the family, we always wanted them 

to stop. That hill and that zipline, Mr. Deputy Speaker, held so 

much appeal. 

 

And finally one year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we got my mother to 

stop, and the goal was to have a picnic and for us to get to try 

out the zipline. And I actually used some of my allowance 

money to pay for the regional park admission. That was the 

deal, that we could go if I coughed up the money for the pass. 

And the most disappointing thing, it was a great highlight to get 

to stop, but it was one of the few times, I’m sure, in the park’s 

history that the zipline wasn’t working. There was a problem 

with the zipline. 

 

So you know, I’ve had an opportunity as an adult to fulfill that 

fantasy with that zipline, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with my own 

kids just a couple of years ago. We made a trip to Valley 

Rosthern Regional Park just for part of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but my kids had an opportunity . . . We had a picnic 

and my kids had an opportunity to try out the zipline at Valley 

Rosthern Regional Park, and I have to say it was a hit. So I was 

living vicariously through my children just a few short years 

ago when I didn’t get a chance to try the zipline. And heaven 

help the zipline if I tried today, but my kids got to. So the 

regional parks are an important part of our recreational aspects 

or recreational opportunities here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Just a few years ago too, actually shortly after I was elected, I 

had an opportunity to do some outreach and some touring and 

headed up to the Carrot River and Tisdale, that neck of the 

woods, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I had a visit to Pasquia 

Regional Park and was amazed by the facilities there. There’s a 

brand new Olympic-sized swimming pool, a new playground. I 

had lunch in the restaurant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and saw Big 

Bert actually. 

 

And I don’t know if I’m describing Big Bert correctly. But Big 



2746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

Bert was a life-sized replica of a fossil that was found in the 

area. I would describe him kind of as a crocodile or an 

alligator-like fossil, but I’m sure, I’m sure the member from 

Carrot River Valley could maybe correct me on that. But it’s 

just a wonderful little jewel of a park here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And there’s so many of these that are, like I 

said, community developed and community run and really are a 

wonderful, a wonderful addition to our tourism opportunities 

and recreational opportunities here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, sets out several 

different goals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And just looking at the 

minister’s second reading comments, he talks about one of the 

changes as providing “. . . a much clearer description of the 

minister’s powers with regards to the regional parks program.” 

And he goes on to, the minister goes on to describe, “The 

existing legislation describes powers of the department versus 

[the power of] the minister and does not specifically describe 

the types of powers required to carry out the minister’s 

responsibilities.” 

 

So that’s one of the changes that is being proposed here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The second area is the minister is establishing “. . . the authority 

to delegate certain minister’s powers to the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association via a formal administration 

agreement approved by . . . [executive council.]” And I know 

the minister goes on to praise the Regional Parks Association. 

And it is true. They play “. . . a pivotal role in the 

administration of the regional parks program across the entire 

province . . .” and they serve as the voice for both regional 

parks in the province but they provide “. . . services like 

accreditation, marketing, and provision of advice to regional 

parks boards as well as adjudication of provincial capital grant 

funding.” 

 

Another area that’s being addressed in this particular bill, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the “. . . formal recognition of community 

and non-profit organizations in the establishment and operation 

of regional park authorities, where previously [in the 

legislation] only municipalities had this formal recognition.” 

 

So the reality is, “The . . . role of municipalities in the 

establishment and operation of regional parks is also reinforced 

[and the minister goes on to say] as the connection between 

regional parks and municipal government is critical.” 

 

And we’d agree with that. 

 

A fourth component of the legislation is overall improved 

clarity throughout the legislation, including the removal of 

many out-of-date and redundant references. The existing Act, 

which was written in 1960 — or the original Act — is 

detailed and many of the sections in the Act have been 

moved to regulations, policy, or simply deleted altogether. 

So that obviously over the course of time . . . 1960 was some 

time ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there are changes in 

language, changes that do have to occur. 

 

The one piece that I find interesting and I think I’d like to talk a 

little bit more about is it clarifies the processes, this legislation, 

for regional park boundary adjustments and dissolution, or adds 

rigour and public accountability, says the minister, with regard 

to park dissolution and also with regard to financial and annual 

operating. The minister talks about park dissolutions and says 

the proposed legislation allows the minister to set certain 

conditions such as the completion of the public consultation 

process. 

 

And we saw last summer actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 

this would come into play. Last August actually there was a 

story that hit the news about the sale of the LeRoy Leisureland 

Regional Park which is located just a few kilometres from the 

BHP Billiton’s proposed Jansen potash mine. There were some 

serious concerns in the community about this sale, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. As I said, regional parks are the lifeblood, in many 

cases, of communities, and people felt that. I’d like to quote 

actually the park manager, Maggie Hamilton, who was quoted 

in an August 21st, 2012 StarPhoenix story. She says, “This 

stinks. A lot of this has been a secret but the public should have 

known about this.” 

 

So there was a public meeting on the subject taking place after 

the fact, after the sale had become local knowledge, and people 

were very concerned about this. The people in the community 

were hoping . . . And the manager again, Maggie Hamilton, 

says, “We’re hoping there’ll be enough people there making 

enough of a stink that they’ll have to take another look at this.” 

 

So this park actually, the LeRoy Leisureland Park had opened 

in the late ’60s. Just a few details about it. It’s an 80-acre park 

and offers a nine-hole golf course, camping, a swimming pool, 

and other amenities. The park manager had argued that this park 

was both a very busy park and a valuable community asset. One 

of the big concerns is that the community was not informed or 

asked for input on the months-long negotiations of the sale of 

the park. 

 

And the minister, as I had said, in his second reading comments 

talks about the bill making changes to . . . He says here again, 

“Regarding park dissolutions, the proposed legislation allows 

me, as minister, to set certain conditions such as the completion 

of a public consultation process.” 

 

So I think one of my questions is it says it allows the minister to 

set those conditions, but I don’t think it mandates or requires 

the public consultation piece. And I think that that would be 

something to flag, that perhaps the legislation should be a little 

bit stronger when this is a community asset. And when a 

community asset is set to dissolve or be sold, perhaps there 

should be mandatory consultation with the people in the 

community. 

 

Again speaking about consultation, the minister in his remarks 

talked about that these are changes that the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association has been asking for with respect to 

this legislation, and has been asking for them for about 10 

years, which . . . Consultation is absolutely critical, and again I 

commend the work that the Regional Parks Association does, so 

I think that on balance the Regional Parks Association knows 

what they need to ensure that the environment is right for the 

support of regional parks. But I think again this is a piece of 

legislation that perhaps the government has done the proper 

consultation on, but this is a rarity in this government’s track 

record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where this government doesn’t do 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

very well when it comes to consultation. 

 

We have many Acts that have come before us and many 

occurrences where the government has not done due diligence 

when it comes to consultation, like The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act, where we’re amending 100 years of labour 

legislation and all rolling it into one 184-page bill, I believe, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it took 90 days to consult on that 

piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And who did they 

consult? They consulted people perhaps of like mind rather than 

casting the net wide and making sure that they hear from all 

kinds of people. 

 

So with Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, the minister has 

commented that he has done thorough and diligent consultation 

with the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association. But I again 

just want to flag the one piece here where the minister says the 

proposed legislation allows him to set certain conditions on the 

public consultation process, but again it doesn’t say that’s 

mandated. And looking to the regional park sale of LeRoy 

Leisureland Regional Park, where there was no public input on 

that sale, that should probably be something that we could 

consider mandating when we’re going to do something with a 

major public asset like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I do know I have other colleagues who are interested in 

wading into the debate on Bill 63, The Regional Parks 

Amendment Act, and with that I would like to move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 64 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 64 — The 

Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 64, 

The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 is 

basically a companion bill to Bill No. 63, the Act that I just 

spoke to. This makes consequential amendments to The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012. The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012 updates references to The Regional 

Parks Act, 1979 which are contained within The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. And the minister goes on to 

point out again that this is a companion Act and it’s a result of 

the proposed enactment of The Regional Parks Act, 2012, and is 

proposed to come into force on the day in which section 1 of 

The Regional Parks Act comes into force. So with that, I would 

like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on The Regional Parks 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Bill No. 65 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 65 — The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I am 

pleased to rise today to speak to this bill. This is the Bill No. 65, 

An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts. 

 

And the mysterious world of securities is one, I think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that can baffle the brightest amongst us. And 

it’s a complicated area where I think we’ve seen over the years 

necessary intervention on the part of the government to protect 

the consumer in the situation where securities are being offered 

to the public, when people want to trade in the stock market, I 

guess basically, although there’s other ways to do that. 

 

So I think it appears that the original securities Act was passed 

in 1988. It’s been around for a while, 25 or is it 35 years. And I 

think a number of changes and developments have occurred in 

the area of securities since then. Obviously the one that sticks 

with most people recently was the financial crisis in 2008. And 

there we saw through sleight of hand and basically a shell game 

some financial institutions being able to subprime mortgage 

their way to a complete sort of financial disaster in the United 

States, and it still has reverberations throughout the world. So 

that was a lesson learned at the time. 

 

And one of the things that became suspect or became open to 

abuse, shall we say, was something called an over-the-counter 

derivative. And I certainly am not going to attempt to explain 

what that is because it’s a very complicated vehicle for 

financing and for investing. But it appears, based on the 

minister’s comments when he introduced the bill on November 

13th when he gave it second reading, that there was some 

pressure on the G20 [Group of 20] to adopt stiffer rules in 

relation to over-the-counter derivatives in order to ensure that 

those who understand these things and see the advantages for 

their clients weren’t able to shop around, basically, to find a 

G20 government where the banking institutions were able to 

carry on these sorts of transactions. 

 

The minister describes an over-the-counter derivative in his 

comment as “an agreement where the price, value, delivery, or 

payment obligation is derived from an underlying interest.” And 

I would challenge the ordinary smart person to even sort of 



2748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

describe exactly what that is, but it’s something that has had a 

serious impact in the securities world. And so in this case our 

government is responding to the challenges of the crisis of 

2008, and they’re making it more difficult now for the OTC 

[over-the-counter] market because there was a complete lack of 

transparency at the time. And it was very challenging. Because 

of the lack of transparency, it was very challenging for the 

regulators to even identify what was going on and what the risk 

was. And I think that was part of the problem with the crisis in 

2008. 

 

So I think the first thing I wanted to point out was the actual 

definition of derivative, and I’m going to read it into the record, 

but it is . . . I think when you hear this definition you realize 

how incredibly complex this area is and how it could be easy 

for people to sort of not really understand what it means. So I’ll 

read this and then maybe we could discuss afterwards whether 

or not it makes any sense. But here’s the definition, the new 

definition of derivative that’s being added to the Act through 

this bill. And it says here, clause 2(1): 

 

“(o.1) ‘derivative’ means: 

 

(i) an option, swap, futures contract, forward contract or 

other financial or commodity contract or instrument 

whose market price, value or delivery, payment or 

settlement obligations are derived from, referenced to or 

based on an underlying interest of a derivative, 

including a value, price, index, event, probability or 

thing; or 

 

(ii) a contract or instrument that is designated pursuant 

to section 11.1 to be a derivative or that is within a class 

of contracts or instruments that is designated to be 

derivatives pursuant to section 11.1 or the regulations; 

 

but does not include: 

 

(iii) a contract or instrument that would be a derivative 

under subclause (i) if the contract or instrument is an 

interest in or to a security and a trade in the security 

pursuant to the contract or instrument would constitute a 

distribution; or 

 

(iv) a contract or instrument that is designated pursuant 

to section 11.1 not to be a derivative or that is within a 

class of contracts or instruments that is designated not to 

be derivatives pursuant to section 11.1 or the 

regulations. 

 

Now I would challenge the ordinary reader to maybe be able to 

come up with a quick definition of exactly what it is I just read. 

But you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the complexity in these 

definitions. And certainly I think that’s one of the reasons why 

our government saw fit to pass The Securities Act back in 1988. 

And it’s to protect investors, people who are putting their 

hard-earned savings and their retirement funds into these types 

of investments. 

 

So I think that’s just one of the challenges we see in this bill is 

actually being able to understand the nature of the market. And 

I know that’s why, with the lack of transparency in 2008, that’s 

why there was such a complete and total disruption in the 

financial market when these things were going on sort of, and 

particularly the sub-prime mortgage trade was going on sort of 

beneath the scope of the regulators at the time. And we see what 

happened. 

 

Indeed the minister pointed out in his comments back in 

November that these derivative markets were really complex 

and that the transparency wasn’t there, and that’s why it wasn’t 

foreseen and the risks accumulated until the point where it 

became a crisis. And he indicated that what happened there is in 

contrast to the trading of derivatives on regulated exchanges, 

which didn’t experience any failures during the financial crisis 

of 2008. 

 

So I think the point here is that these over-the-counter 

derivatives are the risk. And certainly I think what happened 

once the United States started tightening up their rules, we saw 

banks and their supporters looking for other opportunities to 

continue this type of behaviour. And ultimately I think the 

response from the G20 was that pretty much everyone is now 

looking at these types of regulations. 

 

So that was the first change, the major change that the 

minister’s introducing into this amendment or this bill to amend 

The Securities Act, 1988. He goes on to say that the second 

portion that’s being amended . . . or the second main change 

was a change to the confidential records and information 

gathered by officials with the Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority and mainly that those things, those records cannot be 

publicly disclosed. 

 

So the first big change that we see in relation to this is a new 

section 14.1. And this is where the director can make an order 

requiring companies to provide information, and there’s a 

whole list of things there where the director can compel 

information be provided. And the types of people or companies 

that can receive the order would be “a registrant; an issuer; a 

reporting issuer; a transfer agent or registrar for securities of a 

reporting issuer; a director, officer, promoter or a control person 

of a reporting issuer; a custodian of assets of an investment 

fund; a self-regulatory organization; an exchange; a derivatives 

trading facility; a quotation and trade reporting system; a 

clearing agency; a trade repository; and a credit rating 

organization.” So again I think you get the sense, based on that 

list, of the extreme complexity of this area of finances and how 

having regulators keep a close eye on that is extremely 

important. 

 

These changes in section 14 are further supported by changes in 

section 152 which is also amended. And in that case, the section 

152(3) is being repealed and there’s a new clause being 

substituted. And the big change there is where the commission 

itself, how it determines whether things need to be held in 

confidence. 

 

So in the first part . . . In the previous or the existing version of 

the section, I can just read that to you, the current 152(3) which 

reads . . . I’ll just find the section here. Right now 152(3) reads: 

 

Where this Act or the regulations require that material be 

filed, the filing shall be effected by depositing the 

material, or causing it to be deposited, with the 

Commission. 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

Subject to subsection (3), the Commission shall make 

available all material filed pursuant to subsection (1) for 

public inspection during the normal business hours of the 

Commission. 

 

So on those two subclauses, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you see 

where normally the material that is filed is available for public 

inspection. But the key clause is sub (3) where it reads: 

 

Notwithstanding subsection (2), the Commission may hold 

material or any class of material required to be filed by 

this Act in confidence as long as the Commission is of the 

opinion that it is in the public interest to do so. 

 

So the key words there is the public interest. And what happens 

now, the new clause reads as follows: 

 

Notwithstanding subsection (2) and The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act, the 

Commission may hold in confidence all or part of a record 

required to be filed pursuant to this Act or the regulations 

if the Commission is of the opinion that: 

 

And here’s the key part: 

 

(a) the person to whom or company to which the 

information in the record relates would be unduly 

prejudiced by disclosure of the information, and the person 

or company’s privacy interests outweigh the public’s 

interest with respect to disclosure of the information; or 

 

the Commission is subject to a requirement to maintain the 

information in the record in confidence as a condition of 

receiving the record. 

 

So it’s quite a different scenario now when we’re looking at 

what can be released or what the commission has to consider 

when considering releasing this type of information. And rather 

than just having the test that it’s in the public interest to do so, 

we now have a different test and that would be if the private 

interests outweigh the public interest, which is probably a more 

difficult determination for the commission, or whether there 

was conditions placed on receiving the record. 

 

Now if I was a company releasing information to the 

commission, I would just make that a condition right off the 

hop. And in that case, the commission wouldn’t be able to 

release any of this information to the public. Whether that’s 

good or bad, I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I think civil 

libertarians again would maybe view this as a positive thing. 

 

However, public interest is always to have as much information 

available as possible. And I think a good example of that would 

be something like a lobbying registry where people who are 

actively lobbying the government, and that in itself is not a bad 

thing, but that that information be made available to the public 

so they are aware who’s conducting themselves in that fashion. 

So that’s just a comment I wanted to make on the second aim of 

this bill as indicated by the minister in his comments. 

 

The third point I want to speak to is the one the minister 

referred to, and that would be for the collection branch. He said 

the fine collection branch of the Ministry of Justice — and I 

have no doubt that they are a fine collection branch indeed — to 

allow them to enforce and collect financial compensation 

orders. So that change is found in some new sections that are 

being added after 135.6. And there’s about four more or five 

more sections that are being added after that section. 

 

Now 135, I’ll just go back to the original bill and give the 

context for this change. Section 135 relates to . . . It’s a fairly 

long section. It starts on page . . . 135 starts on page 77 of the 

original Act, and then 135.6 is found on page 83 and it deals 

with financial compensation. So what’s added now after 135.6 

is a whole series of sections on how the director can basically 

collect on orders where orders have been issued for a person to 

pay money. 

 

So I won’t go into all the details of 135.61 as it now exists. But 

the new changes are found on page 15 of the bill and basically 

there’s five more sections that are being added here. I guess the 

key point of the changes is found in 135.62 and when it says: 

 

When a claimant files a financial compensation order 

made pursuant to section 135.6 with the director [it says 

under]: 

 

(a) the director may commence proceedings, including any 

means of enforcement mentioned in 135.6, with any 

necessary modification to enforce the financial 

compensation order as a debt due to the claimant. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So it gives the director a fairly broad authority now to go 

forward and collect monies that were owing under these orders. 

 

The other changes there are just in relation to that substantive 

change, but I guess that’s the third goal. And as the minister 

pointed out in his introductory comments to the bill, that these 

orders are being made by the Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority against companies that have contravened securities 

legislation through activities such as fraud. So there’ll be a 

formal hearing and the order is made. And now this is just an 

additional tool for the folks at the Ministry of Justice to go 

forward and collect that amount. And he says, normally the 

amount of the order is to be paid to an individual who suffered 

financial loss on account of the illegal activity. So it’s being 

described as an enforcement tool. 

 

So really what we see in this bill is those three changes that the 

minister’s proposing, and one is a definition of an 

over-the-counter or OTC derivative. And these are different 

than the derivatives that are traded on an exchange. I think 

that’s the main point here. And that they are fairly opaque, 

which means difficult to understand, if you’re asking me. And I 

think the definition itself is very difficult to understand. So this 

is something where you require a certain amount of expertise 

and knowledge in order to provide the legislative background 

for these bills. 

 

And then as I said, the second change is the way confidential 

records are being maintained, and finally the third change is the 

ability for the director to enforce the collection orders. 

 

There is a number of other changes in this bill. It’s a fairly 



2750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

lengthy bill with lots of changes, but the bulk of them are 

merely using derivatives instead of exchange contract, which 

was the former definition. So there’s pages and pages of 

changes to different clauses in the existing securities Act, 1988 

dealing with those proper changes to reflect the intent of the 

new bill. 

 

Further to that though, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will 

want to ask a number of questions in committee in relation to 

this bill, and certainly my colleagues will be able to ask those 

questions there. They’re of fairly technical nature, and at that 

point we’ll have an opportunity to comment further. So at this 

point that’s the extent of my comments on The Securities Act, 

1988. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 65, The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 67 — The 

Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 

pleasure to rise this afternoon in The Community Planning 

Profession Act, 2012. Interesting bit of legislation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and certainly the . . . I don’t know if there’s an echo in 

here, but when I’m trying to tell you what I’m talking about, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hear a distinct ringing from the benches 

opposite from the direction of Moose Jaw North. 

 

But again I’d counsel him, as I’d counselled him earlier, you 

know, maybe I could get past the preamble and then I could tell 

you what I’m talking about. But we’ll see what we can do in 

that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But it’s always nice to hear 

some classic Moose Jaw North interjected into the debate. I 

don’t know if I’d be all that happy if that was my hallmark as a 

legislator in this place but, you know, certainly the member’s 

well-known for that and he does it well. So if he could give us a 

chance, we’ll get into the remarks and we’ll see if he has any 

questions after that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But certainly Bill No. 67, modernizing legislation that has 

essentially been in place since 1963, trying to keep up with the 

way that Acts have changed across the country. The different 

pieces of legislation that are consequentially amended out of 

this including The Planning and Development Act, 2007; The 

Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act; The Land 

Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Act, again changing the 

references in the professional community planner to registered 

professional planner. 

 

So to tell you what I’m talking about and then I’ll talk about it a 

bit and then I’ll tell you again what I’ve talked about, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. What I’m talking about is a lot of 

housekeeping in this piece of legislation. It’s not exactly setting 

the world on fire. It’s a necessary piece of business that the 

government should attend to, and it would seem from the 

minister’s remarks at second reading that they’ve attended to 

that housekeeping diligently. But again, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

surest ways to raise the suspicion of this opposition is to hear 

members opposite saying that all the homework has been done 

and things are fine. That’s when we like to check our wallets, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the assurances of members 

opposite. 

 

But again on the other hand, this would seem to be a pretty 

straightforward piece of legislation wherein key changes 

requested by the Association of Professional Community 

Planners of Saskatchewan have been reflected in the legislation, 

including changing the name of the association to the 

Saskatchewan Professional Planners Institute; replacing the 

term professional community planner with registered 

professional planner, a term adopted by all relevant professional 

planning organizations across Canada; clarifying the 

composition and role of the association’s professional conduct 

and discipline committees, and also including a requirement 

that the majority of the members of the professional conduct 

and discipline committees are licensed members; and enhance 

disciplinary authority by allowing the committee to inform the 

employer of a member found guilty of a professional 

misconduct or incompetence. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, earlier I was saying that this wasn’t 

necessarily a barnburner of a piece of legislation but I’m 

starting to warm up to it. Again, that legislation comes forward 

in conjunction with professional associations and that these are 

largely self-regulating bodies in that their bylaws and means of 

self-governance need to be kept current and kept abreast with 

developments across the country is not exactly earth-shattering. 

So again we’re glad to see these changes brought forward here 

today, but the world has not stopped spinning on its axis. 

 

Moving further through the analysis of the minister’s second 

reading speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wherein: 

 

. . . the ministry and association have identified some 

amendments to ensure the Act fully complies with labour 

mobility obligations under the Agreement on Internal 

Trade and the New West Partnership agreement. This 

includes placing the administration of examinations for 

members with the association, and through them the 

national association, the Canadian Institute of Planners or 

the CIP instead of with the University of Saskatchewan. 

 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

And the minister allows in his remarks that “The University of 

Saskatchewan fully supports this change and has provided a 

letter to that effect.” 

 

Again, you know, glad to hear it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Work 

that can be done to ensure labour mobility throughout various 

jurisdictions, of not just the West but throughout Canada, 

indeed is an admirable pursuit. And if this legislation is in 

compliance with those aims, we’re glad to hear it. 

 

It states further on in the minister’s second reading speech that: 

 

[The] Professional planning associations across Canada, 

including the association, have been working towards 

unfettered labour mobility in conjunction with their 

national association, the CIP. The provisions in the new 

Act represent fine tuning in terms of labour mobility as 

opposed to removing barriers. 

 

So what that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, may warrant further 

questioning in committee, but fine tuning, as opposed to 

removing barriers, again we’ll see how that plays out in the 

black and white and we’ll be interested in the minister’s answer 

to the related questions. But again, coming forward from the 

planners themselves, and being in compliance with the evolving 

national standards, again it would seem to be a fair enough 

proposition. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, wherein the: 

 

. . . Act does not establish the scope of practice of planners 

or restrict persons from calling themselves planners or 

require that only members can do planning. It simply 

recognizes the association or institute, once the new Act is 

proclaimed, as the professional association that regulates 

professional planners in the province and provides for the 

protection of the title of registered professional planner. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, these things are important. If you’re going 

to be calling yourself a registered professional planner, you 

should meet up to the standards required. These are titles not 

lightly thrown around. I know that different people, you know, 

be it doctors or lawyers, geoscientists — these are credentials 

that are worked hard to secure and that people should indeed be 

quite jealous of their usage and make sure that the appropriate 

credentialing body is in place. And again, as covered in the 

legislation here, to ensure that the body is there to not just 

ensure that authority, that credibility of the credential and the 

credentialing process but also that disciplinary steps are there in 

place. 

 

And so it is there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I draw your 

attention to a passage further on in the minister’s second 

reading speech wherein he states, and I quote: 

 

The remainder of the provisions generally follow the 

province’s current template for professions Acts and 

include a number of significant updates. They are: 

providing for public appointees to the association’s 

council; standardizing administrative and regulatory bylaw 

powers of the institute; providing for ministerial bylaws if 

necessary; and standardizing provisions related to 

professional conduct and discipline committees’ 

investigations, hearings, and consequences. The ministry 

has worked out any outstanding issues with the association 

regarding these provisions. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the powers of self-regulating professions 

and the way that the template is applied more broadly across the 

piece, again if that indeed has been followed in this regard, it 

would seem to be a fairly straightforward proposition — 

something that the opposition will be watching with interest, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the government sets out to implement 

the new Act and making sure that this government does indeed 

consult with the regulated professions to refine and update the 

legislation, making sure that the expressed intent is met up with 

the resources and practice in the field. 

 

And again, the Ministry of Government Relations states its 

intent “. . . to continue working with the association to ensure 

that in the near future, clear and appropriate bylaws for the 

community planning profession are established.” Again, Mr. 

Speaker, it seems to be a fairly straightforward proposition and 

we will be following up with the minister and with the related 

bodies to ensure that that is in fact the case. 

 

I know that other members will be very interested to get into 

this debate, Mr. Speaker. So we’re not quite ready to move it on 

to committee just yet but there’ll be some more scrutiny coming 

forward in terms of second reading speeches. But for the time 

being, I would move to adjourn debate of Bill No. 67, The 

Community Planning Profession Act, 2012. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 67, The Community Planning Profession Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 68 — The Justices 

of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la 

Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Again it’s my pleasure to rise to speak to this bill, Bill No. 68, 

The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 

modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix. Had to throw in 

a little bit of French there because in fact this bill is, I believe, 

in bilingual format. No, it’s not just the name unfortunately. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have an explanation by the 

minister introducing the bill and basically the purpose of this 

bill is just to get a new process in place for determining salaries 

and benefits for Saskatchewan justices of the peace. And this is 

a role within our judiciary that I think has a very long and 

honourable history. 



2752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

In fact I think I’d like to share with you a little bit about how 

this came about in Canada. But before I do, I just want to 

describe the original existence of justices of the peace. And 

believe it or not, it goes back to the year 1195 when Richard I, 

the Lion-Heart. Richard the Lion-Heart commissioned certain 

knights to preserve the peace in unruly areas. So these guys 

were responsible to the king for ensuring that the law was 

upheld and preserved the “king’s peace” and were known as 

“keepers of the peace.” 

 

By a couple hundred years later, an Act referred to good and 

lawful men to be appointed in every county in the land to guard 

the peace, and they were first referred to as conservators of the 

peace or wardens of the peace. But the word, the phrase, Justice 

of the Peace, came about in 1361 during the reign of King 

Edward III Plantagenet. So the peace to be guarded is the king’s 

peace or in this case of course the Queen’s peace, which is the 

duty of the Crown under the royal prerogative. 

 

And there’s an extensive history of the role of the JPs [Justice 

of the Peace] as they go through time. Often they were a 

member of the gentry because it was an unpaid office back in 

the day, and it was just more for the sake of renown or to 

confirm the justice’s standing within the community. So it’s 

sort of a status symbol I guess for the JPs and something that 

people were happy to do I guess, that had nothing else to do 

during their days. 

 

The other interesting note is that women were not allowed to 

become JPs in the United Kingdom until 1919. And the first 

woman was Ada Summers, the mayor of Stalybridge, who was 

a JP by virtue of her office. And in Canada we had Emily 

Murphy of Edmonton, Canada who proceeded her by about 

three and a half years. And according to this article in the 

Wikipedia, now in the UK [United Kingdom] 50 per cent of JPs 

are women. So things have . . . We certainly have gender parity 

in the UK when it comes to JPs. 

 

Now in terms of Canada’s JP history, the Justice of the Peace in 

Canada, they play a key role in the administration of justice at 

the provincial level. So normally justices of the peace are 

appointed by lieutenant governors, the lieutenant governors of 

Canada’s provinces, and by the commissioners of Canada’s 

territories on the advice of their premier or attorney general. 

 

As the article notes, Canada, as we know, is a very vast country, 

and often the JPs or the justices are the only magistrates in 

some regions. And sometimes in the Northwest Territories 

they’re assigned to hear federal crimes, or in more populated 

provinces like here in Saskatchewan, they would usually 

preside over bail hearings and provincial offences courts, so 

provincial courts. In addition to their work in a court and when 

court is not sitting, they can perform other judicial functions, 

like most JPs would issue search warrants now if the police 

needed a search warrant. 

 

So back to the bill itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we see here 

is an attempt to assure the independence of these justices of the 

peace and particularly the problem being is that currently it’s 

set through regulations on a fee-for-service basis for most tasks, 

and then there’s an hourly wage for the more complex matters. 

 

So as the minister pointed out, these JPs perform all kinds of 

duties that are essential to the functioning of our judicial 

system. And certainly I know when I was an articling student 

and was required to go to court on a daily basis, it was always 

. . . Everything seemed to start with the JPs in the morning. And 

they were looking after certain matters that ensured the function 

of the court was running smoothly, and they were setting down 

processes, paperwork. They were doing oaths and affirmations, 

affidavits, and then even dealing with remand and release 

hearings and issuance of search warrants. So the JPs perform a 

very critical role in our legal system and in our court system 

now. 

 

And the minister has indicated that what’s inadequate here is 

that now that courts have ruled that principles of judicial 

independence applies not only to judges but to JPs, then there’s 

the question of how their independence is being treated, their 

judicial independence, if their remuneration is tied to the current 

system of regulations and fee-for-service. So the attempt in this 

bill is to ensure that there is actually financial security to ensure 

the judicial independence of these justices of the peace. 

 

The minister indicated that there’s three requirements for 

financial security, first of all that there should be an 

independent process for establishing salaries or maintaining 

them or changing them. And secondly — and this is probably 

the most important one — no direct negotiations are to be 

permitted between judicial officers and the government. So 

obviously if you’re going to retain your independence as an 

officer of the court, you must not be seen or must not be 

required to negotiate with the government in terms of 

remuneration. And then the final point the minister indicated 

was that salaries should not fall below a certain minimum level. 

 

So the minister goes on to say that in his view this new bill 

achieves that independence because what they’ve done is 

they’ve set it up so that an independent commission will have 

the authority to review and make recommendations regarding 

salaries and pension benefits for JPs. So once that review is 

done, then they’ll be locked in. Their salaries will be locked in, 

and then any raises or annual increases would be a percentage 

of the annual salary, a percentage of what the Provincial Court 

judges get, and then adjusted accordingly at the same level that 

the Provincial Court judges are adjusted. 

 

Another important part I think especially for the senior justices 

of the peace is that they will actually be entered into the public 

employees pension plan, which is also an important role. And I 

think as we look at the role of independent officers within not 

only our judicial system but within our whole government 

system, certainly the security of a pension plan is something 

that should be made available to all of them in the most fair 

fashion. 

 

So what this bill provides is that this commission will be 

established, and then they’ll do a review. And then they will 

review again in 2018, so basically five years from now, and 

then following that, every six years. So as the minister points 

out, it’s important for these matters to be reviewed. And that 

would meet the constitutional guarantee of independence. 

 

So the minister is indicating that the remuneration process in 

the bill will not impact on the independent process that’s 

currently in place for Provincial Court judges. And as we know, 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

that did receive some attention in the media a few years ago. 

And there’s always I think public concern when judges’ salaries 

are being established, but this process will not affect the public 

court, Provincial Court judges’ process for remuneration. 

 

And finally he said, the last point is that there’s a transitional 

portion in this bill that will ensure that they’re continued to be 

paid until the first commission regulation comes into force. So 

they’ll be remunerated at the new salary level back to April 1st, 

2013 minus any amounts earned in the transitional period. So 

that’s basically the minister’s comments on the bill. 

 

If you look at the changes themselves, there’s a fair number of 

them. Oh yes, it actually is published in a bilingual fashion, so 

there is the French version as well, which I won’t go into. 

 

But there’s a new heading being added after section 10, and that 

is the determination of salary and benefits. So the first clause 

10.1 just has some definitions that are relevant to the section. 

And secondly the salary and pension benefits are defined in 

10.2 where — this is once the commission is established, the 

initial salaries — then it would say: 

 

. . . the annual salary of a justice of the peace . . . [will be 

a] percentage of the annual salary of a judge of the 

Provincial Court . . . that is prescribed in the regulations 

made by the commission. 

 

And then there’s an adjustment clause following that. So that’s 

the first change under section 10. 

 

Then 10.3 allows the commission to make the questions and do 

the enquiry it needs to in order to establish the correct 

percentage. So this is basically what the commission’s work 

will be, is to look at the work that’s required and what 

percentage it should be in relation to what the Provincial Court 

judges make. And so it would be a percentage of their annual 

salary. 

 

There’s reports required by the commission within six months 

after the day this section comes into force. So they’ll have six 

months to do their work and make recommendations. 

 

And then finally, on or before December 31, 2018, a 

commission has to prepare and submit a report to the minister 

and the association containing all its recommendations and 

proposed regulations to implement those recommendations. So 

that sets up the work of the commission. 

 

10.5 describes the procedures that the commission needs to 

follow. They shall consider written submissions from the 

association and the minister. They can submit written questions 

to the association and the minister after it’s reviewed the written 

submissions. And then they can convene a hearing if they feel it 

necessary. 

 

The new section 10.6 says that notwithstanding The Provincial 

Court Act, the minister, the association and any justice of the 

peace shall not be granted standing to make submissions to a 

Provincial Court commission with respect to the matters in 

10.3. So there’s no standing to make submissions. 

 

And finally 10.7 is how the recommendations will be 

implemented. And there’s a process there that’s set out to 

implement the recommendations that are made. 

 

The final main clause is being changed. It’s clause — an 

additional clause — 10.8. And that is the transition period that I 

referred to earlier when I was describing the minister’s 

comments, where the transition period will start on April 1st, 

2013 and then continue on until the new regulations as prepared 

by the commission are in force. So there’s definitely some time, 

and then there’ll be a calculation made as to the proper salary to 

pay during the transition period. 

 

So I think these changes in and of themself are fairly 

responsible, Mr. Speaker. There’s probably more questions that 

we’ll be needing to ask when we get to committee. 

 

I think again the role of Justice of the Peace is a very historical 

role throughout the Commonwealth. And as I indicated earlier, 

it’s been around for almost 1,000 years now, so it’s a role that 

has evolved. 

 

But I remember in my brief appearances as an articling student, 

dealing with justices of the peace. I think they serve a vital 

function and vital role in the administration of justice. And as 

the minister indicated, they certainly have facilitated the work 

of courts, and they do make sure that all the things that show up 

on the courthouse doorstep basically are handled well and 

appropriately and facilitate the work of the judges of the 

Provincial Court and enable them to do their job as well. 

 

So at this point, our critic is going to have some comments for 

this in committee, and we look forward to the opportunity to 

raising any of the technical questions that we feel are going to 

be necessary once this bill is heard at the committee level. So 

that would conclude my remarks on this bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 68, The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the committee of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Marchuk that Bill No. 70 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 



2754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased to be able to enter into debate on Bill 70, The 

Education Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. Obviously any 

education Acts that are being proposed by the Saskatchewan 

Party government you want to pay very close attention to. And I 

really want to commend the Education critic because obviously 

having to follow all the different changes and of course all the 

different challenges that the school boards and the teachers and 

the students have and the parents have certainly is a task that 

one has to be vigilant in and certainly in trying to make sure 

that the Saskatchewan Party government is held to account to 

all the parties that I mentioned. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And Bill 70 is no different, Mr. Speaker. We think that Bill 70 

certainly deserves a lot of discussion and deserves a lot of 

consultation. It deserves a lot of understanding the different 

players and the effect that it has on the different players. So we 

really have to make sure we examine the proposal of Bill 70 

very carefully and very clearly. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, at the outset I look at some of the points 

that the minister made as to the intent of the bill. And Bill 70 

talks about a number of different categories and different things 

that he wishes to change including: the compulsory school age, 

going from seven to six, including pre-kindergarten in 

definition of schools, looking at the school day and how that 

really affects education amongst our young ones, highlighting 

pre-K [pre-kindergarten], talking about fines in terms of 

bringing them up to date. 

 

They talk about provincial residence in terms of how we can 

certainly support the families that are moving here. Whether 

those families are from different countries or whether they’re 

temporary workers, they obviously have children, and some of 

the bill wants to talk about that. We’re also certainly talking 

about a boundary adjustment for some of the students, capital 

grants, the return to the government’s information bank, 

property clauses, and additional board members for the La 

Ronge area as it relates to Northern Lights School Division. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s 11 different categories that the minister 

wanted to bring forward through this bill, and of course as the 

opposition, we want to be able to speak directly about some of 

the challenges and some of the perspectives of Bill 70. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we looked at is the 

whole notion of changing the compulsory kindergarten 

attendance for young children in Saskatchewan, to reduce that 

from the age of seven down to the age of six. And certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, I look at that as probably a step in the right direction. 

Obviously as times change, people certainly want to be able to 

have their kids access education at a younger age, and this bill, 

or the amendment would really bring the category of the 

mandatory age of seven and reducing it down to the age of six 

in which they must be attending school. And I think overall, I 

think that people in general really wouldn’t want to . . . 

wouldn’t make a fuss about that particular challenge, because 

the earlier you get the kids into school, certainly you want to 

undertake that effort. 

 

The other point I think is also important to raise, Mr. Speaker, is 

the fact that, you know, as you look at the pre-kindergarten kids 

and some of the programs that are available to them now, it’s 

actually amazing the stuff that they learn at that young age. So I 

think moving the age from seven to the age of six I think is 

probably not something that the opposition would want to hold 

the bill up on. We think that’s probably, in the long run, 

something that many of the organizations would probably 

support such as the school board association, such as the 

teachers and such as the parents. So I think it’s really important 

that we look at that, and we look at the good things that might 

be deserving of our support, and we certainly want to offer that 

kind of comment. 

 

I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that if you look at the 

discussion paper, the bill itself, I understood from the minister’s 

comments that he did have consultation with a number of 

organizations. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really, really 

important that we, you know, we identified in fact that the 

minister has said, and I quote, “We have consulted the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association; the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation; the League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents; and the 

Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials.” It just 

goes on and on as to the amount of consultation that the 

minister has spoken about in this particular bill. 

 

And one must never forget, Mr. Speaker, that when you do 

consultation with different groups and organizations, on a 

serious bill of this sort, that you can’t just simply say we 

consulted, because people out there know there’s a difference. 

Because you give the impression when you say that we have 

consulted, you give the impression that all the organizations 

that you’ve consulted with agree with all the changes. 

 

And you’ve got to be very careful there, because obviously all 

those groups may not agree with certain aspects of this 

particular bill and then when you make that assumption, you 

make that statement, people out in Saskatchewanland will 

probably just simply point out, well it appears that the 

government has all the consensus and support of all these 

organizations that the minister’s speaking about in his bill. 

When the fact of the matter is, and I would certainly want to 

make sure people understood that, when the government says 

consultation, it doesn’t necessarily mean agreement by those 

organizations that they supposedly consulted with. 

 

So on that notion, and given that particular reference and a 

point that I want to start off with, is that the minister has 

consulted with these groups. We don’t know if he’s got their 

support and blessing for some of these changes. But obviously 

from, on the outset, changing the mandatory age from seven to 

six is really not a major challenge and a major problem from 

our perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the other point that’s important as you look at some of the 

issues of the pre-kindergarten programs, Mr. Speaker, I look at 

some of the programs in my home community and some of the 

communities and a lot of our northern communities and you 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2755 

look at the pre-kindergarten programs, the pre-school activities, 

and some of the programs that are out there now, I think a lot of 

parents really, really appreciate the effort of the 

pre-kindergarten programs. 

 

We think that the early leaning process for the young children, 

if they’re three, four years old, we think that it’s an excellent 

example of how we assert through the bill and through some of 

our comments that education at a very young age, if children are 

exposed to it even as young as two or three, that they quickly 

learn and that they’re much better students by the time they hit 

the kindergarten age group. And as they enter the kindergarten 

school class, that they’re much better prepared. 

 

So I think certainly as you look at the connection between early 

learning such as pre-kindergarten, to having a good solid 

opportunity to enter into kindergarten, then go on to the middle 

years and to the grade 12 area, and then of course on to 

university or to a trade school, it just shows that there’s very, 

very good planning and a very good matrix of educational 

support. And pre-kindergarten is a very, very good model or a 

big part of that matrix to ensure we have success amongst the 

students that attend our various schools. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again when you look at the definition of 

schools, pre-kindergarten, and some of the points that the 

minister wanted to speak about with this particular bill, we 

think — and I certainly think as well — that pre-kindergarten 

should be protected. We should make sure that we’re not 

putting too many stringent rules and regulations on the 

pre-kindergarten program. Because obviously if you look at 

what the intent is, it’s to expose young children to an 

educational setting as early as two or three without having them 

have the rigors of attending, like as an example, a kindergarten 

program where sometimes the kindergarten children are kept all 

day long. 

 

Now we look at some of the examples. People talk about Japan. 

They talk about Brazil. They talk about China, in which they’ve 

seen this kind of exposure where young kids, as young as two 

or three, are exposed to an educational opportunity or an 

education environment. And by the time they hit the 

kindergarten age they’re much, much further advanced. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think given the resources and the opportunity 

and the advancements that we have made as Canadians, and 

certainly as Saskatchewan people, that I think it’s a good 

investment that we continue the pre-K programs to make sure 

that the young kids have as much exposure to education as 

possible. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of different evidence and a lot 

of different examples and a lot of different compelling tales and 

stories about how young kids, as young as one and a half, two 

years old, are so ready and so adept at soaking in information. 

And many people believe that the learning process begins when 

the mother carries a child. And the child is really, certainly 

getting a lot of information and different signals and different 

communication means, you know, between mother and child. It 

really begins to, certainly from our perspective, lend credence 

to the argument that if the child can learn within the mother’s 

womb, then imagine having a child exposed to education right 

off the bat. And obviously there are some parents that may do 

that, to educate their children as soon as they’re born and 

continuing to do that through the pre-K programs and on to 

kindergarten. I’m sure that as we talk more about those issues 

that you will find that having kids, children, exposed to 

education, interaction, and communication at a very young age 

will certainly benefit them for years to come. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that I do a lot of communicating 

with my grandchildren when they’re very, very young. And 

some of the things that I try and do with them, I try and speak to 

them in very precise language. I do have what they call baby 

songs, but I also speak to them when they’re only about one, 

maybe two years old and we have . . . When I talk to them, you 

know, as an adult, and you learn and you watch how the kids 

are trying to pick up some of the words that you use. And to me 

I think speaking to them in an adult-like way even though 

they’re one or two years of age, I think that really prepares them 

and really educates them in some small way. So I am certainly 

contributing in a very, very small manner when it comes to your 

own grandchildren when they’re young. 

 

So the pre-K program itself I think is an excellent program, and 

we need to do all we can to advance that cause — as long as we 

don’t see the Saskatchewan Party try and put in some of their, 

like, standardized testing processes when it comes to 

pre-kindergarten programs or pre-kindergarten classes, because 

one must not forget that these are still children. Like they’re 

very young children, and generally they’re very adept at 

learning, but as long as we don’t see the Saskatchewan Party 

government, like what they’re trying to do with the 

standardized testing perspective, start putting in some of those 

notions that we go to have standardized testing for pre-K 

programs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we look at some of the silly notions that 

they’ve undertaken on other parts of the bills and some of the 

educational programs that they have. And that’s one of the 

things that kind of worries me when we talk about part of the 

portion of this bill when they say that the pre-kindergarten 

program is included in the definition of schools. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, what we don’t hope happens is that the Saskatchewan 

Party starts putting in standardized testing for the pre-K 

programs throughout the school, because quite frankly these are 

children as young as two or three and I think we should let them 

. . . allow them to learn but all of a sudden, you know, make 

sure that you realize that they’re still children and that they’re 

allowed to be children for a long, long time. And I think that’s 

important that we note that as well. 

 

The other thing that’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re 

talking about the school day in terms of what kind of school 

day, in terms of time. How long are you going to ensure that 

there is the allotted time for educating our students? Is it a 

longer school year? Is it longer hours per day? Is it less time for 

gym or time for artwork, that kind of thing? And if the 

Saskatchewan Party’s trying to force the school system to a 

place where school is no longer enjoyable for a number of 

children, then you’ve got to be careful on that front as well. 

There’s no question that, from our perspective, having a good, 

solid interaction on the educational perspective, on the social 

perspective, and certainly being physically active within the 

school time whether you’re within your school day, I think 

those are really, really strong components as well. I think they 

complement the learning ability and the capacity of our 



2756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

students. So I think it’s important that we really assess what is 

being meant in this particular bill when they talk about 

lengthening the school time that the students will spend in 

school and how that’s going to look in the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the other notion that they talk about 

are fines. I’m not sure of the details of the fines because 

obviously there are fines attached to areas in which either a 

school board or a superintendent or somebody within the 

education system may have done something to deserve a fine. 

They’re obviously updating these fines, and they’re indicating 

that the fines will be increased and that the government is no 

longer able to use the whole threat of fines seriously because 

the fine level is so low as a result of the outdated Act that we’re 

trying to improve on here through Bill 70. 

 

But the whole notion, Mr. Speaker, is people need to know 

what the fine structure is, like what are the fines for? Like who 

gets these fines? What kind of fines are they? What kind of 

violations? What exactly are we talking about? Because at the 

outset we should point out that it’s something that we find, 

basically not something that you see every day where there’s 

fines being assessed when it comes to the education of our 

children, because generally — and I notice this across the whole 

province — generally teachers and people that take care of the 

children do an excellent job. But the whole notion of bringing 

fines to this particular Act, we need to know what kinds of fines 

these are, what the amounts are, examples of how these fines 

may have applied or may not have applied. 

 

[16:45] 

 

These are some of the things I think we really have to pay close 

attention to. And that’s why I go back to my earlier point about 

consultation with the Saskatchewan School Board Association, 

because obviously they would be part of the process to 

determining how these fines work and are they in full 

consultation and have they got their agreement. And that’s one 

of the points that I would make, that we need to make sure that 

is the case. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the other point that I would raise is 

the provincial residents. You look at some of the people that 

have moved to Saskatchewan. We want to continue being a 

province where we accommodate growth and accommodate 

population increase. And you see some of our schools being 

stressed to the maximum in terms of number of pupils per 

classroom. It’s a great credit to our teaching profession that’s 

out there on how they’re able to cope, not just with local 

children that are joining their classroom, but children from 

other countries and children from other parts of the world that 

join Saskatchewan and move to the province. And the teacher 

certainly has to make as best she can of the situation — or he — 

of the situation in the event that they have overcrowding in their 

classroom. And that’s a very apparent problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the challenges, I think, when we talk about this 

particular bill in terms of the provincial residency to ensure that 

we have affording education to some of the people that moved 

to the province, whether they moved from a different province 

or from a different country, is that when you see that the 

educational assistants that are being terminated and have been 

fired. They’re a very valuable resource and a very valuable 

support person to the teacher, and now you see a lot of these 

educational assistants gone. And you see the challenge of 

having immigrants and people moving from different countries 

into an overcrowded classroom. Well this obviously stresses the 

whole system. It certainly stretches the ability of the teacher to 

teach each of the students with the quality time and quality 

instruction. So we must not forget those particular challenges 

that are encountered on a daily basis by our teaching staff. 

 

The other point that was part of this bill, Mr. Speaker, is the 

boundary adjustment for students. The minister proposed to 

make a buffer zone. Obviously there is some overlapping rules 

and regulations on how the school zones and divisions are 

drawn up. And there are probably a lot of examples of how one 

child may be one block off a certain school division is forced to 

go to the school division that he or she lives in. And yet it’s 

very complicated for the parents. It’s very complicated for the 

school, very complicated for the child. Of course that’s the most 

important thing to remember. 

 

And I think this particular bill adjusts that. It talks about buffer 

zones. It allows the process to assess how this is going to 

impact that particular student. So the buffer zone concept, as 

long as it’s not abused . . . And I believe that the point that they 

raise here is that there is only a handful of occasions in which 

this was a major problem, where a student was just at the edge 

of a certain school division and couldn’t attend school at the 

school division that they should be for a variety of reasons. So 

this obviously offers that concession. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we consult with 

the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association], we 

consult with the teachers. And if it’s only a handful of 

occasions where this buffer zone would be able to address those 

disparities, Mr. Speaker, we don’t suspect that this is another 

major challenge with this particular bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at the capital grants and 

agreements. We look at the property classes. We look at the 

returns to Government Relations in terms of the assessment of 

properties. And it always amazes us on this side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, when you look at all the demands and 

the challenges that this particular Sask Party government places 

on our educational institutions, whether it’s the universities or 

whether it’s the schools or whether it’s the pre-K programs, 

you’re starting to wonder where all this challenge is coming 

from. 

 

And teachers across the board, Mr. Speaker, they’re certainly 

trying to figure out where this government is going with some 

of these strategies. As an example, with standardized testing, 

they obviously want to be able to see what’s the government’s 

overall objective, and many times that information is not shared 

in a respectful manner with the teachers. And part of this bill 

talks about the whole notion of property classes, and it talks 

about two tiers of an education system and some of the 

challenges that certainly would provide to the Saskatchewan 

people overall. Mr. Speaker, these are very important, 

fundamental questions that have to be asked on this particular 

bill. 

 

And of course, the last part of the bill, where we spoke about an 

additional board member for La Ronge, obviously this minister 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

and his government were lobbied to increase the number of 

board members for the Northern Lights School Division. And 

certainly La Ronge, given its size, there was compelling 

arguments that La Ronge should have an additional board 

member. And I think, from our perspective again and having a 

quick chat with the member from Cumberland, who’s got a lot 

of extensive experience being on the board for the Northern 

Lights School Division, and he was a very good school board 

Chair, Mr. Speaker, obviously his perspective is that La Ronge 

certainly is advocating for a second board position. It keeps the 

integrity of Northern Lights School Division solid. And that’s 

what the region wants, then certainly he’s supportive of that. 

And from our perspective it’s always nice to have that input and 

that advice from the member from Cumberland. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of a mishmash of a lot of things 

that is being proposed in this particular bill, Bill 70. And we 

look at some of them, that we don’t think there’s a major, major 

challenge with them. But on the flip side, if you look at some of 

the other issues that they’re making reference to like capital 

grants, other returns to Government Relations, the property 

classes, and the different tiers of school systems, you really 

have to be careful how you approach those issues. You have to 

be very careful to pay attention to what they’re doing. 

 

And that’s one of the points that we would raise in opposition, 

is that we would encourage people, whether it’s LEADS 

[League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents] or whether it’s school board members, 

whether it is the parents or whether it’s the SSBA, these are 

different organizations out there that have the knowledge, have 

the information, have the ability, and certainly have the capacity 

to really assess what this all means to their school board, and 

more importantly, what it means to the students that are in these 

various schools. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in a nutshell that’s basically what Bill 70 is 

proposing to do. It talks about compulsory age from seven years 

of age and moving it down to six. It talks about 

pre-kindergarten, including that in the definition of schools. It 

talks about the school day, what that might look like. It’s 

highlighting the pre to K opportunities. It talks about the fines 

that are out of date and a lot . . . [inaudible] . . . that they need to 

adjust that as well. 

 

It talks about the provincial residency clause, the boundary 

adjustments in relation to a buffer zone, the capital grants and 

agreement return to Government Relations, the property classes 

and different tiers regarding the school system, and the final 

point about the additional board members in La Ronge. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot to digest here. And we’re 

certainly going to take our time to look at the bill, work with 

valuable opposition members such as the member from 

Cumberland because obviously he’s got great experience with 

Northern Lights School Division and has a vast amount of 

knowledge as to how the taxation system works and, you know, 

what the challenges are, and to work very closely with the 

Education critic as well. Because, you know, if that’s the value 

of having a good, solid opposition is that the experience and the 

history they have, whether it’d be in government or different 

boards or agencies, that they have that knowledge first-hand. 

And they’re able to certainly hold this government to account. 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of different issues that we’re 

going to raise with this bill. We are going to take our time 

assessing the bill. We will make the contact and at the same 

time we’ll encourage people to contact us, whether it’s the 

SSBA or a parent or a teacher or a student, you know, if they 

have any concerns on this bill, whether it’d be the buffer zone 

or the fines or the compulsory school age or the pre-K 

programs. 

 

We need to hear from you as well because, as opposition, it 

gives us great ammunition, it gives us great opportunity to hold 

this government to account. And a very strong, effective 

opposition that has a good network of people that know these 

issues and know these issues very, very clearly and have some 

great ideas in how to improve these systems, then obviously 

they have the doors open to you when it comes to the 

opposition. We need to communicate more. We need to 

communicate effectively. And once that is achieved, Mr. 

Speaker, then this government cannot pull the wool over 

Saskatchewan people’s eyes and try and sneak in some of their 

right wing agenda to our school system. And there will be 

nobody there to hold them to account if we don’t have that 

collaboration and if we don’t have that partnership with the 

different agencies that are involved with education. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this bill was introduced in November, and this 

is our third, fourth month we’ve had the bill. We are having the 

communication. The critic is certainly doing his or her part to 

engage different groups and different organizations. And so 

there’s a critic and then there’s people that, within the 

opposition, that help the critic. So there’s a number of people 

that are certainly looking at the educational challenges that this 

bill may provide, but we’re also looking at the educational 

opportunities to enhance a lot of possibilities for our students. 

And that’s something that I want to stress, that our role is to 

oppose and to hold the government to account, but on a few 

occasions if we think some of these bills and some of these 

parts of this bill are positive for the people of Saskatchewan, 

then we’re not going to hold it up. We’re going to continue 

moving forward because that’s exactly what good governance is 

about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while there are certain parts of this particular 

bill that we would support and we like, there are many others 

that we want to have clear questions answered. We want to have 

a clear agenda as to what the Sask Party is trying to undertake. 

And once we have that understanding through our partnership 

consultation and blessing — that’s one of the things we want to 

make sure we point out; we want to consult with the impacted 

groups and organizations — but we want their blessing on some 

of the things that we may counter propose when it comes to this 

bill as an official opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues we want to continue to 

assess in this bill. We have a bit of a way to go yet before the 

bill is passed. We want to make sure that we give as many of 

our opposition critics the opportunity to go through this bill and 

connect with the stakeholders. And, Mr. Speaker, we will take 

the time necessary to study this bill to ensure that people out 

there are fully aware of what the implications are and to 

determine if there’s any part of the action of the Sask Party 

government . . . That this bill is not hurting any particular 

group, program, or partner within our educational institution. 



2758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

So, Mr. Speaker, overall the Saskatchewan education system is 

a great system. We have a number of teachers that commit to 

their job, and despite all the Sask Party bungling on the 

educational front, Mr. Speaker, our education programs and our 

teachers and our staff and our school boards and our students 

are doing an excellent job making our province proud. There’s 

always work to do. There’s always improvements to be made. 

We’re not denying that fact, but I can tell you today that we’re 

very, very committed to education. And part of that 

commitment is to make sure that we study these bills 

thoroughly and we hold this government to account. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we 

again reiterate the requests from the different players to join us, 

share the information with us because that makes an effective, 

well-informed opposition a good, solid threat to the Sask 

Party’s agenda to try and push forward a right wing agenda. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t compliment the people of 

Saskatchewan. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill 70. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 2012 

(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being near the time of recess, 

this House stands adjourned to 7 p.m. . . . recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2727 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2727 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2727 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2727 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2727 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2727 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2728 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Spring Free From Racism Family Day 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2728 

 Outstanding Principal Provides Leadership 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2728 

 Aboriginal Police Preparation Program  

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2728 

 Social Work Week 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2729 

 Army Reservists Receive Arctic Response Training 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2729 

 Team Canada West Wins Gold at Special Olympics 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2729 

 T.rex Discovery Centre Unveils Display 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2729 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Courthouse Security 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2730 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2730 

 Lawsuit Regarding Technology Contract 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2731 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2731 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2731 

 Federal Rail Freight Service Bill 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2732 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2732 

 Prince Albert Bridge 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2733 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2733 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2735 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2735 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2741 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2742 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2745 

 Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2747 

 Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2747 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2750 

 Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2750 

 



 

 Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2751 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2753 

 Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2754 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


