




















































Hansard: April 17, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 48A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 17, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3259 

 April 17, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave of the Assembly for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks, 

colleagues in the legislature, for the leave. It’s an honour for me 

to be able to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the House, some special guests that have joined us in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Dr. Larry Rosia is president and chief executive officer of 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], the new president and chief executive officer of 

SIAST, if I can use that term. Mr. Speaker, he’s also joined by 

the board of SIAST, Ralph Boychuk. I’m going to be meeting 

with these gentlemen a little bit later on about their ongoing 

plans for that very, very important institution within the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could tell you that Dr. Rosia joined SIAST in 

July of 2012. And so to say new is maybe a bit of a stretch, but 

certainly the introduction is the first chance that I’ve had to 

properly welcome him on behalf of the government here to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He had served 13 years prior to that as dean of the School of 

Construction at SAIT [Southern Alberta Institute of 

Technology] Polytechnic in Calgary. He’s worked literally at 

every level of education in terms of his 35-year career. We’re 

very pleased that he’s made the move to Saskatchewan, like 

other Albertans have done over the last number of months, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I also am honoured to introduce a friend, Ralph Boychuk, who 

has been involved in many aspects of the life of this province in 

terms of the banking industry and the business life of 

Saskatchewan through his involvement with the chamber of 

commerce where he was a former president of the 

Saskatchewan chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These gentlemen are leading SIAST at a very exciting time in 

the life of that particular institution. Our growing economy 

requires that we are training more and more, that we are 

providing more and more education to those who want to 

participate in that growing economy, Mr. Speaker, and SIAST 

is using innovative partnerships with industry to be able to meet 

the labour shortage challenge that exists here. 

 

Evidence of that was just earlier this week when SIAST 

received a large donation from K+S Potash — $121,800 to go 

towards mining training in the province. It is good to have K+S 

back to the province after they left in the 1970s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell this House that apprenticeship training is up 83 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. I can tell this House that more than 17 per 

cent of SIAST’s students are Aboriginal. And, Mr. Speaker, 

most importantly of all, I can tell you that SIAST grads are 

finding jobs right here in the province of Saskatchewan. We 

want to thank the doctor for his leadership to date, and we want 

to thank him in advance for what’s to come. And we offer the 

same to the chairman of the board of SIAST. And in so doing, 

we welcome them to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Premier in welcoming Dr. Rosia and Mr. Boychuk to 

the Assembly. We know Dr. Rosia has a wealth of experience, 

and I’m sure that he’ll be bringing that to his role at SIAST, 

which he’s been in for a while now getting his feet under him, 

and will be providing leadership to the important institution that 

SIAST is here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We all have constituents, family members, businesses that we 

know, Mr. Speaker, that have benefited from the good work 

that SIAST has done in this province over many years. And we 

know it’s a hugely important institution for the future of our 

province. So we’re happy that they’re here in the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to introduce to you and through you, two great 

entrepreneurs from our province. Brian Olson is president of 

Power Pin Inc. and Terry Jo Batke is vice-president and director 

of operations for the company. 

 

Power Pin, Mr. Speaker, a Saskatchewan-based company from 

Fort Qu’Appelle, they’re the world’s largest supplier of 

implement hitches. They produce 220,000 of them around the 

world every year. You’ll find them on the back end of almost 

every tractor produced in the world. They send them to 

countries of Brazil, Germany, France, Italy, the United States, 

England, Russia, Mr. Speaker. And they’re currently 

developing a new system for smaller trucks, and they call it the 

Hit-N-Hitch. And, Mr. Speaker, it is expected it may 

revolutionize that industry. 

 

And as a true Saskatchewan entrepreneur, they sell around the 

world to the biggest companies in the world, but when they 

want to start a new project like Hit-N-Hitch, they go to Southey 

and they buy a trailer. And that is how this operation operates, 

Mr. Speaker. So please help me welcome them to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 



3260 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, in the west gallery I have my first group for the season and 

actually my first group of school people since I’ve been here six 

years. So they’re very special to me. Se-Se-Wahum School 

from Debden, 26 grade 9 students, and they’re accompanied by 

their teachers Marla Netmaker, Doreen Netmaker, and 

chaperones Nicole Netmaker, Derek Rabbitskin, Rose Morin, 

Valerie Thomas, and the bus driver, Merle Morin. 

 

So thank you very much for being here, and I would like 

everyone to make them welcome in their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly, a group of 43 grade 6, 7, and 8 

students from Thomson Community School here in Regina, 

accompanied by teachers Kyle DuMont, Luke Blondeau, Leah 

Corbett, and teacher assistant, Wendy Cowan. 

 

And Thomson Community School, I’ve talked about it before 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It’s a really special place. It’s 

quite literally the embodiment of our provincial motto, “from 

many peoples, strength.” And today’s group of students is no 

exception, Mr. Speaker. Including students born here in 

Canada, we’ve got students from Bolivia, India, China, the 

Philippines, and Israel, to name some of those places of origin. 

So it’s a really neat place. There are a lot of interesting things 

going on there. And I appreciate Mr. DuMont taking the time to 

bring the students down, the other teachers bringing the 

students to their Legislative Assembly. Welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Request leave for extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for a leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to introduce one of Saskatchewan’s 

dynamic young leaders, Randall Fiddler. Randall Fiddler is a 

third-year student at the University of Saskatchewan majoring 

in Native studies and minoring in political studies. He’s a 

member of the Waterhen Lake First Nation and has Métis roots 

in the northern community of Green Lake. He was raised in 

Meadow Lake and has overcome many obstacles at 20 years 

old. 

 

He has continued to empower youth from leadership to sexual 

health, thanks to work he’s done with Meadow Lake Tribal 

Council, health and social development for youth in urban, 

rural, and remote northern Saskatchewan communities. The 

bullying initiative and Aboriginal youth task force are very 

important to him because it is creating awareness and 

understanding of the realities that all youth face, whether you 

live in a rural, remote, or urban community. 

 

I would like to encourage all my colleagues to welcome 

Randall to his legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very proud to stand today to present a petition asking for 

increasing cellphone coverage to northwestern Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 

following. The prayer is: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service in Canoe Lake First Nations, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon; 

St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known 

as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nations along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, including the neighbouring communities in 

each of those areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular 

petition page, the people that have signed are primarily from 

Cole Bay, Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the need to create a publicly 

accessible asbestos registry here in the province. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take immediate action to increase protection of workers, 

patients, students, and the public by passing Bill 604, the 

asbestos right-to-know Act, which will make a list of 

public buildings containing asbestos available to the 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for reconsideration of passing Bill 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we know since the Act 

was introduced in December, literally hundreds of hours of 

study and comparison have been carried out in the interests of 

due diligence. And we know there is no labour relations crisis 

to fix and no necessity to rush this omnibus bill through that 

will likely govern workplace relations for decades to come. 

And if this bill does become law in Saskatchewan, working 

people — particularly young people, immigrant workers, and 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3261 

other vulnerable workers — will suffer from the hasty watering 

down of our current labour standards which set the mandatory 

minimums for all Saskatchewan workers. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

And people signing this petition come from Balcarres, Indian 

Head, Melville, Redvers, Wapella, Esterhazy, Regina, and 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Access to Physician Services 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know some days being 

short has its challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to recognize our 

government’s continued commitment to improving access to 

physician services for all Saskatchewan residents. Keeping and 

attracting key health providers, including physicians, is one of 

our top priorities. Since the release of our physician recruitment 

strategy in 2009, we’ve been training and recruiting more 

doctors and coming up with new ways to retain Saskatchewan- 

and Canadian-educated medical students. 

 

In 2013-2014, we’re providing 17.8 million in funding for 

post-graduate physician training seats at the University of 

Saskatchewan College of Medicine. Mr. Speaker, this is a $2 

million increase over last year and it will help support our 

broader goals of increasing the number of physicians working 

in Saskatchewan. We’re committed to a strong, viable College 

of Medicine, and to offering more seats in medical education. 

 

Since 2007-2008, medical education seats at the college have 

increased from 40 to 100, and medical residency positions have 

doubled from 60 to 120. Mr. Speaker, our multi-faceted 

approach to physician recruitment and retention is paying off. 

Physician numbers rose 15 per cent between 2008 and 2012. 

Over the same time, physician turnover had dropped by more 

than 2 per cent. 

 

We will continue to work to attract and keep physicians in 

communities across Saskatchewan, and meet the health care 

needs of all of our residents. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Sikh Society Celebrates Vaisakhi 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to speak about an 

incredible act of generosity and humility that took place in my 

community this past week. Mr. Speaker, I am speaking of the 

celebration of Vaisakhi, the establishment of the Khalsa. 

Members of the Sikh Society of Saskatoon mark this day by 

taking part in community service and offering food to over 500 

individuals at shelters across Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, a deep 

belief in equality and community building are major tenets of 

the Sikh faith. 

 

In speaking to a reporter, Gurwinder Singh, a member of the 

Sikh Society of Saskatoon said, and I quote: 

 

The kind of feedback that we get is just priceless. We 

cannot compare it with anything else. It is just the thing 

that gives you the most satisfaction and helps you come 

forward in a more generous way. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, they are already making plans for next 

year. 

 

The Sikh community in Saskatchewan is growing and now 

numbers well over 2,000 people. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

continues to be a diverse and vibrant place and the Sikh 

community is an active part of that. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

my fellow members of this legislature to join with me in 

thanking the Sikh Society of Saskatoon for their service to the 

community. We are grateful for their work and their 

commitment to equality. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Yorkton Students Win McKercher Cup 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize students from the Yorkton Regional High School 

who won the 14th annual McKercher Cup at the Canadian Bar 

Association’s mock trial competition in Saskatoon. 

 

Participating students included Emily Gage, Mari Grobler, 

Rebecca Hotsko, Adesewa Oloka, Mikaila Ortynsky, Alex 

Redwood, Dani Richard, and Wiktoria Wilanowicz. They were 

accompanied by their teachers Tara Haugen and Lisa Yeadon 

and coached by lawyers Gord Prichard and Shane Wagner from 

Rusnak, Balacko, Karchur and Rusnak. 

 

The event was held in honour of National Law Day, which is 

observed annually on April 17th and celebrates the signing of 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and promotes an increased 

awareness of legal rights and obligations. 

 

The competition provides students with the opportunity to learn 

the basic facts about courtroom procedures, rules of evidence, 

and various legal concepts inherent in a criminal trial. The 

mock trial was held at the Court of Queen’s Bench in Saskatoon 

and included witnesses, a judge, a jury, as well as lawyers for 

both defence and the Crown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

congratulating these bright students from Yorkton who won the 

McKercher Cup at the Canadian Bar Association’s mock trial 

competition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 



3262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

World Hemophilia Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today is World Hemophilia Day. 

This year, the Canadian Hemophilia Society is marking its 60th 

anniversary and the World Federation of Hemophilia, its 50th. 

World Hemophilia Day is an opportunity for the global 

bleeding disorders community to raise awareness about where 

they have been, where they want to go and how, together, they 

can close the gap in care experienced by many individuals with 

bleeding disorders. 

 

This week, Canada hosted the second global research forum on 

bleeding disorders in Montreal. There are many critical issues 

facing people with bleeding disorders, but it is also a time of 

great hope, as research is pointing to new treatment products for 

improved care. 

 

In Toronto, the CN Tower will light up in red to mark World 

Hemophilia Day. Mr. Speaker, Hemophilia Saskatchewan plans 

to have booths at Canadian Blood Services in both Regina and 

Prince Albert today. Hemophilia Saskatchewan is the provincial 

organization that seeks to provide education, support, and hope 

to improve quality of life for all people with bleeding disorders.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan bleeding disorders program at 

the Royal University Hospital provides comprehensive care for 

individuals with hemophilia and other bleeding disorders. It 

also provides valuable educational programs for the community 

and for health care providers. Mr. Speaker, I invite everyone to 

join me in recognizing World Hemophilia Day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

St. Brieux Crusaders Win Gold 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 

this Assembly today to share another exciting sports story from 

my constituency. Last month the St. Brieux Crusaders became 

the Saskatchewan High School Athletic Association 1A Boys 

provincial champions after claiming the title at Hoopla 2013 in 

Saskatoon. 

 

They earned this title with an 89-75 win over LCBI [Lutheran 

Collegiate Bible Institute] in the gold medal game. This was the 

school’s first gold medal in a team sport in history, Mr. 

Speaker. The win also completed a strong run for the Crusaders 

who ended the year on an 11-game winning streak. They are a 

youthful team and should be strong for years to come. The 

school’s basketball program has been really developing over 

the last five years, according to team coach Gary Pachkowksi. 

 

The St. Brieux team used speed and skill to overcome what 

might be considered a lack of height, as they have no players 

over 6 feet tall. Calyb Hoffman led the Crusaders with 27 

points in the final game. He and teammate Julius Rara are 

currently being recruited to play basketball at the university 

level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Crusaders on their gold medal finish, and also in thanking the 

parents, coaches, and volunteers who helped make this season 

such a success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Couple Selected as Family of the Year 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, a strong spirit of 

volunteerism is the foundation of every thriving Saskatchewan 

community. I am proud to say that Moose Jaw has been blessed 

with two individuals who exemplify the spirit through their 

endeavours with their community and with their church. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at last week’s Knights of Columbus State Council 

dinner, Pat and Al Rossler of Moose Jaw were duly recognized 

as the Saskatchewan Family of the Year. Al and Pat Rossler’s 

first commitment has been to their family. This is seen through 

their 50-plus years of marriage and raising four wonderful 

children. Al has been very involved in many leadership 

positions with the Knights of Columbus, while both Al and Pat 

have served on parish council and heading up liturgy 

committees while volunteering in a variety of lay ministries. 

They are also committed to the behind-the-scenes tasks, such as 

cleaning of the church and preparing pancake breakfasts, fall 

suppers, organizing Christmas hamper donations for the less 

fortunate, and other charitable activities. 

 

In the non-church community, Al has previously coached Elks 

minor football and Pat has been involved with the Royal Purple 

service organization dedicated to the advancement of speech 

and hearing support for children. 

 

I ask this Assembly to join me in recognizing Al and Pat 

Rossler for their dedicated service and congratulate them on 

being selected as Saskatchewan’s Knights of Columbus Family 

of the Year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Party Policy and History 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

weekend the federal NDP [New Democratic Party] voted to 

remove the word socialist from their party constitution. Now 

many people would say they still are, they just don’t want to 

use that word. So in a sense they’re trying to run and hide from 

their party’s history, just like the Saskatchewan NDP. Today if 

you go to the NDP website, you will no longer find the Regina 

Manifesto. That just doesn’t mean they have rejected it, that 

means they’ve hidden it. 

 

You won’t find their disastrous $5 billion platform from last 

election. Once again, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t rejected that 

platform, they’ve just hidden it. You won’t even find the 2011 

NDP policy review, their infamous tree book written by the 

now Leader of the NDP. Again it’s still their party policy, 

they’ve just hidden it. Mr. Speaker, you certainly won’t find 

any reference to Dwain Lingenfelter, who wasn’t seen, heard, 

or even mentioned at their recent leadership convention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it makes you wonder why is the NDP leader 

hiding from his own policies and, more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, why is he hiding an election platform and policy 

review he helped author? 

 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3263 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Asbestos Registry 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This evening the 

Human Services Committee will consider Bill 604, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is the asbestos right-to-know amendment Act, 

a piece of private members’ legislation that I had the honour of 

bringing forward. Though initially opposed to this common 

sense step, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the Sask Party has 

recently said that they will support this piece of legislation, 

legislation that will create an online registry, a list of public 

buildings that contain asbestos. 

 

I want everything to go smoothly this evening in committee as 

the Human Services Committee will be looking at the bill, Mr. 

Speaker. So my question to the Premier: will the government 

members tonight be supportive of this legislation and not be 

obstructionist in their approach? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I thank the Premier for his co-operation on this 

issue, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s a constructive thing for this 

Assembly and for this province when we can find common 

ground on issues that are simply based on common sense. 

 

This legislation is important, Mr. Speaker, because it’s about 

providing more information to the people of Saskatchewan so 

that workers, families, students, and patients are able to make 

the best decisions possible for their family members. But in 

order for that to happen, Mr. Speaker, there needs to be 

compliance with legislation. We’ve been talking about this for a 

number of months now in the Assembly, so the Sask Party 

government has had time in order to discuss and to have a 

rollout plan for what the legislation, how it will change things 

here in the province. 

 

My question to the Premier: what plan is in place in order to 

ensure that there will be full compliance by school divisions, 

health regions, Crown corporations with this important piece of 

public safety legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had 

ongoing discussions. This piece of legislation is an amendment 

to The Public Health Act. We have determined that the 

enforcement provisions will be done by the officials from the 

ministry of occupational health and safety, or Labour Relations 

and Workplace Safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those individuals have already worked to identify 

which institutions have their information ready, which 

institutions will require some more time to come on. But we 

want to make sure that we have . . . the information there is 

meaningful, is up to date, is kept up to date. We have a 

requirement that each of the buildings that’s affected by the 

legislation will have something on site so that people don’t 

accidentally miss it, or that there is a reminder on site for 

workers that are going to be going into the building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the officials take that responsibility seriously, and 

I am confident that they will have a good level of compliance. 

Mr. Speaker, we know full well that asbestos, when 

encapsulated, is not a risk. But we want to ensure that we 

minimize and reduce risk wherever it can be found. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I thank the minister for his remarks. Many in 

the community have been championing this bill, especially the 

family and friends of the late Howard Willems. There are 

others, Mr. Speaker, many in the province who won’t know 

about this legislation and won’t know about the existence, the 

soon-to-be existence of the asbestos registry that will be 

mandatory. So it’s an important step, Mr. Speaker, because this 

legislation is a very significant step. It’s a Canadian first, and it 

is a step that I think government should be congratulated on for 

coming onside and supporting. 

 

But while progress has been made, Mr. Speaker, there are still 

very important follow-through steps that must take place. And I 

think the follow-through steps include making the public fully 

aware of this change. My question to the Premier: what plans 

are in place in order to share information about the asbestos 

registry so that all families, all patients, all students are able to 

make the best possible decisions for their family members? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

probably appropriate that today again we recognize the late 

Howard Willems who made it his life cause to try and raise 

awareness of asbestos. His spouse and his stepson, Jesse Todd, 

have been tireless advocates since his passing, and I think we 

want to once again offer our condolences to the family and to 

the contributions made by Mr. Willems and by their family in 

raising awareness. 

 

We have already included it on the government website. We are 

ensuring that there are a number of links there in place. We 

would encourage the media to report tomorrow as we expect 

the bill to go through all the final steps tomorrow as we expect 

the bill to pass through the House. We’ve worked as well, Mr. 

Speaker, with the House leaders and the staff within the 

Assembly to ensure that all of the scripts and everything are 

ready so that the bill is able to pass through committee tonight, 

Mr. Speaker, and we look forward to a significant amount of 

public awareness. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Support for Home Care 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, rather than being lean or efficient, 

the new changes to home care in the province are bureaucratic 

and full of red tape. The Sask Party government has asked 



3264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

health regions to make cuts and find efficiencies. What that 

really means is cuts to services for people. One of the first 

fallouts of the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is a clawback 

of important home care services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, basic services including laundry and cleaning help 

people stay in their homes and live healthier lives. Home care 

also saves the health system resources because it’s more 

affordable for us as a province to have people living at home 

rather than staying in hospitals or care facilities. Mr. Speaker, 

why is the Sask Party neglecting the importance of home care 

in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, home care is a service that is delivered by all health 

regions across this province. Mr. Speaker, in the last six years, 

the budget for health regions in this province has gone up 46 

per cent, an additional $1 billion into health regions’ budgets 

over that time period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact we believe that home care is an important 

part of the continuing care for seniors and that’s why we’re 

investing $2 million to pilot a new home care project, a 

program in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region which is based 

on programs that are used in other parts of Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. We hope that that program will be able to demonstrate 

good results here in Regina Qu’Appelle in a short order of time 

and hopefully be able to deliver it in other parts of the other 

health regions across Saskatchewan once we demonstrate its 

efficiency. We know that home care is an important tool to 

keep seniors in their homes longer and to, in this program 

specifically, Mr. Speaker, to hopefully defer trips to emergency 

rooms and acute care beds and provide increased assistance for 

seniors in their own homes. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Michael Lilley is a senior in 

Regina who has severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 

and asthma. He is severely allergic to dust, and he stops 

breathing when exposed to too much dust. He gets sent to the 

hospital if he has a severe attack. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lilley has until now been receiving home care 

to assist with cleaning and laundry services. It’s been a useful 

service to him to stay out of the hospital and in his own home. 

But, Mr. Speaker, on April 8th, following the Sask Party 

government’s mandate for more cuts in health care, Mr. Lilley 

was cut off. This senior was told he was on his own, and he 

should look in the Yellow Pages for help. Mr. Speaker, why 

would the Sask Party government tell a senior to look in the 

Yellow Pages for help when home care has been helping Mr. 

Lilley? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not aware of the particular case that the member 

from Lakeview raises today in the House, but I would say that 

significant dollars have been invested into health regions in 

Saskatchewan in this year’s budget. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, when you look across Canada at health 

budgets that have been released already, Mr. Speaker, including 

Manitoba’s just yesterday which only sees a 2.7 per cent 

increase in health spending, this budget in Saskatchewan 

includes 3.5 per cent increase in health spending but, Mr. 

Speaker, more importantly, four and a half per cent as an 

average for health regions across Saskatchewan. And that’ll 

range from anywhere from 2 per cent all the way up to 7 per 

cent in increased health funding, in increased health funding 

specifically for health regions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re pretty excited about this pilot project that we’re going to 

launch here in Regina Qu’Appelle to enhance the home care 

services, Mr. Speaker, and as I said before, hopefully this 

demonstrate some good results and be able to deliver it across 

the province into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview, 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, after a review, Mr. Lilley was told 

Social Services will now pick up the tab for a private sector 

cleaner. But Mr. Lilley has been told he has to find two 

contractors in the Yellow Pages, get some proposals and then 

submit them, and then the Social Services ministry will pay for 

the private cleaning service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this whole process is a mess of red tape and 

bureaucracy and a shell game. It’s putting undue stress on a 

senior, and it seems to be pushing responsibility to Social 

Services to deliver reduced home care. This is nothing more 

than extra red tape for seniors and home care clients, and it does 

nothing to improve home care or the health care system. 

 

To the minister: why would the Sask Party government fail to 

improve home care and instead leave the Social Services 

ministry scrambling to fill the gaps they’re creating in the 

health system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again, while not knowing 

the specifics of this individual’s circumstances, Mr. Speaker, 

we are providing record funding to health regions across 

Saskatchewan, including Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact their budget will be going up significantly 

in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. Those dollars will be needed 

to be allocated by the health region in important programs, 

including home care and long-term care and delivering acute 

care services and emergency services and physician services, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly I will be pleased to follow up in this particular case, 

particularly as it relates to Social Services, Mr. Speaker, as I 

can’t speak to the specifics of this one. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this government is making a concerted effort 

to not only increase the funding for health care regions across 

this province, including Regina Qu’Appelle, but also look at 

new and innovative ways to deliver important services like 

home care. 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3265 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Highway Conditions 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

been keeping a close eye on the CAA’s [Canadian Automobile 

Association] worst roads poll. For Saskatchewan people like 

those that live in Estevan, Hatchet Lake, or Earl Grey, voting 

on the CAA website once a year seems to be the only way to 

get the Sask Party government to pay attention to their 

crumbling roads — your crumbling roads. 

 

My question to the minister: does he pay attention to CAA 

worst roads poll, and can he give us an update on which 

communities are winning this year’s contest for the Sask 

Party’s worst roads? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly aware of the CAA poll that is going 

on right now, that is being conducted. And it’s people from 

around the province that are calling in and placing their vote for 

what they think is the worst road, perhaps not always with a 

perspective of all the roads across Saskatchewan certainly. 

 

I can tell you that I’m very, very fortunate with 48 members on 

this side of the House that tend to tell me where roads need 

fixing, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s in Estevan and the issue just 

north of Estevan on Highway 47 I believe it is, Mr. Speaker. So 

we gain information from a number of different avenues, 

whether it’s the area transportation planning committees, 

whether it’s the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

from this side of the House, or whether it’s from CAA, Mr. 

Speaker. We look at all the information as we come in. 

 

Certainly the Ministry of Highways has a long-term plan as to 

what highways will be fixed, a five-year plan, Mr. Speaker. 

And we’re moving forward with that plan to make sure that we 

have the best transportation and road system that we can 

possibly have in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, highways for Cumberland 

House and Dinsmore are currently on top of CAA’s worst 

highways list. And this voting was done this week, Mr. 

Speaker, or last week. And despite government attention and 

commitments to Earl Grey last year, Highway 22 is still on the 

list this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government’s new provincial 

budget allocates less money for highways this year. And that’s 

right, Mr. Speaker, the highways budget has less this year. 

When will the residents of the Cumberland House area, 

Dinsmore, Rosetown, Earl Grey, Gravelbourg, or any of the 

hundreds of other communities finally have their roads fixed, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would say again 

regarding the CAA poll, this is not a new poll. It’s been around 

for a number of years, probably even back a number of years 

ago when that member was the minister of Highways. I will say 

the difference between when that member was the minister of 

Highways and this government, Mr. Speaker, is the investment 

in the highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those members turned their backs on many of the highways 

and had a $1 billion pothole for our government to fill, Mr. 

Speaker. We worked very hard with a number of extremely 

large budgets, Mr. Speaker, this being the second largest budget 

in highways history, Mr. Speaker. And when you compare our 

funding over the last six years compared to the previous six 

years of the NDP, it’s an increase of funding for highways 

alone by 76 per cent over the days of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a budget here from 

2007 that shows $65.5 million was committed to northern 

roads, including Cumberland House’s road. I’m going to send 

that over to the minister so he has a little read, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Safe roads are an absolute necessity in northern Saskatchewan. 

The Sask Party government draws out millions if not billions of 

dollars out of the North from all sorts of mining. They should at 

least have the decency to realize that transportation of those 

goods has to be done safely and that this cannot be done . . . 

You cannot handle the dangerous goods routes on a network of 

damaged roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, decent roads benefit mining companies. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s vital to the safety of all northern residents. There’s 

huge potential for dangerous goods to be spilled and people’s 

lives could be put at risk. When will the minister listen to the 

northern people, listen to the mining companies, and at least 

invest some of the revenues generated by the North to fix the 

roads in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — It’s a very interesting line of 

questions, Mr. Speaker. When will we start listening? Well we 

have listened, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ve entered into an 

agreement with Cameco, Mr. Speaker, a joint partnership to 

repair or to extend a connector road for 914 specifically to 

address the issues that member is talking about. But it’s 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, because in this year’s budget there is 

money for that. What did that member do? He voted against it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we checked his budget for this 

year and guess what? Nothing for northern roads, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s no question that when the minister spoke with the 

press, he said, and I quote, “We’re going to have potholes. 

We’re going to have heaving. We’re going to have all of that. 

There’s no question. I know that.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that the roads are bad, 



3266 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

but he has no plans to fix them. When people drive on roads 

that are this bad in northern Saskatchewan, they are damaging 

property, which are expensive vehicles, and it’s also threatening 

people’s lives, Mr. Speaker. When will this government and 

when will this minister realize that if they don’t fix our roads in 

northern Saskatchewan and through all Saskatchewan that they 

are putting industry at risk and more importantly, Saskatchewan 

people’s lives at risk, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly we know that 

the seasons have a huge impact on our road surfaces, not only 

in northern Saskatchewan but in southern Saskatchewan. The 

frost coming in and out of — if it ever leaves our road system, 

Mr. Speaker — it certainly has an impact. We see potholes, and 

we see heaving not only in northern Saskatchewan but also in 

southern Saskatchewan. That’s why we are continuing to put a 

record amount not only to capital, which is new construction, 

but also maintenance, is to make sure the roads we have 

continue to serve the people as best as possible. 

 

But I can’t help but listen to that member opposite day in and 

day out when he stands up and asks questions. He asks 

questions like, why would we not put more into northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? He was the minister of Health . . . 

minister of Highways, sorry. They didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. He 

asked questions yesterday or two days ago about expropriation. 

He expropriated, Mr. Speaker. It’s unbelievable. He’s asking all 

these questions on the very subjects that either in expropriation 

he did or in funding northern highways he didn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Funding for Firefighting 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Protecting the 

province’s forests requires co-operation with communities in 

and around the North. And that’s what’s so disconcerting for 

people living in the forest fringe communities, to see the Sask 

Party government propose a new wildfires Act that leaves it up 

to RMs [rural municipality] to fight wildfires with limited 

access to the forested land and tax dollars. 

 

The province has a responsibility to protect against the potential 

damage of fires to communities, to industry, and to people. But, 

Mr. Speaker, under the proposed wildfire Act, municipalities 

and their local volunteer firefighters could be left fighting fires 

with limited resources and equipment, potentially bankrupting 

the RM. Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask Party government 

tell rural municipalities that they are now responsible for 

fighting wildfires? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. To the hon. member, certainly fighting fires and 

keeping residents and communities safe in northern 

Saskatchewan and across Saskatchewan is a priority for this 

government. We will continue to do so with the resources of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

We asked the municipalities to participate in that. They have 

done that. They have done that under the members opposite 

when they were government. They continue to do that today. 

We will continue to use technology and to look at the best ways 

of fighting fires in northern Saskatchewan, and we will 

continue to ask the municipalities to participate. Right now 

we’re consulting with them. We’re asking them for ideas. 

We’re asking them for their innovation. And once that 

consultation process is finished, we will bring legislation to this 

Assembly to ensure that this good record continues. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, RMs are being told that the 

province will no longer provide support to fight fires in the four 

and a half kilometre buffer area unless the RMs pay for it. 

Given that the province knows that the potential threat of fires 

is increasing, this makes no sense. RMs have pointed out in 

many meetings with the ministry that, among other things, 

climate change predictions show an increase in the frequency 

and severity of wildfires, and there’s an increase in the amount 

of mature fuels in the forest fringe area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the ministry, through the proposed 

wildfires Act, already telling municipalities they’ll be forced to 

absorb all the costs for fighting wildfires? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. With all due respect, the member opposite has her 

information wrong. We are not asking municipalities to fund 

the entire operation. Certainly there have been joint funding 

arrangements in the past. We have asked municipalities to do 

their share. They have done that time and time again. We have 

discussions ongoing and going forward, Mr. Speaker, but again 

the premise of the member’s opposite question is absolutely 

wrong again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the ministry says they will 

continue to assist rural municipalities to fight these wildfires. 

But on their web page, it states very clearly that they will only 

do so on a cost recovery basis. It’s the ministry’s way of 

dealing with the disastrous effects of fire, and it’s clearly 

different than how the province deals with other disasters such 

as flooding or grass fires. 

 

Rural municipalities have been speaking out about the proposed 

downloading of wildfire protection costs onto their ratepayers. 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

debated a resolution at their 2012 mid-term convention 

following resolutions and discussions raised in the RMs of 

Prince Albert, Buckland, Beaver River, and Lakeland. But so 

far there has been no indication that the Act won’t contain this 

downloading of costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister listen to the RMs? Will he 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3267 

commit today to change this proposed legislation and ensure it 

doesn’t download unmanageable costs onto the RMs? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, cost recovery is a 

responsible way to administer firefighting in the North and 

across Saskatchewan. It is indeed the way it has operated under 

members opposite and continues to operate today. We have a 

very good relationship with municipalities, with SARM. We 

continue to consult at the provincial level, at the regional level, 

with individual municipalities. 

 

And when it comes to downloading, I will take no direction 

from ministers opposite, because in the past and certainly in the 

years between 1991 and 2007 there has been a record amount of 

downloading from members opposite under municipalities. 

They asked for revenue sharing under that government. What 

did they get? We’re getting around to it. Sorry we didn’t get to 

it. Under this government there is a record amount of revenue 

going to municipalities, as it should be and as it will continue, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Combatting Discrimination and Bullying 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my last question to 

the Minister of Advanced Education, as he was commenting on 

the asbestos legislation he made an interesting point, Mr. 

Speaker. He talked about how the government website would 

be updated so Saskatchewan people could find out about the 

asbestos registry, how it could benefit their families. I think 

that’s a good step, a very common sense step, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What a contrast, Mr. Speaker, to what we heard from the 

Education minister yesterday when we were talking about 

gay-straight alliances here in the province — a complete refusal 

to simply update the government website. A very easy step, 

would not cost any money, and could be done tomorrow. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is it that this double standard 

. . . Why is it that the Minister of Advanced Education can post 

information on a government website about the existence of an 

asbestos registry, but when it comes to a gay-straight alliance, 

simply providing some information, not a legislative change, 

simply providing information to Saskatchewan students and 

parents, why is that not allowed? Why is he allowing this 

double standard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly not a 

double standard at all. We’re at the end of a process that, to the 

credit of the Leader of the Opposition, was initiated in many 

respects by him in terms of the legislation. As you get towards 

the end of a process, then you look to communication tools. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister said that’s what would happen. 

That’s precisely what we’ve said with respect to the issue of 

gay-straight alliances or bullying in general in terms of 

information on the website. We have a member, the member for 

Fairview who’s going to be doing some work in this particular 

issue. And all avenues of communication will be considered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, though with respect to anti-bullying in all of its 

forms, including information provision for gay-straight 

alliances but also around cyberbullying, I can tell you and 

members of the House that the Minister of Education, the 

ministry is looking at ways to speed up that process. I think as 

of today he can provide a bit more details. 

 

I want to finish though on the topic of double standards. 

Yesterday though in this Assembly, the Leader of the 

Opposition stood up, asked that same minister to fund, fully 

fund First Nations schools in terms of the provincial level 

off-reserve to the federal level on-reserve. Mr. Speaker, at the 

convention, at the NDP convention, that same Leader of the 

Opposition said he wouldn’t commit to that kind of funding, 

and moreover, moreover, Mr. Speaker, you can check an MBC 

[Missinipi Broadcasting Corporation] story that says the NDP 

will not provide that funding where the federal government 

wouldn’t. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition hasn’t met a 

position of the party he hasn’t changed yet. And he needs to 

determine exactly what his direction will be and stop frankly 

trying to work both sides of the street. 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to advise the House that I have 

received advice from the Lieutenant Governor regarding 

changes to the Board of Internal Economy: 

 

Pursuant to section 67 of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007, I hereby inform the 

Assembly of the membership of the Board of Internal 

Economy effective April 10, 2013: the Hon. Dan 

D’Autremont, Chair; Hon. Nancy Heppner; Hon. June 

Draude; Jeremy Harrison, MLA; Doreen Eagles, MLA; 

David Forbes, MLA; Cathy Sproule, MLA. 

 

Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant Governor, 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 91 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 91 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and enter into debate of Bill 91, The 



3268 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). It’s 

very important that . . . This is an important area when we talk 

about pensions. And how will our seniors and how will we, as 

we age, and how will our children have that stability when they 

reach the retirement years? And what kind of plans have our 

governments made to ensure that there is that stability and 

predictability and the protection against poverty when we reach 

that age? 

 

And so in many ways we’re starting to see the fruits of the 

labour of this government and also at the federal level I know, 

and the federal minister and our own provincial minister have 

spoken about the discussions that have happened at the 

federal-territorial-provincial tables around pensions and 

security in old age. And so this is one part of that package, and 

of course this one is about amending the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan so it can offer the pooled pension initiatives that the 

ministers have been talking about. 

 

So it’s important that we take some time and talk about this. I 

think there’s three or four bills that are tied together on this 

issue. 

 

But as I have talked earlier, and I will continue to raise this in 

terms of the fact that we think this is not the approach, I think 

this is not the approach that serves Canadians in the best way, 

that unfortunately that we should be doing more to strengthen 

the programs that all Canadians have. And of course the 

minister did talk about this. He did raise the fact about the 

different pillars. And he talked about the fact that in Canada we 

are considered to have one of the best systems in the world. It’s 

a blend of public and private programs. And he talks about the 

three elements or referred to the three pillars, and I think that’s 

very important to consider. 

 

Now he does talk about only 47 per cent of workers have access 

to workplace pension plans. And that’s so true. And ironically 

almost all of those have workplace pension plans because they 

are unionized or they are organized. And that is one of the 

positives of an organized workplace is that you can get benefits 

that most others can’t. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, you know, and I think I may have 

said this, but I’m not sure. But two-thirds of my family, my 

siblings and our spouses — and that would range in to about 15 

people — have pensions because of the fact that we belong to 

some sort of organized workplace. And whether it’s myself in 

terms of the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] or 

whether it’s CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] or 

Steelworkers or the SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and 

General Employees’ Union] or SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses], almost . . . Yes, two-thirds of my siblings belong to 

some sort of organized workplace. And most families I think in 

the province would think, well we’re not a union family, or 

we’re not a labour family. And I think that until just recently, I 

think that I would’ve said the same thing about the Forbes. 

 

But unfortunately or fortunately, I think perhaps more 

fortunately, the fact is that we were able to launch our careers in 

organized workplaces, whether that be nurses or teachers or 

social workers. It’s interesting that we are now, my siblings, 

many of us are reaching that retirement age. And we can make 

that choice because we belong to some organized work 

association, whether it be a union or a professional 

organization. We were able to have workplace unions’ plans. 

But unfortunately less than half of Saskatchewan people have 

that. 

 

Now the other shocking statistic is not only is a small number, 

less than half have a workplace pension, but then about only a 

third of people take advantage of private pension plans. They 

just aren’t meeting or aren’t able to be utilized by workers in 

Saskatchewan, and it’s unfortunate. It truly is unfortunate 

because what happens is that we could make these plans, but if 

people cannot afford them or it’s the last thing they do because 

they have too many other bills to pay, then there’s a problem. 

There’s a real problem. And so, Mr. Speaker, this is a challenge 

that I think that we have to address.  

 

And while we can talk about changes to the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan and we can debate the value, the merit of that plan 

— and it’s been around now for quite a while, almost 30 years, 

27 years — the real debate is, is this meeting the need of people 

in Canada and in Saskatchewan when ironically so few people 

can actually take advantage of it? And I mean about a third of 

people. And I don’t know what the actual percentage of . . . 

And I think the member did talk about the fact that 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan has grown over 32,000 members. 

But we’ve got to realize, out of what kind of pool of potential 

members is that? And this is something that we think is a 

problem. And he talked about 1,000 new members since 2012. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the Finance minister may be impressed 

by these numbers, we have to be impressed by the fact that old 

age security is becoming a real, a real challenge for people, and 

they are worried about what will be their lot when they retire. 

We know more and more people are actually working past 65. 

And in fact the federal government did raise the age of 

retirement or what we often think of the age of retirement to 67, 

and it’s pushing people to work longer. 

 

Now we’re seeing potential pressures from that. Interestingly 

last week we saw the stats on workplace fatalities, and one of 

the highest stats was heart attacks in the workplace. Now I 

don’t know the situation behind that and all the details, but I do 

know that there were several in their 60s, and I think that there 

might have been one even in their 70s who were still working. 

 

Now it is a wonderful thing to work into . . . you know, until 

you feel that you are ready to retire. And if you feel you are 

contributing, and it’s a meaningful workplace, or if you’re 

meeting a social need, that you’re working in the coffee shop 

for a couple of hours and it’s meeting your need, I’m fine with 

that too. But I am worried. I am deeply worried that people are 

working or may be forced to work longer than they normally 

would simply because they have a hard time making ends meet. 

That shouldn’t happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

And when the minister talks about the fact that our retirement 

income system in Canada is considered to be one of the best in 

the world, you know, there’s many things that we are 

considered to be the best in the world, but our reputation is 

sliding. And I really worry. I deeply worry about this, that how 

do people around the world view our retirement plans? And it 

used to be one of the best and may be today, but clearly is it on 

a slippery slope? 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3269 

Now pooled pension plans may work for some, and I think 

that’s an interesting tool in the tool kit. I’m not opposed to it in 

principle. But what I am concerned about is the priorities and 

choices this government has made when really I think the idea 

that I know that many groups have raised with the Finance 

ministers that talked about the second pillar which consists of 

the Canadian pension plan, CPP [Canada Pension Plan], which 

is funded through earnings-based contributions from employees 

and employers . . . And participation in CPP is mandatory for 

all employed and self-employed Canadians. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And so I think it’s important that we take a look at that. That 

would have been my first choice for this government, and I 

think it would have been the first choice for people in 

Saskatchewan to say, can you look at this more carefully? Be 

one of the provinces that join in in convincing the federal 

government to pay attention to the Canada Pension Plan. Pay 

attention to the CPP because while it is tough when we have 

deductions off our paycheques and it goes to CPP, you know, 

you feel a lot more secure about it. You know what’s going to 

happen, and you can count on it. 

 

And the wonderful thing about CPP versus say the 

Saskatchewan plan . . . And we see people moving back to 

Saskatchewan, but we don’t know where we’re going to be in 

20 or 30 or 40 years, especially young people. And if they’re 

making contributions to the CPP, it will follow them. It will 

follow them right across Canada whereas the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan is really focused on, you know, one employer who 

may be involved in the Saskatchewan plan. And will it follow 

them, or will they have to keep track of it? 

 

And I think that could be a real challenge for somebody who is 

25 or 28, working and saying, oh I have to remember that when 

I was in Saskatchewan and I worked for a company for two 

years, I had made contributions and the contributions are in the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And now I’m 65 and I’m living in 

BC [British Columbia] or Nova Scotia, and I have to remember, 

oh yes, that Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And that was located 

in what city was it? Kindersley. 

 

And that’s great that it’s in Kindersley. But you know, Mr. 

Speaker, I think this is not the appropriate priority that this 

government should have gone down the road of. This 

government should have gone down the road of CPP. And this 

is a tool in the tool kit. As I said, I’m not fundamentally or on a 

principle opposed to it. And it was originally set up to meet the 

needs of homemakers and those people who did not normally 

have access to a pension. But now we’re seeing that it’s moving 

into the mainstream, and I worry about that. I worry about that. 

 

So I would really, I would really encourage this government to 

continue — and I understand from the minister that they’ll be 

meeting in June — to talk with the Finance ministers to 

continue this conversation around pensions and security for 

seniors. And I would really urge them to continue the 

conversation around CPP, just because I think that’s a more 

universally accessible program for Canadians. And I think that 

it’s critical that we do that. 

 

And I think we can do both at the same time, that we can have 

tools. And it’s good to have a variety of tools to meet your 

needs in your senior years. But we do have to set priorities. And 

I said with the CPP, I think that makes a lot more sense to have 

that full discussion. And of course, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 

all the specific details. Obviously the Finance ministry . . . It’s a 

very complex, very complex issue. But I would really urge the 

government to really pull at that as well. 

 

And while we will be debating this, we will have many more 

questions in committee around this topic and around this tool 

because it has stood the test of time as I said, being created in 

1986. Obviously it’s been well run and the management is 

strong and it’s not going anywhere. And it’s meeting the needs 

of a group of people. And so we will have questions about that. 

 

But as I said, that it’s important that we look at the broad range 

of people — those who are able to save money, those who are 

able to put money aside, who’ll say this makes sense for me; I 

can put this aside. But there’s many, many people, and we often 

consider them, we often talk about them as vulnerable workers, 

those who just have a difficult time making ends meet. And 

whether it’s because of the high cost of housing that they’re 

spending more than what we would normally, say 30 per cent 

of their income on housing, and if they’re paying 40 or 50 per 

cent, that extra 20 per cent is what they could be making a 

choice about putting into their retirement savings. But they 

can’t. 

 

And we know in the reality in Saskatchewan that housing has 

become much more expensive. It’s much more expensive. And 

it’s one of those basic needs. You’ve got to pay the rent. 

You’ve got to make your mortgage payment every month. You 

absolutely do. And so these are the realities that people have. 

And I’m not even thinking we can call them choices because 

you really don’t have a choice. Do you pay rent or do you pay 

into your savings account, your retirement savings account? 

Unfortunately that’s reality here in Saskatchewan now. 

 

And the other issue though of course is around you may have a 

high cost like housing, but you also may have low pay. And 

that’s an issue as well. Now we’ve seen the minimum wage 

increase significantly over the past seven years. And on our 

government’s side we were very happy and proud of the 

contributions that we made in terms of increasing the minimum 

wage to what we thought was going to be a living wage. But 

clearly the cost of living in Saskatchewan has outstripped that, 

so it’s no longer really considered a minimum wage, even when 

it’s over $10 an hour. 

 

The reality is, though, we have to make sure that people have a 

living wage. And this is something else, on an aside. You 

know, when we first did that, I think that there were numbers 

around 10 or 12,000 who were working for minimum wage. 

And now I understand the number is much, much higher. 

Because as you increase the minimum wage, it catches more 

people who were working maybe 50 cents or $1 dollar an hour 

higher, and you were catching those people. So they’re not 

getting the increases that typically would have happened or 

should have happened. When minimum wage was increased, 

their increases should have happened, but they didn’t. And so 

they’ve been caught up by the increase in minimum wage, so 

you have a lot more people at the lower end of minimum wage. 

 



3270 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

And again I hesitate to use the word choice because they don’t 

really have a choice. They have to pay for the basic things of 

life and what’s happening in their life right now. And 

unfortunately, putting aside for retirement isn’t making their 

priority list. And I can understand why. I can understand. I 

absolutely can understand. And so this is why we need to have 

that broader discussion. 

 

And I’m using this time, Mr. Speaker, to make that pitch for us 

to have that conversation about strengthening the Canada 

Pension Plan. And while we are talking about the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, as I said, it’s a tool in the tool kit. Not 

fundamentally opposed to it. It meets the needs of a certain 

group of people, but it sure does fall short of the mark to meet 

the needs of many, many people in Saskatchewan, particularly 

those vulnerable workers who are working at low-income jobs 

or are caught in a cost squeeze because of their cost of living. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this is the challenge that we have. This is 

the challenge we have, and I know that there will be many 

people who will want to speak to this bill because this is, again, 

we call it a suite of bills. We understand there’s three or four of 

these. And I know that we’ll be ready to go on to some other 

debates pretty darn quick because I think that . . . I know there 

are many people who want to speak to this particular bill. So I 

would like to move now adjournment of Bill 91, The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 91, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 92 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 92 — The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate here this afternoon, or discussion, as it 

relates to Bill No. 92, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act. And of course this is an Act that follows 

changes that have occurred federally that has made PRPPs, 

pooled registered pension plans, available to some Canadians, 

and particularly the federal changes opened this up to those that 

are working in banking and telecommunications industries. 

 

This change that’s brought forward here today allows much 

broader applications to PRPPs, and on those fronts we’re 

certainly supportive. This is updating Saskatchewan legislation 

following many of the approaches that are being taken by 

provincial governments across the country. And certainly we 

recognize and speak regularly to the importance of addressing 

the pressures and challenges that so many hard-working 

Saskatchewan people and Canadians are facing as it relates to 

retirement security, income security, and to those years beyond 

work. 

 

I want to make clear that while we’re supportive of 

improvements on this front and this legislation, we need to 

continue to press this government to do far more as it relates to 

what is inadequate supports for those that are retiring, for those 

hard-working Saskatchewan people, hard-working Canadians. 

And we call for this government to be a strong voice and join 

voices of other provinces that have lent their support, lent their 

voice to see an expansion of the Canada Pension Plan, CPP, 

which is certainly a pan-Canadian solution to something 

important to all Canadians, and certainly to all Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

So we urge that measure, and we urge that voice from our 

Finance minister to be of one of support towards expansion of 

something that’s portable, that’s effective, that’s efficient, and 

something that could impact the lives in a significant way for 

all Canadians. 

 

And of course where CPP has its strengths is of course on the 

side of its efficiency and its low cost of management but as well 

by the fact that it’s portable right across the country and also by 

the fact that it’s not a voluntary measure for employers and 

employees, something that is lasting and meaningful and 

creates real security for all Canadians. 

 

We also recognize the pressures that workers are facing. And 

we see a context of, in many cases, dismantled public and 

private pensions across Canada. And we see an agenda in many 

ways of this government as well, pushing towards removing 

workers’ rights and making changes to legislation that haven’t 

been done in listening to workers, and not understanding the 

importance of some of these measures, and whether it’s the 

safety of workers or the fair compensation and certainly that of 

income security. We need to make sure that families are strong 

across Saskatchewan, families are supported. And that after 

many years of the hard work that so many provide, that they’re 

able to retire with some dignity. And that’s where we’re 

looking for these broader supports to be brought forward. 

 

We know that the federal government is making cuts to old age 

security, delaying when individuals, hard-working Canadians 

and Saskatchewan people, when they retire when they can draw 

upon those supports. W see that as a step in the wrong 

direction. We believe that Canadians and Saskatchewan 

workers are entitled to the dollars that they’ve put away, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that’s something that’s important for us to 

remember when we’re talking about old age security or CPP, 

when we’re talking about those contributions that have been 

done in concert with employers. These are independent dollars 

and dollars that are not at the discretion simply of a government 

to make decisions with. And they’re important in the lives of 

Canadians and certainly of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now by way of the PRPP, some of the benefits that we see in 

this legislation is that it certainly makes more accessible the 

possibility of some retirement fund plans to possibly smaller 

businesses or to entrepreneurs themselves. This is something 

that’s a good thing. This is something that we support. Some of 

the drawbacks is that they’re still . . . they’re voluntary and that 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3271 

we need to make sure that we’re providing income security and 

that dignity of a retirement for all. 

 

We also see as strengths of a PRPP is that there have been 

noted benefits by way of some of the costs of these plans could 

be shared by many and should be a more efficient tool than 

some other methods. So on that front we’re supportive. 

 

We look as well in hope that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

can be involved in this process, that they can apply to be an 

administrator, that they could be considered for licence, and 

certainly that’s important for us to make sure that this 

legislation supports those changes as well. 

 

But as I say, when we’re talking about retirement security, this 

is something that’s of paramount concern to so many. I think of 

the young families and the young workers all across our 

province. They’re working hard here today to take care of the 

needs of today, to put aside some dollars for tomorrow, and 

certainly government has an important role to make sure that 

it’s supporting those Saskatchewan workers, those Canadians. 

In doing so, the PRPP is certainly one tool that can be brought 

forward, and as I say, we’re supportive of that tool being 

brought forward. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But we have to lay this against the broader context where we’re 

far too . . . far too many Canadians in fact aren’t making gains 

on this front, where far too many Canadians and Canadian 

families are actually losing ground. And we need to make sure 

that those families are provided the tools and the mechanisms 

and the supports, that their hard work today will provide them 

some dignity tomorrow. 

 

And certainly as I say, we need to make sure that this 

government gets on board with other provinces to be that voice, 

to expand the Canada Pension Plan — something that’s 

efficient and that’s affordable, that’s meaningful to all workers 

quite simply, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be looking for this 

Finance minister to be a voice as he comes together with 

Finance ministers across Canada in June, and that’s certainly 

something that’s important to us. 

 

We look at the rights of workers and those changes to 

legislation that this government’s pushing forward. We see that 

as a regressive step towards making sure that workers have the 

rights, protections, dignity that they deserve. And that all fits 

within this framework in this discussion as well.  

 

But as it relates to this, the changes to enable PRPPs in 

Saskatchewan to make sure that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

can participate, to make sure that this voluntary tool is afforded 

to more Saskatchewan workers, that’s something that we 

support. But we do have to do a much better job of providing 

income security, retirement dignity to all Canadians, all 

Saskatchewan workers, and certainly we’ll continue our call on 

this government to make sure that the actions they’re taking are 

meaningful and impactful for all. And we see this as simply one 

measure and certainly insufficient in meeting the big challenge 

that so many families are facing. 

 

At this point in time I will, you know, I don’t have many other 

comments at this point in time. I certainly will continue to 

consult with families, with workers, and with stakeholders. But 

at this point in time, I’ll adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 92, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 93 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 93 — The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension 

Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This bill is 

simply a consequential amendment to the piece of legislation 

that I just spoke to, so I don’t have many other comments to it 

here today. 

 

What this does do is provide families the kinds of protections 

though that they’re afforded through a pension plan by way of 

the enforcement of maintenance orders and making sure that the 

pension dollars are included in those laws. Just as a pension is, 

Mr. Speaker, so certainly we support making sure that the new 

pooled retirement pension plans are also included in, by law, 

protected in the enforcement of maintenance orders and making 

sure that families have that protection. This also addresses some 

of the translation in English and French, so it’s of a practical 

nature, and certainly an amendment for which we are 

supportive of. 

 

But as I say, this whole discussion on retirement security and 

income security, we’re supportive of a new tool, being the 

PRPP, and how that may extend to smaller businesses and to 

individuals who may want to participate. But I need to remind 

the Assembly and remind all Saskatchewan workers that this is 

a voluntary plan. 

 

We need to work towards pan-Canadian solutions that are 

broad-based and making sure that, you know, that we’re 

supportive as a province of the Canada Pension Plan, something 

that this minister, this government’s been back and forth on. 

And that’s not what we’re looking for to make that sort of a 

change. We’re looking for leadership and a commitment to 

expand the Canada Pension Plan. We’re looking for a strong 

voice to oppose the delayed receipt of old age security 

payments for retirees. 

 

And as well making sure that we’re supporting those 

Saskatchewan people that have actually put their dollars away 

through tools that have already been afforded to them in this 

province. And I think of the labour-sponsored venture funds 



3272 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

where certainly there’s been concerns raised by many 

Saskatchewan families that have placed dollars into those funds 

and only to see now government coming in and dictating where 

those dollars can be placed and certainly threatening the return 

that those families, those investors . . . Those 55,000 

hard-working Saskatchewan people that have placed those 

dollars into those funds, they deserve the full return based on 

the prospectus they entered into. And we call for this 

government to make sure they’re addressing what they’ve 

brought forward in this budget. That’s certainly not fair to those 

investors, to those families, and certainly not supportive as well 

of the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

But as it relates to the pooled retirement pension plan and 

making sure that there’s provisions to make sure families are 

protected through the enforcement of maintenance orders — 

and we are supportive of those consequential amendments, see 

these as but another tool — but recognizing that we’re not 

making the gains that we need to to provide real protection, real 

security to hard-working Saskatchewan people, hard-working 

Canadians. And we’ll continue to be that voice, Mr. Speaker, 

on those fronts. 

 

But at this point in time, as it relates to Bill No. 93, I will 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 93, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 83 — The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on discussion on Bill No. 83 which is An 

Act respecting Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration 

Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in the Assembly over the last couple of years 

we’ve had a number of discussions as it relates to immigration 

here to the province, as it relates to workers, as it relates to 

families that are seeking to come to our province. We’ve had a 

number of question period exchanges over the course of the last 

few sessions, Mr. Speaker, and the discussion has been around 

what sort of, what sort of approach we want to have when it 

comes to immigration here in the province. 

 

The question has been whether we want to have a short-term 

approach, which doesn’t necessarily recognize workers as 

belonging to families, as a longer process of coming to 

Saskatchewan and how they can fully establish themselves and 

take root here in the province, or whether, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

proper approach where it focuses on the need for strong social 

ties along with the economic drivers that are often behind 

immigration, and often behind the reality for businesses to seek 

foreign workers to come and work in Saskatchewan, or for 

families to welcome individuals here to the province and to 

have a larger extended network of people they are related to 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So we know immigration is hugely important to us here, as a 

province and in a number of communities. I can think of my 

own constituency, Mr. Speaker, that has a real diversity of 

people from Saskatchewan, whether it’s people of European 

descent who have been here for a number of generations, along 

with a large First Nations and Métis population. But also a large 

immigrant population, Mr. Speaker, a number of people from 

South Asia, Pakistanis and Indians, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

many Filipinos as well, and they’re adding to the richness of the 

neighbourhood. They’re adding to diversity in our schools, so 

the children learn how to interact and how to respect 

differences in a constructive way, Mr. Speaker. And 

immigration is a positive thing for the province and something 

that we support. 

 

It’s important to support immigration, Mr. Speaker, in a way 

that, though, is based on common sense, that doesn’t view 

individuals simply as an economic cog, but as belonging to a 

larger family, belonging to a larger society. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to ensure that the immigration system we have, as it 

relates specifically here to Saskatchewan, that it is facilitating 

the type of long-term sustainability that we want when it comes 

to welcoming people to Saskatchewan. 

 

And so how individuals come to Saskatchewan, how they are 

welcomed plays a really big part in how individuals feel about 

the province, how they feel about their community. And as 

MLAs, perhaps some of us have had experiences in our 

constituency offices where either an employer or an immigrant 

has faced a challenge or an unpleasant experience with respect 

to immigration, Mr. Speaker, and that colours their opinion and 

their feeling of being in Canada. 

 

They’ll always welcome and are always appreciative of the 

freedoms we have, of the wonderful place that we live in, but 

when immigration is a negative experience, Mr. Speaker, when 

it’s not fair, when it’s not with a long-term view in perspective, 

that’s when it causes problems. And that’s not appropriate for 

businesses that are operating because businesses want to and 

ought to conduct themselves with the highest level of ethics and 

responsibility, as the vast, vast majority of businesses do here in 

the province. 

 

And also those that are in the immigration process, individuals 

need to, Mr. Speaker, be following the rules and playing by the 

rules that are in place, and allowing those rules to allow them to 

do well as individuals and as families. 

 

So when we look at this piece of legislation, I note the 

minister’s words about preventing exploitation. And I do think, 

Mr. Speaker, that is an appropriate lens to look at this issue 

because we don’t want exploitation for the workers or for 

prospective immigrants who are coming to the province, and 

we also want to ensure that employers are acting in a way that 

is fully responsible and fully within the rules. So we must ask 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3273 

ourselves, Mr. Speaker, what steps are necessary in order to 

ensure that we’re setting up that structure to allow for the best 

operation of our immigration system? 

 

So this step, Mr. Speaker, the legislation brought forward by 

the minister responsible, is an attempt, as I understand it, to 

provide some structure, to have consultants who are licensed, 

part of a registry. So there’s a degree of accountability there, 

Mr. Speaker, to have employers operating within that system as 

well on a list so that they have met a threshold of 

responsibilities that they must meet, and then also, Mr. Speaker, 

providing the rules or the game plan for immigrants and for 

workers who may be coming here to the province. 

 

Within the legislation there are a number of sections, and I 

won’t list them all. But important aspects within the legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, we see the licensing of foreign workers and 

immigration consultants. So the idea that people have to follow 

rules, that just not anyone can hang a shingle and say they’re 

doing this type of work, that there’s an accountability 

mechanism in place, Mr. Speaker. And I think that is 

appropriate and proper. Then, as I’ve said, the registration of 

employers so that if employers want to be bringing a worker in, 

that they belong to a registry. 

 

Of course there also needs to be prohibited practices and 

standards of service, which is included, aspects of inspections, 

penalties for those that are not following the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

Then of course there needs to be the necessary enforcement. 

And we know this is important. And we hear situations in the 

news from time to time, Mr. Speaker, of workers who have not 

been treated properly or of people who have been taken 

advantage of through the immigration process, either 

financially or through their relationships, and how this has had 

a harm on their families. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure 

that we are taking the right steps. 

 

So a framework is important. And I think this legislation can go 

a distance, Mr. Speaker, in providing that framework, which is 

important because we especially need to be on guard to fight 

against exploitation and ensure that everything is above board 

and that the reputation of Saskatchewan as it relates to a place 

where people can come and be welcomed, follow the rules, 

establish themselves, and have their families thrive, that that 

reputation be upheld and actually be strengthened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Looking at the legislation, we do have to ask ourselves a 

number of questions such as, is the bar set high enough with 

respect to the licensing requirements for those individuals who 

would be working as an immigration consultant, Mr. Speaker? I 

think that is important. We also have to look at whether or not 

the penalties involved with this legislation are adequate and 

provide enough of a deterrent to those who may be seeking to 

bend the rules. 

 

We also need to look at what the structure put in place. Any of 

us as MLAs who have helped individuals with immigration 

casework, it can be complicated. And it is not something that’s 

done overnight, and it requires a lot of paper. So we have to ask 

ourselves if the steps being put in place are effective and 

appropriate, whether they are a duplication of other hoops or 

other measures that must be done by either immigrants or 

employers, just to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we’re striking 

the right balance between having a system that’s timely and 

meeting the needs of individuals, while at the same time 

ensuring that the right checks and balances are in place, that 

companies are operating properly as well as prospective 

immigrants. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The issue of temporary foreign workers is also top of mind. We 

know we’ve heard a lot of stories, Mr. Speaker, in the news 

recently about situations, and this is an issue which requires 

attention because, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier on, it’s 

necessary to have the long-term view when we think of 

immigration. And I think when, you know, when my family, 

my great-grandparents came to the country, Mr. Speaker, it was 

with a long-term view of establishing themselves, welcoming 

other individuals, being part of the economy and doing well, 

and then giving back to the province that welcomed us. And so 

we need to ensure that we are taking the steps of doing that, of 

laying the groundwork and the framework that treats people 

with respect and provides a clear path for those wanting to 

come to the country or for those wanting to welcome 

individuals to the country. 

 

When establishing any type of program, there are also costs 

associated. So it’s important to have a discussion, Mr. Speaker, 

about by whom those costs will be borne — through the 

employer, through the applicant — and of course that ties in to 

other pieces of legislation. And when looking at legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s always important and necessary to ensure that the 

proper consultation has taken place — the proper consultation 

has taken place with employers, with immigration consultants, 

and as well as the families here in the province who want to 

welcome people to Saskatchewan. 

 

So that’s an overview of the legislation and a highlight as I 

identify some of the relevance and importance of this type of 

legislation in terms of providing structure and rules to this 

system. And I support this, a framework like this, a legislative 

framework like this in principle, but of course it is in looking at 

the details to ensure that we are striking the right balance. And I 

have raised some of my questions around the legislation. 

 

I look forward to the opportunity in committee to have more . . . 

have some interaction with the minister to discuss some of the 

topics that I raised as well as some of the other items that I, 

other items that I’ll be bringing up at that time. So I’ve 

appreciated the opportunity to speak to this piece of legislation 

today, and I look forward to further discussion in committee. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of the Economy that 

Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration 

Services Act . . . Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Be now read a second time. 



3274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — Be now read a 

second time. Oh, Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment 

and Immigration Services Act be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — To which committee 

shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — This bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 94 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 94 — The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter into the discussion on Bill No. 94, An Act to 

amend The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998. This piece of legislation is 

fairly straightforward, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s nice to see 

a woman in the Chair today. What this bill does, it increases the 

tobacco tax rate from 21 cents per cigarette, tobacco stick, or 

gram of tobacco to 25 cents. So on a package of 25 cigarettes, 

that sells for about $12 and amounts to a tobacco tax increase of 

$1. 

 

So we know that when we think about, we think about smoking 

here in Saskatchewan. The minister has pointed out that we are 

now at the lowest rate of smoking here in the province than 

we’ve ever seen, which is great news, but we still happen to be 

far higher than any of the other provinces. So that’s a bit of a 

problem. We know that bans on smoking in public places, 

public education and awareness, are some of the factors. And 

tobacco taxation, I can’t forget tobacco taxation because that’s 

what we’re talking about. And these are all ways to reduce 

smoking rates. 

 

So I think about myself and think about my own family and my 

experience around cigarettes. It’s I think a very good thing to 

reduce smoking rates. There’s nothing good that comes from 

smoking cigarettes, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s hard on 

people’s health. It ends up having very negative outcomes. 

People who get sick from smoking cigarettes, it’s a huge burden 

to our health system. I know my own experience . . . And it’s 

incredibly sad. People’s quality of lives who become addicted 

to cigarettes and end up smoking for a long period of time, it 

has a huge impact on their quality of life. But it’s incredibly sad 

as well. 

 

I know in my own experience, I had a good family friend, 

actually my mom and dad’s best friends, Ken and Linda. My 

dad grew up with Ken, and I knew Ken and Linda all my life. 

And Linda was a long-time smoker from the time that she was a 

young woman. I remember actually sitting at her kitchen table 

rolling cigarettes. I didn’t roll the cigarettes, but I remember her 

little machine where she’d stick the little paper in and fill them 

with tobacco. And I spent a great deal of time with Linda. And 

about 25 years ago, shortly before Christmas, she was 

diagnosed with lung cancer. And it was incredibly sad. Ken and 

Linda had been together for a very long time. And within just 

three short months, Madam Deputy Speaker, Linda succumbed 

to lung cancer. And it was an awful illness to watch. It was 

terrible to watch Linda, but it was very hard to watch the impact 

on her family and friends as well. 

 

So I’m a pretty strong advocate of not smoking, Madam Deputy 

Speaker, as you can see, from personal experiences. A huge 

loss to my family to lose Ken and Linda, who were family 

friends but were like family. And I know my parents . . . Linda 

passed away in the early ’90s, and you know my parents have 

never really recovered from that. They’ve got lots of good 

friends, but Ken was my dad’s best friend growing up, and they 

travelled every couple of years with Ken and Linda. They were 

just really great people. And it was awful to watch what 

happened to Linda. And you know, after Linda passed away, 

six months later Ken passed away on Christmas Day. He was to 

come to our house for Christmas dinner, and he had a massive 

heart attack. We think that perhaps he died of a broken heart, 

but when they did the autopsy, they discovered that Ken had the 

body of a smoker from living his life with a chronic and regular 

smoker. 

 

So reducing smoking, in my mind, is a very good thing. My 

Auntie Alice, actually right around the same time, just a few 

months after Linda had been diagnosed, my Auntie Alice was 

diagnosed with lung cancer and the same thing happened to her, 

Madam Deputy Speaker, just a few short months later. Again a 

really awful . . . Passing away is never a good thing, but lung 

cancer is ravaging and awful to watch. It’s hard on the 

individual and hard on everybody else around them. 

 

So I think about my 15-year-old daughter who is in that 

demographic of people who have increased . . . The age 

demographic of those who are taking up smoking happens to be 

the age of my 15-year-old daughter. I’m a big believer that 

everything humanly possible to keep her from smoking is a 

good thing, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

I know that young people tend to feel like they’re invincible. 

And I was never a smoker. It never appealed to me, and I’m 

also a bit of a rule monger. So I’m the youngest of seven kids, 

and I always wanted to make my parents happy. And I wasn’t a 

rebellious teen and didn’t decide that . . . Smoking wasn’t one 

of those things that I wanted to do to be different and rebel 

against my parents. I was a pretty by-the-book kid, and 

thankfully, I think my daughter Hennessey is. But as I said I’m 

always happy to hear of things that will keep our young people 

from starting smoking, but will hopefully encourage other 

people to quit. 

 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3275 

Very thankful. My dad actually was a long-time smoker as well 

and quit shortly before I was born. He was one of the fortunate 

people who . . . Money was tight in our family, six kids at the 

time before I came along, an at-home mom, and a seventh baby 

on the way. And my dad, I’ve been told . . . [inaudible] . . . that 

he just decided to quit. It was too expensive and that was it. 

And he never went back. He never was interested in smoking 

again. 

 

But from everybody I talked to who . . . From most people with 

whom I’ve spoken about smoking, it’s a terrible addiction. 

Once you’ve been a smoker, there’s so many things around us 

that can be tempting, or it’s a hard thing to quit for the long 

haul. I know many people who have quit smoking 20 times, 

Madam Deputy Speaker, who try and do really well, and then 

for many reasons start smoking again. 

 

So we think about public policy, of bans on smoking in public 

places. Again reflecting a little bit on my own life, I’ve 

mentioned here in the House before that I was a server in 

restaurants and bars during my university days, and it’s not that 

long ago, although perhaps maybe it’s longer than I’d like to 

care to admit. But that was about 20 years ago, 20-plus years 

ago that I did that. And I can remember every night coming 

home. The bar would close at 2:30. I would come home and I 

would have to shower. I stunk like cigarette smoke. I knew that 

it was impacting my health. Actually one of the reasons I quit 

smoking is because I have very bad allergies and that was it for 

me. So I was very pleased to see years ago the government 

starting, the former administration moving on banning smoking 

in public places. 

 

It’s interesting when you think about smoking and how policy 

evolves too. Again I might be dating or aging myself here a 

little bit, but I remember the Nick nicotine ads. I don’t know if 

anybody else recalls those where Nick, in his jeans and his very 

cool shirt, sat on the steps. And smoking makes your teeth 

yellow; I remember that. 

 

And when you think about a public policy, from a public policy 

perspective, that’s called suasion. It took a long time of public 

education and awareness before government was in a good 

position to be able to start moving on things like banning 

smoking in public places. I think it can be very hard for 

governments to go from here, from one point and to the next 

point very quickly. There’s things in between. And public 

education was one of those pieces. Public education and 

awareness was one of those things that helped move us along so 

we could start banning smoking in public places and taxing 

cigarettes becomes a little bit easier. And I think smokers are in 

the minority now, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I’ve appreciated personally government policy that has 

aimed to curb smoking and keep smoking rates from rising or 

tried to reduce smoking rates. And I’m glad to hear that we’re 

at the lowest rates that we’ve ever been, but there’s 

undoubtedly still work that we can do on this. 

 

Smoking is expensive. It’s hard on people’s health. It’s hard on 

the taxpayer, from my understanding, aside from some of the 

chronic illnesses that come with cigarette smoking as well. I 

think about my friend Linda or my Auntie Alice. And that 

short, very short time in hospital is also very labour-intensive 

and very expensive on the taxpayer. So I think that there is 

good merit in trying to ensure that our people in Saskatchewan 

have good information and there’s public policy tools in place 

to reduce smoking rates. 

 

So with that, I would like to move adjournment on Bill No. 94, 

The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — The member from 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 94, The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — Carried. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Bill No. 95 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 95 — The 

Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Campeau): — I recognize the 

member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. It’s my pleasure to rise this 

afternoon to speak to Bill No. 95, An Act respecting the 

Operation of Public Registry Statutes, establishing the Office of 

Public Registry Administration and making consequential and 

related amendments to other Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Justice outlined when he 

introduced this legislation, this is a legislation to provide a new 

way to deliver public registries. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

especially, and others, but the Premier especially really has a 

thing about red tape and creating more work and more 

confusion in legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I can see why they 

numbered this one No. 95 and put it at the end of the list 

because they kind of want to slip it in and basically tell people 

that, oh well we’ve got this ideological decision to privatize our 

ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

registry, but to do that we have to bring in a piece of legislation 

that’s got more rules and all kinds of pieces to it, that it’s going 

to take a long time for all of the information to be totally 

recognized in the system. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to end up talking a bit 

about what this document tries to do. Now I know that the 

people who have been working on this have been under a fair 

amount of pressure to put this together. And I wouldn’t be 

surprised if we’ll even see some more amendments in the 

coming weeks as we move forward with this one because this is 

not a very simple piece of legislation to put in place. 

 

If in fact the government had stuck with the original intent of 

the Information Services Corporation and the consolidation of 

registries through that government-controlled, 

government-owned system, this whole Act would not be 

necessary, nor the next piece of legislation that we have which 



3276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

is consequential amendments to that. It wouldn’t be necessary 

because the rules have been in place for a long time as it relates 

to a whole number of pieces of legislation. And so let’s talk 

about what pieces of legislation are affected by this Act. 

 

If you go to page 4 of the Act or to the definition section, which 

is section 2(2), it lists the Acts that are presently going to be 

part of this particular legislation. And let’s talk about them. 

We’ve got The Business Corporations Act. We have The 

Business Names Registration Act. We have the Business 

Statutes Administration Transfer Act, The Companies Act, The 

Condominium Property Act, The Co-operatives Act, The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Act, The Land Information 

Services Facilitation Act, The Land Surveys Act, The Land 

Titles Act, The Libel and Slander Act, The Names of Homes Act, 

The New Generation Co-operatives Act, The Non-profit 

Corporations Act, The Partnership Act, The Personal Property 

Security Act, and any other prescribed Act that shows up. 

 

And practically what we’re trying to do here, or the minister’s 

trying to do is to put in place some method of contracting with a 

private contractor that protects the rights of Saskatchewan 

people. And they’re doing it on the fly. They’re doing it as a 

result of the ideological decision they made around ISC. And 

then all of a sudden they realized, oh, vital statistics; people 

don’t like that. Well we’re going to move that back to Health or 

eHealth. And we know how much turmoil that’s causing as 

that’s being done. 

 

And then they realized, oh we have to make sure we protect the 

public interest in all these other pieces of legislation. Let’s try 

to draft an Act that looks at that. And then, oh who’s going to 

look after this? Well let’s create the office of a public registry 

administration. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you end up making an ideological decision 

and then all of a sudden all these other things start trailing out 

from it. And this is only in the first two or three months since 

that decision, or maybe four months since that decision has 

been made. It doesn’t take into account what kinds of litigation 

we hear. One of the first things I looked for in this legislation 

— and it may be here, but I haven’t been able to find it yet — is 

a protection for Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 

corporations that their information will be retained here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And there doesn’t appear anywhere in here that I can see, 

unless it’s supposed to be part of each and every service 

agreement that’s created. But, Mr. Speaker, there, that seems to 

me that it would be a fundamental part of this legislation, which 

is about protecting Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 

corporations and other entities that are registered under this 

system. 

 

So I don’t think I’m wrong in saying that people have been 

working very hard to get this legislation ready to prepare or 

ready to be presented in the legislature, and that when you 

move too quickly and you move in a way that is not getting all 

of the checks and balances in place, there are going to be some 

problems. And so at this stage when you look at this, you know 

that the good civil servants who are drafting this are trying to 

pick up every problem that maybe or might arise in this 

process. 

But it could have saved everybody a lot of work if the Premier 

just said, hey we floated this idea about ISC, but hey, maybe 

it’s not as good an idea as we thought. We’ve made a mistake. 

Let’s pull back on that, and let’s allow for a very profitable 

corporation to continue to be in the ownership of the public of 

Saskatchewan so that those resources can be used by the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I heard the minister say the other day that oh, this is a great time 

to privatize this piece of this company because what’s happened 

is that it’s got high revenues this year. Well that’s also a very 

good time to say, maybe we made a mistake and those revenues 

should be retained by the people of Saskatchewan to provide 

services for the people of Saskatchewan. So there’s a bit of a 

strange sense of oh, if we get something that actually works 

quite well, let’s sell it off so somebody else can make some 

kind of income out of it. 

 

Now what’s clear in the legislation as well is that the ability to 

set fees is put forward into . . . It allows the contractors to set 

the fees, and the primary contractor for most of this work will 

be this privatized ISC. And it removes the ability for each of the 

ministries that might be responsible for some of these types of 

institutions to have a say in how those fees are created. Now I 

know that there’s a lot of freelancing going on as this 

legislation is being developed and that there’s a brave face 

being put forward by the minister and others that, oh well this is 

going to solve all our problems. But I don’t think there are total, 

ironclad, a sense of security around the fact that this is actually 

going to do what we all expect, which is to protect 

Saskatchewan people and to protect Saskatchewan businesses 

and institutions. 

 

So why create more red tape, create another agency, another 

whole set-up of people? Why do all of that when you can 

basically not have to be involved with that and you can actually 

then retain the service as an asset of the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

This bill also builds on a long history in Saskatchewan of 

looking at different, innovative ways to deal with public 

information. And we all know, but maybe sometimes people 

forget, that when the original land titles systems were set up 

here in Saskatchewan, we adopted an Australian system which 

had effectively provincial government or state guaranteed title. 

And part of this legislation is attempting to scale out or take out 

those obligations around the guarantee of title and make sure 

that they continue even though the main part of the operation 

has been contracted out to a private entity. 

 

And that’s why I say that this legislation may have bigger 

consequences over the long term for what happens in 

Saskatchewan than anybody realizes. And for them to work at 

it, slip it in at the end of the legislative session and try to get it 

all in place is an example of how hurried and how not totally 

preplanned this whole initiative is. And it goes right back to an 

ideological decision to privatize a piece of a corporation that 

Saskatchewan people expect the government to retain. 

 

And they’ve made that decision. They’re testing the waters. We 

don’t know what it means for other of the Crown corporations 

in Saskatchewan, and that’s another factor in this. I assume 

they’ll set up some kind of another operation if they privatize 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3277 

some other corporation in the province with another office of 

public registry administration or whatever they’re going to do. 

And every time they do this they’ll create other layers of red 

tape. Now how does this mesh with the goal of having efficient, 

inexpensive government? I don’t know where that comes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation has been brought forward in a 

hurry. It’s been brought forward to try to patch some of the 

holes in the ideological decision they’ve made around the 

Information Services Corporation. I think that there are a 

number of issues which aren’t addressed, including where this 

information is to be retained and where it’s to be protected. 

 

One of the things that we know as legislators and also I think as 

citizens of the province is that our legislation often will only 

apply within the boundaries of Saskatchewan. We have to have 

agreements if our legislation is to apply in Manitoba or Ontario 

or other places or in the United States. And in fact we do have 

some of those kinds of agreements. But as it relates to this type 

of protection of fundamental information about people and 

about corporations, institutions in Saskatchewan, I don’t think 

we have that kind of a protection. And I’m not sure we have the 

jurisdiction if a big chunk of that information is taken out of the 

province and is placed in some other place. 

 

And so what kinds of rules will there be? What kinds of things 

will be part of the whole system to protect us in that way? I 

don’t know if I see anything in here that addresses that. 

 

Another question that I have for the minister and for the 

Premier is whether this has been fully vetted by the Privacy 

Commissioner. We know that two or three pieces of legislation 

this session have been a surprise to that person whose job it is 

to review legislation. And I saw no record of any reference to 

review by the Privacy Commissioner as this proceeded. I’m not 

certain that this legislature and the people who are members in 

this legislature are ready to go ahead with this type of 

legislation with so many questions outstanding. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And I urge the members opposite who are part of the 

government caucus to go back and take another look at this one 

and ask themselves and ask what some of their constituents will 

be thinking about this type of legislation that is meant to protect 

Saskatchewan people and corporations and institutions. But 

does it actually do that? And I think that that is the fundamental 

question as it relates to this legislation and it’s something that 

we all need to take a very hard look at. 

 

Now I’m not going to make any more comments today, but I 

know others in my caucus want to look at this particular bill 

because it has a number of large questions attached. It may be 

that it’s the type of bill that should take a couple of sessions, a 

couple of years, to be dealt with because it has these long-term 

implications for the province. Our registry systems have been 

around for centuries, and there’s no reason that we shouldn’t 

take the right amount of time to review what’s here. So at this 

point I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 95. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 95, The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 96 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 96 — The 

Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of Public Registry 

Statutes Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 96, An Act to make consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Act. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

particular bill relates to the changes that are necessary if Bill 

No. 95 is passed as it relates to bilingual legislation in the 

province and under our agreements with and plans for the 

province in the long term. We have wanted to have legislation 

drafted in both official languages of Canada, in probably in all 

areas, but we’ve started very carefully with those pieces of 

legislation which affect more people than some other ones. 

 

And so what this legislation then does is address the issues as it 

relates to bilingual legislation that is being affected by this 

whole procedure, which is the ISC privatization kind of 

initiative. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would say on this particular bill is that it 

should move hand in hand with Bill No. 95 and have a 

thorough review, whether it takes one or two or three sessions 

of this legislature because of the changes that are made and 

because of the concerns around protection of the information 

and important details of the lives of people, of corporations, of 

institutions. 

 

And what happens is that I think sometimes governments slip 

things in at the end that even get past their own caucus 

members about what they’re trying to do. They just say, oh we 

have to do all of this. But I think that’s the point where both the 

caucus and opposition members need to say, okay let’s slow 

down a bit here. What’s the big hurry? Let’s make sure that our 

people in this province are protected, their information’s 

protected, and that things are done properly. 

 

And I know that this has been a pretty hurry-up job in dealing 

with this. The whole initiative that was brought forward by the 

Premier was another one of his surprises. And when those 

things come forward, we know that they move sometimes 

ahead of thinking through what they’re doing. It’s kind of like 

getting your mouth in motion before you’ve actually thought 

about what you’re going to say. And this is getting your 

legislation in motion before you actually have thought about 

what the effect of it is. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this particular bilingual bill, I think 



3278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

that this matter should be adjourned. The debate should be 

adjourned to allow some of my colleagues to deal with it, but 

also to allow the minister to take another hard look at both of 

these pieces of legislation to make sure that the protections are 

there for individuals and corporations and other institutions in 

our province, and also that the issues of privacy are properly 

addressed and that information is presented in this legislature. 

 

So with that I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 96. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 89 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 89 — The 

Creative Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 

pleasure that I enter the debate on Bill No. 89, The Creative 

Saskatchewan Act. It’s important in opposition and for 

everybody in Saskatchewan to think about, when a bill is before 

us, who has suggested the bill, or why is the bill before us, what 

the bill proposes to do, and why they are proposing to do that. 

 

So I think we have to go back to a year ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, or just over a year ago when the government cut the 

film employment tax credit, which had a huge impact on jobs, 

on economic spinoff, on peoples’ lives. There were very real 

impacts on peoples’ lives through the cut to that tax credit. 

There were people, families who have deep roots in the 

community, in the province, who’ve been forced to leave to 

find work elsewhere, film workers and production companies 

who made a living here who had to go where other provinces 

. . . every other jurisdiction that still supports a film tax credit. 

 

The film tax credit was a key part of what used to be a strong 

and vibrant film industry here in this province, but this 

government actually slowly has eroded that. It cut SCN, the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network, three years ago. And 

then we have the tax credit that was cut last year. Now we have 

a sound stage which there are public dollars in that sits empty 

right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Usually by this time, we know 

that there’ll be productions shot in the sound stage. At this point 

in the year, we know what will be shot during the summer on 

the sound stage. And right now the sound stage sits empty. And 

that was public dollars and public investment that is not being 

utilized. 

 

So we go back to a year ago when the government made this 

decision and then backpedalled slightly. And instead of cutting 

it as of April 1st, they realized, after there was a huge outcry by 

both film workers and people in the community, that they 

should extend that. And they agreed to sit down and work with 

the film industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so they were doing 

that, and the film industry came up with a proposal that they felt 

was workable. So what the government did was take the film 

industry’s recommendation, and in front of the word refundable 

tax credit write the word simply “non” and said that they had 

taken the industry’s recommendations, and here they are, and 

these are good. And of course so what the government had 

thought would fix the problem just made people even more 

upset, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So why is this bill before us? It comes back to the film tax 

credit cut this time last year and the huge public outcry. 

 

So after session and as we rolled into spring and summer, the 

government announced that it was going to embark upon 

consultations for all creative industries. And that was their 

solution to solving the problem that had arisen with the film tax 

credit and the film community and those who supported the 

film community, which was a broad swath of people here in the 

province. 

 

People here in Saskatchewan appreciated the direct jobs that the 

film tax credit created. They appreciated that young people 

could graduate from our film school and stay here in the 

province. And that should have fit with this government’s 

narrative about attracting and retaining young people, that those 

are the people who are primarily working in the film industry. 

The goal should be to attract and retain them. Instead we have 

people who go to film school here who are forced to leave. 

 

I know a young woman in grade 12 who is at the film school in 

high school at Evan Hardy. And it’s been a fabulous program 

for her. She’s so enthusiastic. Actually her teacher had high 

praise for her. And he said there’s not too many people who 

he’s ever recommended should become producers, but she is 

gregarious and outgoing, and he said she should pursue film 

studies. And well actually he suggested a commerce degree and 

film studies. And this should be something that she should do. 

 

But unfortunately she doesn’t feel like if she goes to school 

here that there will be a job here, so she is going to be going to 

school in Ontario. There’s a great school here, but the problem 

is the time when you’re in your education is often time where 

you make connections for when you move beyond your career. 

 

So people here in Saskatchewan saw that this created direct 

jobs and employment, economic development — all those 

organizations that benefited from big spend, the spending that 

happens when film or TV production comes to town, whether 

it’s a restaurant that does all the catering or a lumber yard that 

is used to supply the set building that goes on in the sound 

stage, the clothing store that gets $8,000 of business when a 

wardrobe person comes in and needs to buy clothing. So there 

are many people who realized that their businesses would be 

impacted from the cut to the tax credit. 

 

Just the sheer opportunity to tell Saskatchewan stories . . . If 

we’re not telling our stories, if we don’t have a vibrant film 

industry here in Saskatchewan, who is going to tell our stories, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? And so people saw the issue with that. 

 

Another piece of that is pride of place. I think when a film is 

made here in Saskatchewan, we have the opportunity to see our 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3279 

neighbours as extras or that opportunity to say, hey that set, 

which looks like a place in Minnesota or wherever it might 

have been, is my backyard, or that’s my neighbour’s tree in the 

film. I think that pride of place, seeing Saskatchewan 

landscapes reflected on the big screen or the little screen or now 

on the Internet with interactive media, those are all things that 

people here in Saskatchewan knew what was missing. 

 

So it’s a huge problem with the cut to the film tax credit. I think 

what we discovered was even a bigger problem is that we saw a 

government who made the cut to the tax credit, and then shortly 

before they announced the cut, decided to spend some taxpayer 

dollars on a quick piece of research but didn’t release that study 

because it didn’t fit with their narrative. So a government 

makes a policy decision and then decides that they better do 

some analysis. 

 

And you know, last spring on many occasions both in this 

House and in estimates I asked, has the government done any 

economic analysis? Could you table that economic analysis? 

Nary a word from the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We didn’t hear a single word on economic analysis. We heard 

lots of spin. I actually was just looking at estimates from last 

year, and the minister, when asked that question, repeatedly 

would not table that document. 

 

We learned that there was a second document when the 

chamber of commerce and SaskFilm came out with a report in 

support of the tax credit. The chamber of commerce, which is 

typically not what one would say is an organization that takes 

these things lightly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, came out strongly in 

support of the tax credit and the economic spinoff that it 

generated for many of its members. 

 

So what happened after that? The government again did a piece 

of economic analysis on the tax credits that . . . They didn’t 

make it public because it didn’t fit with their narrative. So we 

have two pieces of analysis done after the government has 

made a decision to cut a tax credit. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is poor public policy decision making. That is not the way 

public policy should be made. 

 

So why do we have Bill No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan 

Act, in front of us right now? So after all of the mess the 

government made with the film employment tax credit, they 

needed to embark upon a consultation process that involved all 

creative industries. And you know, I commend them on that. 

It’s important to raise the bar or raise I think the fortunes of 

other creative industries, ensure that they have access to the 

things that they need to take their product to market. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So I should just define for you that creative industries are the 

businesses and people involved in production, distribution and 

marketing of commercially viable content and experiences, like 

music, publishing, craft, visual arts, film and digital media, 

theatre, and dance. So I think it’s great that there is a desire to 

improve things for the other creative industries. 

 

But we could have gotten there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We could 

have gotten there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, without cutting the legs 

out from one of the creative industries that has the hugest 

production or that brought an enormous amount of money. 

Because there’s a huge amount of capital that comes with film, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a huge amount of money that is involved 

in it. The reality is it is the one creative industry that has the 

capacity to bring . . . has budgets in millions and millions of 

dollars. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we didn’t have to cut the legs out from 

under an entire industry to raise the bar, to raise the bar for the 

other creative industries. That wasn’t necessary. We could have 

improved the fortunes of the other creative industries and still 

kept a film employment tax credit. 

 

So with respect to the consultations, with respect to the 

consultations that started back I believe last July, there were 

calls for submissions. And I know initially many of the creative 

industries, not just film because other . . . There’s not been a 

single person who I’ve spoken to in any of the creative 

industries who didn’t think the tax credit was a good thing. 

They all recognize that they benefited from a vibrant film 

industry here in Saskatchewan. So I didn’t hear people from 

other creative industries saying, oh no no, let’s kill the tax 

credit and we can share it all. What I heard people say to me is, 

I benefited from a strong film industry, and it’s really 

unfortunate and not right that this government cut the tax credit. 

 

So we didn’t have to do that to ensure that everybody else did 

well. So the government embarked upon these consultations. 

And people were nervous, invited to submit, but people initially 

were incredibly wary. They didn’t have a lot of faith or trust in 

the process. 

 

And you know, I’ll give the government credit here. As the 

processes moved along from that initial few months where I 

think it was pretty rocky, things started to improve, and most of 

the creative industries were feeling quite good about the 

process, although there were still some challenges. I know film 

actually has felt like they haven’t been listened to at all. 

 

There was just an article in The StarPhoenix last week where 

the Saskatchewan Media Production Industry Association says 

that they haven’t felt like they’ve been listened to at all. And 

they would argue that in the small transition fund that the Arts 

Board offered up $1 million that was part of the Arts Board 

budget, the cap of $60,000 that was placed on grants was not, 

didn’t meet filmmakers’ needs. We have to think too, in this 

whole creative industries process, this is a very disparate group. 

They all have very different needs. What publishing needs isn’t 

the same as what film needs or isn’t the same as what music or 

craft needs. 

 

And film is a bit of a different one than all of them because they 

do their marketing before the product is actually made. 

Marketing happens when you are going to pitch your product to 

get broadcast licences or to try to create budgets. The marketing 

for film happens at the start of the project, not once the project 

is complete. So film is a very different entity. So I recognize 

that it’s a very difficult thing, pulling all these organizations 

together, and there is not a cookie-cutter approach that can be 

taken with any of the creative industries. 

 

I know that one of the concerns that is on the table right now is 

with part III, 12(3) and 12(4) with: 



3280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2013 

Not less than five of the members are to be appointed 

from a list of nominees provided by the creative industry. 

 

And: 

 

Nominations made for the purposes of subsection (3) must 

be made in the manner prescribed in the regulations. 

 

People are concerned with what the regulations are going to 

look like. And they’re still in consultations and, again, I give 

the ministry credit for continuing the process. It’s absolutely 

imperative that they get this right.  

 

But what I’ve heard from the creative industries is there is an 

organization, a not-for-profit that’s been in existence, I believe, 

since 1997. It’s incorporated. The Saskatchewan cultural 

development council, which initially had five of the creative 

industries on it but with the Pride of Saskatchewan they have 

moved to a model that includes some of the other creative 

industries as well. But I know the cultural development council 

would be very interested and willing to have some of the new 

dance and theatre incorporated or included in the council as 

well. 

 

But from my understanding, there has been consensus, and the 

minister last night in committee said otherwise. But from my 

understanding from conversations with people around the table 

is that they want a body from which to appoint . . . There are 

only five spaces available for industry reps. So five spaces and 

there are more than five creative industries. So instead of 

picking and choosing that, saying, this creative industry and 

this creative industry can have spots, they want the cultural 

development council to be the body, the representative body 

that puts forward nominees. 

 

And I know that the only, from my understanding, the only 

people who are opposed to this is the ministry at this point in 

time. And I’m sure that if I’m incorrect, I’m sure I will hear 

from the creative industries who disagree with that. But from 

my understanding, from being in close connection with those 

who are around that table, that that was agreed upon. 

 

I know when we talk about consultation, this has been, as I said, 

it started out as a very rocky process but again it’s been quite 

thorough. And at this point in time, the ministry is sitting down 

on a weekly basis with the creative industries. But one of the 

concerns expressed was around the introduction of the bill and 

not getting to see the bill. And the minister explained that he 

couldn’t, people couldn’t see the bill before it was introduced. 

 

But I think one of the frustrations that people had was that the 

definition that in this consultation that has been ongoing, in the 

consultation a definition of creative industries was put forward 

and agreed upon by the creative industries, and that definition 

wasn’t the one that showed up in Bill 89, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

So that’s one of the reasons they aren’t feeling that the ministry 

and the minister is hearing them. So that is a bit of a problem. 

 

And there are other questions that are out there as well right 

now around funding. And I had an opportunity to ask the 

minister some questions last night, and I think things still aren’t 

entirely clear. There’s $6.5 million in the budget and the 

minister confirmed that 5 million will be for an investment 

program, which is interesting. I digress here. This is interesting. 

 

The pot of money that was put in place for a transition, the $1 

million — I think this needs to be put on the record — the $1 

million that was put in place to support the creative industries, 

that will be evaluated, the minister said last night. And it may 

be the model that’s used going forward for the 5 million, but 

we’re not sure yet. It needs to be evaluated. But I need to point 

out that that was a grant, a direct grant. And it’s great that we’re 

putting money in the hands of our creators who want to take 

their content and share it and rightfully earn a living, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I think it’s ironic that this time last year the words on the 

opposite side of the House is, we’re not in the business of 

grants, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t know how many times we 

heard that over and over and over again. But the reality is the 

program that the government put in place was a grant program. 

So I find that interesting that the spin that they were using is 

exactly the kind of program that they’ve landed on, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So that is just, I think, something interesting to note. 

 

But back to that budget of $6.5 million. So the $5 million is for 

an investment pool. The $1.5 million, it’s still not entirely clear. 

The ministry has committed that 1.5 million. Some of it is for 

the creative industry sector organizations which, in 

consultations, the sector organizations have said it’s absolutely 

imperative that that funding continues because the sector 

organizations are the direct, are the direct link to all the 

creators, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are the people, the sector 

organizations who are the voice of all the different people in 

their respective sector. And so the sector organizations have 

made it very clear in the consultations that continued funding is 

very important. They are the ones who liaise directly with the 

ministry. 

 

So the 1.5 million is about what they get right now, but there’s 

nowhere in the budget, there’s no line item specific to how 

Creative Saskatchewan is actually going to function. There’s no 

money for administration as a line item or in the Creative 

Saskatchewan budget. So I know the minister explained last 

night that some of the money could come from SaskFilm, some 

of the money could come from Culture on the Go. But all of 

that, there’s still . . . The creative industries have many, many 

questions on will the sector organizations be funded to the level 

they are right now to carry out the services they currently are 

carrying out right now, or what does that look like? So they still 

have some fear and apprehension around how all of that looks. 

And just again pointing out that there isn’t any direct money set 

aside at this point, some very transparent way of looking at 

what’s going to be used for operation for Creative 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’m looking forward, when this bill is moved to committee, I 

do have more questions for the minister and look forward to the 

opportunity to get some further clarification on some of the 

issues that the creative industries have raised with me. And 

again it’s been my pleasure to have the opportunity to speak to 

this bill. I think that raising the fortunes of all the creative 

industries as a whole is a very good thing. But I just want to 

emphasize we did not have to cut the legs out of an entire 

industry to get there, and I think that’s a huge shame. Thank 

you. 



April 17, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3281 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill 

No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until 10 a.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:58.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3259 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3259 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3259 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3260 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3260 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3260 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3260 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3260 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3260 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Access to Physician Services 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3261 

 Sikh Society Celebrates Vaisakhi 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3261 

 Yorkton Students Win McKercher Cup 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3261 

 World Hemophilia Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3262 

 St. Brieux Crusaders Win Gold 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3262 

 Couple Selected as Family of the Year 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3262 

 Party Policy and History 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3262 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Asbestos Registry 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3263 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3263 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3263 

 Support for Home Care 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3263 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3264 

 Highway Conditions 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3265 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3265 

 Funding for Firefighting 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3266 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3266 

 Combatting Discrimination and Bullying 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3267 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3267 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3267 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3267 

 Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3270 

 Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3271 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3272 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3274 

 Bill No. 94 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3274 

 



 

 Bill No. 95 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3275 

 Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3277 

 Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3278 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3281 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


