




















































Hansard: December 02, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 22A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4323 

 December 2, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly an 

honour today to introduce to you and through to all members of 

the Assembly, in the west gallery there are 41 fabulous students 

from the Humboldt Collegiate, of course in Humboldt. And 

accompanying them is their teacher, David Millette, who has 

brought students each and every year that I can remember, and 

the chaperone, Janet Nunn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m told that the highways were passable yet, so 

hopefully these students can make their way home too, or else it 

might be fun to stay overnight if they get stormed in. But at any 

rate, may everyone welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce Mr. Max Poelzer. He’s spent 

time in Saskatchewan, Alberta, British Columbia, and Ontario. 

He’s completed his degree, undergrad degree at the University 

of Saskatchewan. He went on to do a graduate degree in media 

and film studies at Carleton. He’s acquired a capacity to speak 

Spanish, and he’s returned to Saskatchewan to complete a 

second graduate degree at the Johnson–Shoyama School. 

 

He’s currently interning at the office of the Provincial Auditor, 

where he’s finding the work both challenging and interesting. 

And he’s looking forward to being able to exercise and practise 

his skills right here in Saskatchewan as he successfully 

completes his studies and then moves successfully into his 

career. I’d ask all members to help join me in welcoming Max 

Poelzer to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I’d like to take the opportunity to 

do an introduction. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery is Senator 

Rich Wardner of North Dakota. Senator Wardner makes his 

home in the Dickinson area and is passing through Regina on 

his way to Calgary and Lake Louise for the Energy Council 

meeting. So I’d ask members to welcome Senator Wardner to 

the Saskatchewan Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join in 

with you in welcoming Senator Rich Wardner to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

It’s quite a number of years ago that Senator Wardner came up 

with an investigation crew to see whether our Legislative 

Assembly was of a high enough standard to become part of the 

Council of State Governments Midwest Legislative Conference. 

And I think that dinner at our house outside, which then went 

inside, where we talked and talked and talked was a big part of 

them inviting us all to be part of the Midwest Legislative 

Conference. And I want to thank Senator Wardner for the good 

work they did back then, I think it was 1999. And we appreciate 

the thing that he’s done, but welcome, and I look forward to 

seeing Senator Wardner in Lake Louise. Thanks. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of anti-bullying initiatives. 

And we know that bullying causes serious harm, and the 

consequences of bullying are devastating, including depression, 

self-harm, addictions, and suicide. And we know that this 

government is not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 

schools for gay and transgendered students or students bullied 

because of their sexual identity. And this government must act 

so that students have simple, easy-to-understand information 

about gay-straight alliances, GSAs in their schools, how to form 

a GSA, and who they should talk to in order to form a GSA 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives of 

young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents, families, farms, and 

businesses in our province as it relates to the unacceptable, 

unsafe condition of Highway 220. They note that currently too 

many highways and roads are not being repaired or maintained 

across Saskatchewan; that a responsible growth strategy would 

make our highways and roads a priority; that the state of this 

highway is unsafe and dangerous for all, including residents, 

farms, businesses, and travellers; that the state of this highway 

causes harm to the local economy and business activity in the 

region. And it goes on and talks as well about the damage to 

personal vehicles, recreational vehicles, business vehicles in the 

region. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: push the Sask Party government to make 



4324 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

repairing and maintaining the province’s highways a 

priority, specifically Highway 220 from Bulyea to 

Rowan’s Ravine, which has not been properly maintained 

or repaired by this government and as a result is unsafe and 

dangerous, causes costly damage, and hurts businesses and 

the economy in the region. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 

 

Now I have a thick stack of petitions to present here today, and 

I understand many more that are coming in for Highway 220. 

But these petitions today are signed by concerned residents 

from Bulyea, Strasbourg, Regina, Torquay, Lafleche, Radville, 

Milestone, Avonlea, Saskatoon, Coronach, Eldora Beach, 

Sunset resort, Lumsden, Southey, Earl Grey, Collingwood, 

Estevan, and Assiniboia. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

because the leaders and residents of northern Saskatchewan are 

concerned about seniors’ care in the North. The Croft report of 

2009 showed a serious shortage of long-term care beds for 

seniors and the problem has gotten worse. Seniors have done 

their part for this province, and it’s time the government to do 

its part. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to treat northern Saskatchewan senior 

citizens with respect and dignity and immediately invest in 

a new long-term care facility in La Ronge and area. 

 

It is signed by many northern and Saskatchewan residents. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out 

the following: that the gym at Sacred Heart Community School 

in North Central Regina is now quite literally falling apart, has 

been closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe for students or 

staff. These petitioners are aware that a temporary solution has 

been arrived at, Mr. Speaker, in terms of refurbishing the old 

sanctuary at the old Sacred Heart Church, but they are calling 

for a permanent solution. 

 

They are also pointing out the fact that Sacred Heart 

Community School is the largest school in North Central 

Regina with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of whom are First 

Nations and Métis. They point out that enrolment has increased 

by 100 students over the past four years and that attendance and 

learning outcomes are steadily improving, and they point out 

that as a matter of basic fairness and common sense that Sacred 

Heart Community School needs a gym. In the prayer that reads 

as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to immediately 

commit to the replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred 

Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina and 

Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

World AIDS Day 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Sunday, December 

the 1st marks World AIDS [acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome] Day. Our province has proclaimed World AIDS 

Day; AIDS Awareness Week, November 24th to December 1st; 

and Aboriginal AIDS Awareness Week, December 1st to 5th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this gives us an opportunity to raise awareness of 

HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome] and highlight provincial efforts to address 

the issue. 

 

HIV touches the lives of many people everywhere, including 

here in Saskatchewan. Our government remains committed to 

reducing the HIV rates and supporting people affected by 

HIV/AIDS in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the number of new HIV cases has been declining 

since 2009 despite increased testing. We are encouraged by this 

trend. Significant progress has been made in a number of areas 

through the provincial HIV strategy. There is increased access 

to HIV testing. More HIV patients are receiving treatment and 

experiencing successful outcomes, and, from 2011 onward, 

there have been no babies born with HIV through 

mother-to-child transmission. We will continue our efforts to 

reduce the risk factors and help people access testing, treatment, 

and care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today I want to thank all partners — health care professionals, 

front-line service providers, community-based organizations, 

and others — for their work to prevent the threat of HIV. We 

can all play a part in creating greater support for people living 

with HIV. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. World AIDS Day 

was the first ever global health day, and it was initially 

recognized in 1988. Stigma and discrimination remain a reality 

for many people living with HIV, often preventing them from 

seeking treatment and support they need. This day not only 

unites people in the fight against HIV and AIDS but also aims 

to show support for people living with the disease. 

 

Globally it has been estimated that 34 million people have HIV. 

We are encouraged to see this number stabilizing, Mr. Speaker. 

Though an estimated 2.6 million people become newly infected 

with the virus every year, the number of people newly infected 

with HIV is declining, and AIDS-related deaths are decreasing.  

 

Unfortunately our province continues to have a high rate of new 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4325 

HIV cases, often associated with drug use. World AIDS Day 

provides an opportunity to remind the public and our 

governments that HIV is still a reality and the need persists to 

increase awareness and to fight prejudice. 

 

I would like to recognize the work of the Canadian AIDS 

Society, the Saskatchewan HIV Provincial Leadership Team, 

AIDS Programs South Saskatchewan, AIDS Saskatoon, and 

other organizations for their hard work providing outreach, 

education, and support for people living with HIV and AIDS. 

 

I would like to ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing World AIDS Day, December 1st, and to also 

remember the importance of public education and support all 

year round. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Thanks to Movember Participants  

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The month of 

November is over and December is upon us. That means that 

the Movember challenge is now complete, and moustaches 

across Canada have been shaved. And, Mr. Speaker, my wife 

and daughters are very happy that my Ben Stiller Dodgeball 

look is gone, for a year anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over $99.7 million has been raised through the 

Movember movement this year. Mr. Speaker, our very own 

Saskatchewan Party caucus, Team Growth Plan, raised over 

$6,000 with online and manual donations. Thank you, everyone 

who made generous donations. And of course thank you to our 

caucus participants: the ministers of Rural and Remote Health, 

Justice and Attorney General, and Advanced Education, as well 

as members from Moose Jaw North and Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every one of us knows someone affected by 

prostate, testicular cancer, or mental illness. And it is crucial to 

raise awareness to end the stigma around these illnesses. 

 

A huge thank you to all the Movember participants on both 

sides of the House and throughout the province for raising 

funds and awareness of these illnesses. I ask all members to join 

me in recognizing the Movember 2013 movement, participants, 

and donors. And remember, Mr. Speaker, if you can dodge a 

wrench, you can dodge a ball. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Centennial Year for International Alliance 

of Theatrical Stage Employees 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to congratulate the International Alliance of Theatrical 

Stage Employees, Local 295 Regina and 300 Saskatoon, for 

celebrating their 100th anniversaries. These IATSE 

[International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees] locals 

were officially granted their charters on July 10th, 1913 for 

stage workers and film projectionists. 

 

The Saskatchewan locals maintain a membership of over 250, 

covering 30 craft departments in film, stage, and projection 

areas. Major events such as the Grey Cup, the Junos, and Paul 

McCartney, all were IATSE workplaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the 1960s these locals have been 

representing film production technicians. But as you can 

imagine, IATSE was not supportive of the decision to axe the 

film tax credit. 

 

John Lewis, international vice-president and director of 

Canadian affairs for IATSE, wrote a letter to the Premier in 

May of 2012 warning him that the replacement of a 

non-refundable tax credit spells doom for the local film and TV 

production sector. I quote: “There are few industries that are as 

mobile as the film industry,” he wrote in his letter. “It’s an 

industry capable of packing up and setting up elsewhere in a 

matter of days.” Unfortunately this is what happened in many 

cases. 

 

Many members persevered though, and the IATSE locals 

celebrated their anniversary in Saskatoon at Persephone Theatre 

and here in Regina at the Conexus Arts Centre this past August. 

I ask all members to join with me in congratulating IATSE 

Local 295 and 300 on their centennial year, ensuring that while 

we enjoy the game, the movie, or the play, that the work is well 

done and everyone is safe and treated fairly. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

New Facility for Naicam Sarcan 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Wednesday I had the pleasure of bringing greetings and 

extending congratulations to the Naicam Sarcan on the grand 

opening of their new facility. 

 

Sarcan has been in the town of Naicam since January 1991 and 

since that time has recycled 10,882,902 containers, Mr. 

Speaker. With this new facility, Naicam Sarcan can continue to 

meet the recycling demands of growing neighbourhoods. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to recognize depot supervisor Brian 

Lukowski who has worked at the depot for almost 20 years, 

starting just three years after the depot was opened. 

 

Recycling and protecting our environment is a priority of this 

government, and reducing the amount of waste going into our 

landfill will protect our environment and sustain the quality of 

life we have come to enjoy in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like all members of the House to join me in recognizing 

Sarcan and the residents of Naicam in their continued 

commitment to the reduction of waste. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Company Supports Community School 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 

in the Assembly today to recognize some great work that’s 

happening in the city of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, WBM Office 

Systems has graciously been supporting Vincent Massey 

Community School for over 15 years in a variety of ways, some 

of which I’d like to mention today. 



4326 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

WBM has generously provided funding for off-site learning 

experiences such as attending Persephone Youth Series 

performances, and supported senior students on camp trips 

through fundraising as well as additional human resources. 

WBM staff also go to the school during the workday to 

participate in weekly reading sessions with the youngest 

students. They also have hosted the grade 8 students at their 

office to experience a day in the workplace. Mr. Speaker, WBM 

staff are always at the school’s events, ready to help, such as 

holiday lunches, National Aboriginal Day, and other school 

functions. 

 

Through their unwavering commitment to Vincent Massey 

School, WBM has a nutrition-positive program as well as 

supporting learning and building community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to ask all members to join me 

in recognizing WBM’s great corporate citizenship and 

important work they do in engaging students at Vincent Massey 

School. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Plans for Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Janice MacKinnon, former NDP Finance minister, wrote in a 

report, Health Care Reform from the Cradle of Medicare, that 

“. . . Health care costs could be reduced and patient care 

improved if governments adopt a long-term care strategy, which 

includes using public-private partnerships . . .” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, on November 27th, our government 

announced that we were proceeding to the request for proposal 

stage for the Swift Current long-term care facility. Three 

qualified bidders have been shortlisted to participate in the next 

stage of the competitive P3 [public–private partnership] 

selection process to build the new 225-bed facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once procurement is complete, value-for-money 

calculations prepared by the external financial advisor and the 

report from the independent fairness advisor will be published, 

publicly demonstrating the savings we will achieve by utilizing 

a P3. 

 

The project is a design, build, finance, maintain public-private 

partnership procurement model, and the winning bidder is 

expected to be selected by the spring of 2014. Construction is 

expected to be under way in the summer of 2014 with 

completion targeted for 2016. 

 

The Cypress Regional Health Authority will maintain full 

ownership of this facility and will operate all aspects of direct 

care. Most importantly, the new facility will create a home like 

atmosphere for residents and incorporate lean operational best 

practices. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Long-Term Care Conditions 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Premier. Mr. Speaker, can the Premier tell us if the government 

is considering requiring a residents’ bill of rights for all seniors’ 

care homes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it isn’t an initiative that the 

government is considering at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we keep hearing 

concerns from Saskatchewan people about the quality of 

seniors’ care under this government, Mr. Speaker, a quality of 

care that is getting worse; about seniors not receiving the kind 

of care they deserve, the kind of care that families expect; about 

their basic rights, Mr. Speaker, not being respected. 

 

The government received a report back in May from its own 

Law Reform Commission. The commission recommended that 

a residents’ bill of rights be required for all seniors’ care homes 

and that an enforcement mechanism be specified in legislation. 

My question to the Premier: why has the government ignored 

that very clear recommendation from its very own Law Reform 

Commission? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this House will know and I think the public will know 

the tremendous strides that this government has taken and will 

continue to take to improve seniors who are in our care in our 

residences across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from time to time we will get advice and input 

from organizations, whether that be through legislative 

secretaries, whether that be through organizations like the 

Seniors Mechanism or in this case the Law Reform 

Commission, Mr. Speaker. We have looked at the findings, the 

recommendations of the Law Reform Commission, as we have 

with other organizations that have put forward 

recommendations to government. We will in the future consider 

those recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point though, what we’re going to continue to do is 

institute the CEO [chief executive officer] tours, Mr. Speaker, 

respond to those CEO tours with an Urgent Issues Action Fund, 

make a determination of whether or not additional funds would 

be necessary in the future and, Mr. Speaker, have a reporting 

mechanism for both the public and for CEOs on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we see from this 

government is step after step where they have reduced the 

quality of care, Mr. Speaker, for seniors. We saw the removal of 

minimum hours of care for seniors. We saw a removal, Mr. 

Speaker, of any reference of sufficient staffing when it comes to 

the care of our loved ones. 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4327 

Mr. Speaker, the Law Reform Commission’s report was entitled 

Civil Rights in Saskatchewan Long-Term Care Facilities. It 

talks about, Mr. Speaker, how current protections for civil 

rights of seniors in the province simply are not good enough. 

Ontario, Manitoba, and British Columbia all require seniors’ 

care homes to have a residents’ bill of rights. 

 

The government’s own Law Reform Commission specifically 

urged this government to follow Manitoba’s lead by requiring 

care homes to have a residents’ bill of rights that meets a 

legislated minimum standard. My question to the Premier: will 

this government commit to implement this change as soon as 

possible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to correct the 

member. We still do require minimum basic standards within 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker. They are tailored around the 

individual though, Mr. Speaker, not a regulation that was put in 

place in the 1950s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think it’s important that the Leader of the Opposition 

acknowledge that the standard that was in place from the 1950s, 

while for some people it did speak to two-hour minimum, for 

some it also spoke to a 45-minute minimum and for some 

people a 20-minute minimum, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t think the 

Leader of the Opposition is telling the entire information when 

he talks about the regulations that were changed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in terms of sufficient staffing, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 

we’ve added 700 full-time equivalents to the long-term care 

system in only six years, Mr. Speaker, I think it speaks to this 

government’s commitment to ensuring that we have the 

appropriate level of staffing, Mr. Speaker, unlike the members 

opposite who didn’t take those steps. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the actions that we see from this 

government show a very different picture, and what we see are 

actions that have reduced the quality of care for seniors here in 

the province. We see a removal of minimum standards. Instead 

of trying to raise the bar, instead of trying to make care better 

for everyone, we see the removal. We see the elimination of 

sufficient staffing references, Mr. Speaker. We see a one-time 

payment fund to address the huge issues that Saskatchewan 

people have brought forward, an approach that even the CEO of 

the Saskatoon Health Region says won’t address the actual 

problems that we’re facing. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we see a very clear recommendation 

from this government’s very own Law Reform Commission 

saying that a residents’ bill of rights should be in place as 

another measure to ensure that seniors receive at least the basic 

level of care. But, Mr. Speaker, consistent with their track 

record, they just stubbornly ignore the recommendation. 

 

My question to the Premier: what will it take for this 

government to actually address the quality of seniors’ care in 

this province? When will they stop stubbornly dismissing the 

concerns that are brought forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what it took for a 

government to start paying attention to the needs of seniors 

across the province. It took the election in 2007. It took the 

defeat of members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what has happened since then? Well since 2007 there’s 

been a 14 per cent increase in nurses at LTC [long-term care] 

facilities, a 10 per cent increase in staff overall. Overall 

staff-to-bed ratios in the long-term care sector have improved 

by 9 per cent since they were in office, Mr. Speaker. This side 

of the House is building new long-term care facilities, adding 

new beds, when they closed beds including the one just 

referenced by the member for Wood River in Swift Current. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, beyond that in terms of seniors, we 

have doubled the number of seniors eligible for the seniors’ 

income assistance plan, tripling the benefits under the plan from 

the days of the NDP where for 16 years they offered nothing, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’ve created a personal care home benefit 

up to $4,400 per year, Mr. Speaker, since the 2011 election. 

That speaks to action, Mr. Speaker. After 16 long years of 

ignoring seniors, question period doesn’t change the fact that 

the people of this province got frankly ignored by members 

opposite on this issue, and action from members on this side of 

the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Okay, Mr. Speaker, here’s the facts of the 

matter. The Law Reform Commission, a commission of this 

own government, Mr. Speaker, says that seniors’ civil rights are 

being violated in care facilities. Because of what it has seen, 

Mr. Speaker, it puts forward a recommendation that there 

should be a residents’ bill of rights. My question to the Premier, 

who’ll get up and give the rah-rah, Mr. Speaker, but will he 

answer a clear question: why is this government ignoring the 

recommendation from the commission that there should be a 

residents’ bill of rights? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think again it’s important to note the record on this side of the 

House when it comes to seniors. Notwithstanding the question 

with respect to bill of rights, the Minister of Health has said 

there’s no immediate plans for this. The Law Reform 

Commission has made these recommendations. They weren’t 

necessarily solicited by the government, but it’s something that 

in the long term I think governments are going to look at, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what we also need to look at is the record on this side of the 

House because day after day that Leader of the Opposition 

stands up and says, look, the actions of this government 

underscore the priority in which they place long-term care. You 

bet the record of this government does just that, Mr. Speaker. 

We have added to the number of nurses working in long-term 

care facilities — it bears repeating — by 14 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, a 10 per cent increase in staffing overall. 

 

We are not closing long-term care beds like members opposite 



4328 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

did, like the member for Regina Lakeview did when he was the 

Health minister, Mr. Speaker. We are opening new long-term 

care facilities, Mr. Speaker. We took the seniors’ income 

assistance plan, ignored, unincreased by the NDP for 16 long 

years, Mr. Speaker. We’ve tripled the benefit, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’ve added as well a personal care home benefit of up to 

$4,400 per year, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s why, that’s why 

seniors in this province and their families in the last election 

said, I think we’re going to go with action rather than rhetoric 

from members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, in the research undertaken by 

the Law Reform Commission regarding civil rights and care 

facilities, food was the most commonly mentioned topic. The 

commission heard that meals are times of stress for residents, 

that residents are not given adequate time or assistance to eat 

the meals provided for them, and that many families believe 

their loved ones don’t eat unless a family member or hired 

private care aid is there to feed them. Shockingly the 

commission’s interim paper said, “Three families believe their 

loved one died as a result of the lack of assistance available for 

residents to eat and drink.” To the minister: why did the 

government ignore this? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve indicated on this 

issue, Mr. Speaker, the government has not ignored the issues 

of seniors, Mr. Speaker. We commissioned the first ever 

long-term care tour within this province’s history when it comes 

to long-term care, where CEOs and senior managers, those 

responsible for managing these organizations, Mr. Speaker, 

actually went out and spoke to residents and their families, Mr. 

Speaker, solicited information, and we will act on that report, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re also putting in place, as I’ve mentioned before, an Urgent 

Issues Action Fund to identify those urgent issues that we need 

to address, Mr. Speaker, $10 million that will be flowing over 

the next number of weeks, Mr. Speaker, to address those issues, 

and a reporting mechanism, 60-, 90-, 120-day reporting back, 

Mr. Speaker, to the ministry to see what further work would 

need to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take this issue very seriously. That’s why 

we’ve increased the supports for seniors, those that live within 

personal care homes, private personal care homes. There is 

legislation before this House to publish, be transparent with the 

licensing around personal care homes, the private personal care 

homes, Mr. Speaker. And we have added significant dollars to 

the budgets of regional health authorities, 48 per cent, $1 billion 

additional money, Mr. Speaker. This government is not 

overlooking or ignoring this issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it was three years ago that the 

government heard from its own Law Reform Commission that 

families think their loved ones died due to the lack of assistance 

available for residents to eat and drink. Yet what did this 

government do? A year later it watered down the special care 

home regulations to remove any reference to minimum care 

standards and sufficient staffing. Food- and nutrition-related 

concerns are not only quality of life matters. They are civil 

rights matters and according to what the Law Reform 

Commission heard from families, they are matters of life and 

death. 

 

To the minister: when will this government recognize that food 

and nutrition are a major concern in care facilities and when 

will it finally do something? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, these are the types of issues that we have recognized 

as a government, going back to 2007 when this government was 

elected, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite, when their 

plan for long-term care for our seniors, for those people that 

built this province, was to close 16 facilities, to close 1,200 

beds, Mr. Speaker, and to increase long-term care fees in this 

province to the point where seniors would have to go on welfare 

to be able to afford to pay their fees, Mr. Speaker. How today 

the NDP in this province can now stand up and be the defenders 

of seniors in this province, Mr. Speaker, is beyond me. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, in the law commission’s 

research, food was the most commonly mentioned concern. 

And we know that this government has heard about families 

who are concerned about their loved ones who died due to lack 

of assistance with eating and drinking. And these concerns were 

mentioned numerous times in the CEO report. 

 

We know that the government’s one-time payment fund will 

only go so far to address problems in senior care facilities 

throughout the province, but surely some of it will be devoted 

to address these types of concerns. To the minister: how many 

business cases were received regarding food- and 

nutrition-related problems and what is the total cost attached to 

those business cases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the member opposite for allowing me the 

opportunity to talk about this government’s $10 million Urgent 

Issues Action Fund that this government is allocating over the 

next number of weeks, Mr. Speaker. We received reports and 

business cases from all of our health regions, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve had to go back to some of the health regions to have 

them provide some additional information. Some did speak to 

issues around food quality and food preparation, Mr. Speaker. 

Others spoke to some small maintenance projects, Mr. Speaker, 

that we look to be able to fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the $10 million will be flowing over the next 

couple of weeks. We will then do an evaluation over 60, 90, and 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4329 

120 days to determine whether or not the dollars actually got to 

the front lines so that residents could actually see a positive 

effect from the dollars. It’ll allow us also an opportunity to 

evaluate what more we can do to improve the life of seniors 

within our care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this demonstrates in this one small aspect, 

Mr. Speaker, that this government is taking this seriously as a 

priority. Unfortunately the members opposite never did when 

they were in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Minimum Wage 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Back in July the 

Labour minister promised changes to the minimum wage 

legislation by the end of this year. Here’s a quote from the 

media, and I quote: 

 

Don Morgan’s pledge comes after the NDP yesterday 

accused the government of unnecessarily delaying a 

minimum wage index. Morgan says a formula is being 

developed and that a policy will be in place before the end 

of this year. 

 

To the minister: will this government actually keep that 

promise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite had 

some 16 years in which to index minimum wage. They didn’t. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has regularly and 

routinely increased minimum wage. We have the third-highest 

after-tax income for full-time minimum wage earners. We’ve 

increased the minimum wage some five times from 7.95 to $10 

per hour. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the simple answer is, we will be 

indexing minimum wage and they’ll see it soon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, back in July the Labour minister 

also said the usual effective date for minimum wage changes is 

December 1st. Mr. Speaker, it’s December 2nd and we still 

have no word on when this government will finally index the 

minimum wage. To the minister: when, when will this 

government release the full details of the formula and timeline 

for indexing the minimum wage? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the intention of this 

government to index minimum wage to provide security for 

minimum wage earners and to ensure business owners have 

some predictability. 

 

In the five years, last five years, we’ve increased the minimum 

wage on average 5 per cent per year, over a 25 per cent 

increase, well in excess of what cost of living’s done. We have 

in addition to that increased the basic personal tax exemption so 

it will have the effect of eliminating personal income tax for 

some 114,000 people in this province. 

Mr. Speaker, we will be introducing legislation later this week 

dealing with other parts of the employment Act, and, Mr. 

Speaker, the members will soon learn when things are going to 

be rolled out. And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, this is a government 

that cares about and values low-income workers, unlike the 

members opposite who in 16 years did absolutely nothing for 

low-income workers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the cost of living has gone up 

significantly here in Saskatchewan. We know there are many 

people who are struggling to pay their bills and make ends 

meet. But it’s absolutely essential the minimum wage be 

indexed at an appropriate level. Mr. Speaker, only one province, 

only one province has a minimum wage that is lower than 

Saskatchewan’s minimum wage. To the minister: will he 

guarantee that the minimum wage will be indexed at an 

appropriate level so it provides a living wage for hard-working 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d urge the members 

opposite to stay tuned, watch for it. Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

something we’re going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention something about the 

previous leader of the opposition. He was somebody that knew 

absolutely nothing about the minimum wage. He reported on 

CHAB radio, Dwain Lingenfelter, August 4th, 2011, 

“Minimum wage workers in Moose Jaw have not had an 

increase in three years.” Absolutely false, Mr. Speaker. Not 

correct. The fact is that we have routinely and regularly 

increased minimum wage, on average 5 per cent per year. 

Usually every year this government has raised minimum wage, 

Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to do so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Funding for First Nations Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a lot of 

interesting and concerning details in the Senate scandal 

documents released recently by the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police]. And buried in that stack of papers is proof 

that the Prime Minister’s Office stubbornly refuses to ensure 

First Nations students have the equality of opportunity that they 

deserve. An internal government memo authored by Nigel 

Wright and several other senior staff specifically say it is 

against government messaging and direction for Senate 

committees to have urged the government to “invest heavily in 

Aboriginal education.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a huge issue of importance to our province. 

In the last few weeks, Mr. Speaker, we’ve have motions come 

forward from the Premier on the Senate and on CETA 

[Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement]. My question for the Premier today: will he agree 

to unanimously pass a motion condemning the federal 

government’s inaction, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to fair 

funding for Aboriginal education? 

 



4330 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well here the 

opposition and the government agree. There needs to be parity 

in funding education on-reserve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I just had the occasion last month to visit with the Prime 

Minister and Mr. Valcourt, the minister responsible for the file, 

as did the Minister for First Nations and Métis Relations in the 

province, together with the Minister of Education. We’ve made 

this case, Mr. Speaker, not just in this year but in many years 

previous, including just prior to a federal government decision 

to actually increase funding for on-reserve education by about 

$200 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re concerned to see actually how that money has flown to 

First Nations in terms of education. We have not seen that yet. 

We expressed that concern when we met with the ministers. We 

do have, frankly, some positive developments to report to the 

House beyond whatever motion my friend is proposing, 

including, Mr. Speaker, a recognition by Minister Valcourt, I 

think it’s fair to say, that we need to agree on the appropriate 

measure for funding so we can actually do something about it. 

And hopefully that would mean federal government investment 

in on-reserve education. That continues to be the position of the 

government. 

 

We’re not waiting for that though, Mr. Speaker. We’re actually 

providing adult basic education on-reserve today. We’re 

providing driver education on-reserve today, Mr. Speaker. But 

there is an issue here for the federal government, and I think it’s 

one we share with the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While there may be 

discussions with the minister, what is very concerning, Mr. 

Speaker, is the signal and the messages being given by the 

PMO [Prime Minister’s Office] as revealed through the item, 

Mr. Speaker. The PMO is not just stubbornly refusing to fund 

First Nations students attending reserve schools at the same 

level as their provincial counterparts. They actually find any 

talk, Mr. Speaker, about investing in Aboriginal education as 

threatening. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the underfunding of First Nations 

education on-reserve is a huge concern for our province, where 

on-reserve students receive half to two-thirds of the amount of 

funding that students off-reserve in the provincial schools 

would be receiving, Mr. Speaker. We know this is a huge 

concern, especially when we see the words coming straight 

from the highest office, the Prime Minister’s Office. My 

question to the Premier: does he agree that this is a huge 

concern for our province, and will he agree to pass a motion in 

the Assembly today condemning the federal government for its 

inaction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a motion is I guess an option. 

Another option is to engage directly with federal parties, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ve done that on many occasions with the 

federal government, with the Prime Minister. So it’s interesting 

to watch the Leader of the Opposition go through some verbal 

gymnastics to try to connect the important issue of First Nations 

education funding with the Senate scandal, Mr. Speaker. But 

fair enough. Whatever entree into an important issue, I’ll 

certainly accept that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that increasingly we have the federal 

government’s attention on the issue. That’s why a couple of 

budgets ago, I think, they have increased funding of $200 

million, again notwithstanding concerns about where the 

funding has gone and how it’s gotten to where it was intended 

to be. Moreover though, Mr. Speaker, in meetings with the 

federal minister, response from Minister Valcourt, there has 

been indications from the province that they’re prepared to look 

at some pilots, maybe even here, right here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And so I would encourage our 

government and all parties to support that kind of piloting. 

That’ll absolutely clear a path to solving this problem. 

 

And I would also ask the Leader of the Opposition what efforts 

he has made with the federal Leader of the Opposition to raise 

this issue in the Parliament of Canada or in the course of his 

meetings that he’s had with his federal counterpart, Mr. Thomas 

Mulcair. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An internal memo 

authored by Nigel Wright and several other senior staff, Mr. 

Speaker, says it was against government messaging and 

direction for Senate committees to have urged the government 

to “invest heavily in Aboriginal education.” 

 

The Premier’s absolutely right, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very 

serious matter. It is a serious matter for the future of our 

province, a serious matter for so many children, so many 

communities throughout the province. 

 

We’ve had motions that come forward, Mr. Speaker, on CETA, 

motions on the Senate where we have a common voice, Mr. 

Speaker, from the Assembly in talking about issues that have 

relevance to the province. So the motion later on, Mr. Speaker, 

that I would ask the Premier if they would agree to is: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Prime Minister’s Office 

for the disdain it has shown for any discussion about the 

underfunding of First Nations students; and 

 

That this Assembly call on the federal government to 

immediately provide fair funding for First Nations 

education. 

 

My question to the Premier: will his government support this 

motion this afternoon? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Speaker, we won’t support the 

motion, and here’s why. We are aware that the federal 

government is looking carefully at this issue substantively in the 

way of some pilot projects that could actually . . . [inaudible 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4331 

interjection] . . . Well if the Deputy Leader of the Opposition is 

interested in this answer . . . They say it’s important to them. If 

he’s interested in it, I’d invite him to pay attention and perhaps 

even to support, to support our government’s attempt to provide 

our own support, our own resources to the extent they’re needed 

for some pilots that we understand may be under way for right 

here in the province of Saskatchewan and perhaps some other 

jurisdictions in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for this legislature and that 

Leader of the Opposition and his seatmate, and his seatmate, to 

recognize that some sort of a general motion condemning 

something before they know what they’re condemning, or some 

sort of motion condemning something that for whatever reason 

might jeopardize progress that can be made on this file in this 

province, is not probably the wisest, most prudent action for 

this legislature to take. If they wish to bring a motion, they can 

do that on Thursday, and it’ll receive the attention from the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the meantime the minister responsible and our 

office, my office, is going to continue to make this issue a 

priority. And we’re hopeful to see some early results, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved that Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the Leader of the 

Opposition on his feet? 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 

 

Funding for First Nations Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 

day, Mr. Speaker, I stand to seek leave under rule 61 to move a 

motion of urgent and pressing necessity. I’ve already outlined 

in question period with regard to recently released internal 

documents that show the disdain with which the Prime 

Minister’s Office treats any discussion about fair funding for 

First Nations students. 

 

This is an issue of critical importance to Saskatchewan and I 

think it’s important that this Assembly sends a clear message to 

the federal government for passing a motion, Mr. Speaker, by 

passing a motion, Mr. Speaker, to that effect. If there’s 

unanimous consent to do so, I’m prepared to move that motion. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition requests leave 

to move a motion regarding First Nations education. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion fails. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Election Amendment 

Act, 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Chief Electoral Officer has advised that he 

will not be appointing an assistant Chief Electoral Officer as 

required by the Act. This bill will remove this requirement to 

avoid non-compliance by the CEO [Chief Electoral Officer] 

with his governing legislation. The other changes are being 

presented now to ensure that they are in place prior to the next 

general election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the election Act 2013 will also amend the deposit 

refund provisions to remove the requirement that a candidate 

must receive at least 50 per cent of the votes of the winner in 

order to get back their deposit. This will ensure the provision is 

not a deterrent to smaller political parties or independent 

candidates. 

 

It will revise the pre-election advertising rules for government 

ministries and agencies to address technical problems identified 

in the last general election. These include amending the current 

process of counting back from an uncertain writ issue date to 

determine the start of the restrictions to instead now count back 

from the fixed election date. 

 

It will change the monthly average advertising spending 

restrictions provisions to require government ministries not to 



4332 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

exceed the amount they spend in the corresponding four-month 

period in the previous year, rather than a monthly average 

determined from their twelve-month advertising spending, 

allowing the restrictions on advertising spending in the 120-day 

period prior to the election to be spread over the four-month 

period rather than limited to a per month limit. 

 

The bill will also remove the uncertainty as to what agencies of 

the government are subject to these restrictions by defining 

government ministry to include a ministry and any other 

government institution as that term is defined and listed under 

The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

The bill will also exclude routine advertising by government 

ministries for employment or the procurement of supplies from 

the advertising and publications bans prior to a general election, 

and the bill will also provide that the 28-day minimum written 

period be reduced to 27 days. This would allow the Chief 

Electoral Officer to avoid having to issue the election writ on a 

holiday such as Thanksgiving during a fall general election. 

 

Members of the House will be aware that we are now in receipt 

of additional proposed changes to the Act suggested by the 

Chief Electoral Officer. These proposals, along with changes 

suggested by other stakeholders, will be considered for further 

amendments in future cities. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 

second reading of The Election Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 121, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to stand today and to give the first few comments on 

The Election Act, Bill 121. And, Mr. Speaker, as we went 

through the bills, we were very interested as to how the Sask 

Party is going to be proceeding with going through the election 

process and how they have worked closely with a number of 

players. I want to ensure that there is fair elections and that 

there’s as much involvement of the voters as possible. 

 

I think that’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that we continue to 

stress that because as you look at some of the evidence, Mr. 

Speaker, we go back to the earlier statements about the manner 

in which they have selected or made the choice to go from 58 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] to 61 MLAs. 

That was an increase of three more politicians, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s not what the people of Saskatchewan asked. And, Mr. 

Speaker, not only have they put the extra MLAs on the agenda, 

they have also spoken, Mr. Speaker, about how the MLAs are 

to be selected and how they rationalized their decision around 

the manner in which to increase in number of MLAs here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they talked about the concentration of voters, 

and they looked at only the voters 18 years of age and up, Mr. 

Speaker. They did not include any of the children, any of the 

young people, and certainly a number of people that were 

excluded includes the future of the province of Saskatchewan. 

So we’re seeing that particular manipulation, if you will, in 

terms of justifying how they wanted to come along and increase 

the number of MLAs from the current complement of 58 to 

include three extra ones to make it to 61. 

So, Mr. Speaker, the first thing they do is they increase the 

amount of MLAs. The second thing they do is they make sure 

that young people are not included, anybody under the age of 

18 are not included as to how they justify those numbers. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen evidence time and time again that the 

concentration of voter per constituent is really, really high in 

other areas. And here in Saskatchewan they’ve somehow 

magically justified to increase it by three and, Mr. Speaker, 

once again they’re trying to push that item forward. 

 

The second thing they want to do, Mr. Speaker, and I noticed 

that they’ve taken some of the examples around the US [United 

States]. And we look at that as voter suppression tactics, where 

the previous Justice minister brought in these rules in the sense 

that they have to provide photo ID before they’re allowed to 

vote. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the second particular aspect that 

we’re concerned about. 

 

And we tell a lot of people in northern Saskatchewan, and I 

guess all throughout the province, that most people that do not 

have voter ID, Mr. Speaker, include the elderly. Sometimes 

they include the new Canadian that is here for the specified time 

because I think many of them can’t vote immediately, but they 

eventually do have that option of voting. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what happens is they simply do not have the driver’s licence 

that they need, even though they have stayed here the minimum 

time frame. And of course these are the new Canadians, the 

people that have settled in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, 

many of those people do not have a driver’s licence or a photo 

ID. And of course, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the Aboriginal people 

don’t have photo ID. 

 

So if you look at the older Canadians, Mr. Speaker, you look at 

the new Canadians, and you look at the Aboriginal Canadians, 

Mr. Speaker, these specific groups do not, many of them do not 

have the privilege of having a voter . . . a photo ID. And again 

what the minister of Justice previously done was he certainly 

put these rules and regulations into place to suppress that 

particular demographic of the province, to encourage them not 

to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we also know that the fourth kind of action, that look at 

some of the minutes that the Board of Internal Economy, BOI, 

where you see a number of ministers, a number of people from 

the Saskatchewan Party really challenging the current elections 

officers in terms of the amount of staff that they need to run an 

election fairly. 

 

So you look at all these activities, Mr. Speaker, and we really 

begin to want to watch and monitor as to what the 

Saskatchewan Party has in plan and what plan they have in 

place to try and skewer the free democratic right for people to 

vote as they wish. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at this current bill, Bill 121, The 

Election Act, and we think that some of the changes are 

common sense. But before, as I mentioned, we’re kind of 

tainted. Every time the Saskatchewan Party bring forward any 

changes under The Election Act, we watch it very, very 

carefully. We scrutinize the bill to make sure that there isn’t any 

processing here that’s going to help complement some of their 

earlier works that they have done as I’ve spoken about earlier. 

And that’s one of the things that we want to be careful as we 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4333 

watch for. 

 

So one of the things that we obviously also want to encourage, 

as a result of this bill, is to have people out there that watch the 

elections because the fundamental rights of people to expect a 

fair and unencumbered election process is key to our 

democracy. That’s what a lot of people have fought for over the 

years and, Mr. Speaker, we cannot gerrymander that process in 

any way. 

 

And all the evidence that I’ve seen thus far, all the evidence that 

I’ve seen thus far, Mr. Speaker — whether it’s the voter ID 

[identification], whether it’s increasing the amount of MLAs, or 

whether it’s the suppression tactics that I spoke about earlier, 

Mr. Speaker — we’re finding more and more evidence that the 

Sask Party’s doing all they can and leaving no stone unturned to 

try and manipulate and gerrymander election processes as much 

as they can, even to the extent where they are arguing publicly 

during meetings here in the Assembly over the role of the 

electoral office, that’s the independent office of this Assembly, 

as to why they would need more staff, and certainly more 

opportunities to run a fair and full election. 

 

So you see all the evidence, all the activities, Mr. Speaker. It 

does not suggest that any way, shape, or form that this 

government is going to do anything positive when it comes to 

advertising. So what we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is you want to 

see exactly what they have in mind with this bill, Bill 121. And 

yes, once again, once again we’re seeing another plug-in for the 

Saskatchewan Party plan to try and manipulate the election as 

often and as many times as they want for the next election. 

 

And this is where people ought to be told as to what, from our 

perspective, is wrong with the whole bill. And certainly they 

need to know and need to learn how the Saskatchewan Party is 

doing their business when it comes to gerrymandering some of 

the processes here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can remember a number of . . . eight or nine years ago, in 

which we were in government and they were in opposition. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most surprising thing, the most 

surprising thing, Mr. Speaker, is that they were very critical of 

any advertising that we’d done. They said that it was wrong and 

we shouldn’t be doing that kind of activity. 

 

And my goodness, Mr. Speaker, the world was coming to an 

end when the Sask Party in opposition spoke about government 

advertising. When they spoke about government advertising, 

Mr. Speaker, they were condemning it. They were arguing 

against it. They were making motions. They were screaming. 

And they were just creating a ruckus over there, Mr. Speaker, 

when they were in opposition, talking about government 

advertising, accusing the government of the day at the time of 

using advertising to their benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here we are a short seven years later, and what is the Sask 

Party now doing, Mr. Speaker? They’re doing exactly what they 

were decrying seven or eight years ago, Mr. Speaker, what they 

were decrying as being very wrong with the whole process, 

trying to make sure that they position their government to do as 

much advertising before an election is called. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they use a lot of baseless allegations about government 

advertising in the electoral process. 

And, Mr. Speaker, where are we today? Again nothing has 

changed under the Sask Party when it comes to trying their 

darndest to manipulate the future elections for the province of 

Saskatchewan. And with this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, we 

have some serious concerns around the advertising that they’re 

speaking about and that particular mindset that they have. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if I can kind of draw a map to the people of 

Saskatchewan, where the minister has spoken about this bill, of 

how they want to look at the previous year’s spending and do 

the four-month average and look at how they could take any 

four months and kind of mimic that during the election year. 

And, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen is that they’re going 

to . . . They know what month they’re going to call the election. 

And then what’s going to happen is the year before in the time 

frame that they want to select for the election, they’re going to 

spend as much of the advertising dollars in that time frame, the 

year before. 

 

You’ll watch, and as plain as I’m standing here today, they will 

advertise as much as they can and want during that four-month 

time frame. They’ll concentrate all their advertising dollars. 

And what will happen is they’ll ramp up the spending in that 

four-month time frame the year before so they can justify in the 

election year that they can do the same amount because that’s 

what they’ve done the year before. So we see that kind of 

comparison and that kind of activity happening, Mr. Speaker, 

because after all they’re doing all they can to gerrymander the 

election. 

 

And as I mentioned, some of the meetings that we watch during 

the committee of how members of the Saskatchewan Party have 

steadfastly attacked the provincial elections office to try and 

reduce the amount of resources and staff that this office needs, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s really, really important that we leave the office 

as independent, unencumbered, and with the proper resources in 

place to run a really clean, free election for the province and for 

many, many years to come. 

 

So they go there, give this person a hard time or this office a 

hard time. They add three more MLAs, which nobody asked, 

and they’re trying to insist on photo ID. And now they’re 

talking about advertising within a compressed time frame a year 

before the election so they can do exactly that. When the 

election starts happening, they can start rolling out their good 

news and do it for four months as opposed to doing the right 

thing, which they used to cry when they were in opposition, of 

trying to encourage the government to not gerrymander the 

election process through government advertising. And guess 

what, Mr. Speaker? They’re doing exactly that. What they cried 

and complained and bellyached about for years, that’s exactly 

what they’re doing now, Mr. Speaker. We can see it as plain as 

day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let’s do another example of we’re talking 

about advertising. Look at the SaskPower ads, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re running the SaskPower ads. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

very proud of SaskPower. We’re very proud of the employees 

of SaskPower. We’re very proud of some of the resources and 

some of the revenues that they generate for the people of 

Saskatchewan. We all know we own SaskPower but you don’t 



4334 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

have to spend $700,000 on that type of advertising, Mr. 

Speaker, to be able to tell the people that we should be proud of 

SaskPower because we all are proud of SaskPower. 

 

And what adds insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, is that when you 

look at this particular SaskPower advertising, this is a thing or a 

practice yet to come, Mr. Speaker, by this government. They 

have increased the rates 15.5 per cent, And all they’re trying to 

do, Mr. Speaker, is to try and minimize the criticisms over these 

increases. And so they run these SaskPower ads, Mr. Speaker, 

but the people can see right through them. They’re running and 

if they’re paying the ad, if the people are paying the ad to tell 

them to be proud of SaskPower, why would you want to 

manipulate the customers in that sort? Why you don’t just 

simply, why don’t you just simply have their bill not increased 

instead of being jacked up to pay for your political process? 

That’s what we can’t understand. 

 

And the people that are paying a lot extra for their power bills, 

don’t forget that is courtesy of SaskPower . . . sorry, not 

SaskPower, but courtesy of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, using 

SaskPower to justify their political agenda through advertising 

of that sort. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say again we’re really proud of SaskPower. 

We’ve always, always advocated ownership, public ownership 

of the Crowns — our telephone companies, our insurance 

companies, and of course our power companies, Mr. Speaker. 

We think that they’re really important overall for the future of 

the province and that they give us good sources of income. 

 

But when it comes to the electoral process, when it comes to 

elections, once again we’re seeing the Sask Party using our 

Crown corporations to pay for their political ads. And then what 

happens, Mr. Speaker, is after they run their political ads to 

justify their existence as the government, they send the bill to 

the SaskPower customer, Mr. Speaker. They send the bill to the 

SaskPower customers. So as people begin to pay 15.5 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, more on their bill, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

people are quite upset over that process. 

 

And I can remember, Mr. Speaker, reading an editorial, and I 

think it was in the Kindersley area, in which the editorial simply 

said, thankfully the NDP are bringing up the increases in 

SaskPower to try and counter some of the huge increases people 

are paying in SaskPower. And I can tell you that that sentiment 

is all over the place. And I do wish I had that paper in front of 

me so I’d be able to read out the exact quotes, Mr. Speaker, of 

that editorial, but basically the editorial was decrying the fact 

that this Sask Party government has increased the rates for 

SaskPower 15.5 per cent, and nobody seems to want to fight 

back, Mr. Speaker. Everybody’s angry about it.  

 

But what’s really amazing, Mr. Speaker, is now they’re doing 

this to run advertisements which the people of Saskatchewan 

simply do not want. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan do not want to pay extra on their power bills, but 

this government is forcing them. And guess what they’re 

forcing them to pay? It’s primarily for their advertising plan 

when it comes to trying to manipulate the next election. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of concerns on this particular 

bill. And mark my words, we need to monitor very closely what 

. . . the time frame that they want to manipulate. The year 

before the election they’ll start putting all this advertising out. 

So the year of the election they can say, that’s what we spent in 

that time frame last year, so this bill basically allows us to do 

that. And, Mr. Speaker, once again we see that kind of activity. 

 

So we have a lot of concerns around this particular bill, and we 

would encourage people out there to pay attention. Anything 

that’s to do with elections, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve indicated, we 

want to make sure, we want to make sure people know that they 

have a right to get up and speak. We want to make sure that 

they have a right to participate. We want to make sure that they 

know that the opposition will certainly bring up their arguments 

and bring up their points. And we want to make sure that 

elections in the future are fair, that they’re very well run, and, 

Mr. Speaker, that they’re democratic. And we don’t need to 

have the manipulation that we’ve seen evidence of, of the Sask 

Party, over the last number of years. 

 

And we’re still very, very upset, Mr. Speaker. We’re still very 

upset that they forced three more MLAs on the people of 

Saskatchewan when nobody wanted extra politicians, Mr. 

Speaker. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, they put in all of these 

restrictions on people willing to vote and this whole notion of a 

photo ID. This is one of the things that I think is really 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then I can also remember the last time we spoke about the 

electoral process. I actually asked the electoral commission here 

to see if they could get us a copy of all the information and the 

actual recording of the advertisement that they ran through their 

phone bank when they talked about resource revenue sharing 

and when they talked about First Nations involvement, Mr. 

Speaker, how the wording of that message was to the many 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. I think if there’s that 

kind of process to the conservative phone banks or the Sask 

Party phone banks to try and tell people in Saskatchewan, to 

manipulate them in that sense, Mr. Speaker, then we should 

have a copy of that, the verbatim of that particular recording in 

which they phoned every house to ask them about their opinion 

on First Nations and resource revenue sharing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I was asked . . . I asked for that, and today 

we haven’t got a copy of that. Because it’d be sure interesting 

as to what they were saying to the people of Saskatchewan 

through their phone bank because I think that’s also an 

improper act to try and sway people and to try and manipulate 

people over an issue that was unfair to all the parties involved, 

including the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So you look at all those things, Mr. Speaker, and we still have a 

fundamental problem when we look at how they’re trying to 

manipulate all the election processes in the province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s important that we tell people that these are 

some of the areas that we’re quite concerned about. 

 

And once again it comes to advertising, the election advertising 

scheme, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what this is. It’s a scheme 

to justify how they’re going to advertise. Added a ramped-up 

pace the year before so they can justify that that’s what they’ve 

done the year before. So come election year, they’ll ramp up 

their spending and getting government advertising the same 

corresponding time that they’d done it the year before. And, Mr. 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4335 

Speaker, we can see right through that particular tactic. 

 

So everything that I’ve spoken about, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

whole issue is that people of Saskatchewan ought to know. And 

that’s one of the reasons why we’re giving the time. And this is 

one of the reasons why we’re going to go back to the 

organization and the groups, encourage them to do one thing — 

and that’s to come out and vote in great numbers.  

 

We’re also encouraging the Chief Electoral Officer and his 

office to fight for a fair and democratic election process. That’s 

what we’re asking them to do — to keep it independent, to keep 

it focused, to keep it on encouraging people to come out and 

vote. And to resist, on many occasions and on all occasions, to 

resist the manipulation of the electoral process because it does a 

great injustice to the people that should be allowed to vote and 

people that have the right to vote and, Mr. Speaker, that should 

have every, every defence given to ensure that the Chief 

Electoral office is given the right resources, the unfettered 

support to make sure that there’s one place that we can 

encourage clean, clear elections, Mr. Speaker, is through that 

office. 

 

We do not trust the Sask Party government, and this is another 

example of how a party in power can manipulate the process 

and can really seriously create what I think is not acceptable in 

this day and age — a skewered process, a skewered process in 

which they benefit. And, Mr. Speaker, that is not how you 

should run elections in Saskatchewan. This is obviously not an 

American-style election process, Mr. Speaker. You can see the 

ads that they run every now and then. 

 

So you look at all of the examples that I’ve spoken about, and 

once again we’re quite worried. We’re quite concerned. We’re 

worried in the sense that we’re allowing this kind of activity to 

occur under their watch, and our job is to expose that, Mr. 

Speaker. But we’re also worried, Mr. Speaker, that the future 

electoral process of Saskatchewan is being severely 

compromised by the Sask Party’s activities. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that should not be accepted in any Assembly anywhere that 

speaks about freedom, that speaks about democracy, and that 

speaks about fairness. 

 

So we have a lot of issues, Mr. Speaker. We have a lot of issues 

of how elections are being operated on, Mr. Speaker, or being 

operated under. We are quite frankly concerned that the process 

is unfair. We think that quite frankly that the process is being 

skewered as I mentioned earlier. And, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

way that the people of Saskatchewan would stand for this if 

they were aware, if they were aware of what the Sask Party is 

trying to do when it comes to all the different tactics that they 

have to try and stay in power, Mr. Speaker. And this is where 

we encourage people in groups and organizations to come 

forward and share the information with us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more speakers that are going to 

come forward from our side of the Assembly to talk about this. 

We encourage people to get involved, to get involved. Because 

that’s exactly what is happening on the government side. Once 

again we’re seeing evidence of that today. 

 

So on that notion, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill 121, and I now take my place. 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 121, The Election Amendment Act, 2013. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la 

Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise and introduce for second reading Bill No. 122, 

An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997. The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 

establishes the foundation for the regulation and licensing of 

alcohol and gaming products in Saskatchewan. 

 

The changes being proposed to the Act have four primary 

themes. The first is providing authority for a First Nations 

gaming licensing authority to register on-reserve charitable 

gaming employees and suppliers. The second is allowing SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] to establish a 

subsidiary corporation through an order in council. The third is 

ensuring effective regulation. And last, Mr. Speaker, is other 

housekeeping amendments. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The 1995 Gaming Framework Agreement contained 

commitments respecting the regulation of on-reserve charitable 

gaming by First Nations. This commitment is continued in the 

2002 agreement. 

 

To facilitate delegation, the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] created Indigenous Gaming Regulators or IGR. 

Since 2007, IGR has been responsible for the licensing and 

registration of on-reserve charitable gaming, including bingos, 

break-open tickets, raffles, Texas hold’ems, Monte Carlo and 

table games in SLGA casinos. During that time, IGR has 

fulfilled its responsibilities diligently, and IGR and SLGA 

continue to share a co-operative relationship that is beneficial to 

both parties. 

 

Registration is a tool commonly used by gaming regulators to 

contribute to the integrity of the gaming industry. Currently 

SLGA registers gaming employees and suppliers whether they 

are involved in gaming on- or off-reserve. Earlier this year, 

SLGA and IGR began discussions respecting IGR’s authority to 

register on-reserve charitable gaming employees and suppliers. 

Provision of such authority necessitates amendments to this 

Act. 

 

As a result, I am proposing amendments to the Act that will 

authorize a First Nations gaming licensing authority such as 

IGR to register on-reserve charitable gaming employees and 

suppliers. The authority can only be exercised by a First 

Nations gaming licensing authority that has an agreement with 



4336 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

SLGA. The amendments to the Act will provide similar powers 

and authorities as those already provided to SLGA. 

 

In addition amendments to the Act will enable the Liquor and 

Gaming Licensing Commission to review decisions by IGR 

with respect to registration decisions. The commission already 

has similar abilities with respect to licensing and regulatory 

decisions made by IGR. Again, these authorities will resemble 

those in place respecting commission reviews of SLGA 

decisions. 

 

Presently SLGA does not have the authority to have 

subsidiaries. Changes to the Act will provide this authority 

subject to order in council approval. Subsidiary corporations are 

a common accounting and management tool used by 

corporations to effectively manage assets and operations. The 

ability for SLGA to have subsidiary corporations will allow 

SLGA to fully explore options to ensure savings and benefits 

are present. 

 

In November 2012, I stood before you to introduce amendments 

arising from the red tape committee’s review of liquor 

regulations in Saskatchewan. I also made a commitment that we 

would continue to look for ways to reduce red tape and remove 

redundant regulation for business. Bill 122 continues to end red 

tape using the same principles applied during the red tape 

review. The changes included in Bill 122 are irritants that no 

longer have relevance to the effective regulation of alcohol in 

this province. They include eliminating the requirement for 

medical use, non-consumptive use, and educational use liquor 

permits and removing provisions that grant SLGA authority to 

demand explanations from permittees when a person has been 

refused entry. 

 

We are also taking the opportunity to remove outdated 

legislation. For example we will be eliminating the 

discretionary ability of SLGA to require a permittee to stock 

beer manufactured in Saskatchewan. This provision has not 

been enforced in recent memory, and there is no need for SLGA 

to regulate this area. 

 

While we continue to look for ways to remove red tape for 

business, we continue to recognize the government has a role in 

the effective regulation of alcohol in order to maintain public 

safety. As a result, Bill 122 contains an amendment that places 

increased responsibility on permittees to not only refuse to 

serve alcohol to persons who appear to be intoxicated but to 

ensure that those persons are not in possession of beverage 

alcohol. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will also be taking this opportunity to 

implement a number of smaller housekeeping amendments 

identified by SLGA that are aimed at reducing redundancy in 

the Act and ensuring consistency with current practices and 

processes. An example of these changes include placing 

definitions for terms used in the gaming sector in regulations to 

better allow SLGA to respond to changes in the industry, and 

better organization and clarification of sections related to the 

Liquor and Gaming Licensing Commission. Ultimate 

implementation of all the changes will require amendments to 

the Act, The Alcohol Control Regulations, 2013, and The 

Gaming Regulations, 2007. 

 

I am pleased to take the first step towards implementation by 

introducing this bill. With that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my 

remarks and move second reading of Bill No. 122, An Act to 

amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 122, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is the House 

ready for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased to stand in my place today to offer initial 

comments of this particular bill. There is a lot of issues that the 

bill is going to certainly present to a lot of organizations out 

there, Mr. Speaker, because there’s a lot of different issues that 

the minister spoke about. 

 

And certainly I can remember the discussions we had around 

the partnership that we enjoyed with SIGA [Saskatchewan 

Indian Gaming Authority Inc.], Mr. Speaker. And certainly 

SLGA’s co-operation with SIGA in the early years certainly 

proved of significant advantage for the people of Saskatchewan 

because there were certainly some challenges when we looked 

at the authority of First Nations land as it relates to the 

provincial government’s role. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, back in 1995 I can remember those 

discussions. There were some very tough choices and there 

were some very tense moments, Mr. Speaker, that I can 

remember that people were speaking about, in the sense of 

trying to make sure that we can rationalize how gaming overall 

works within Saskatchewan, because you had many First 

Nations that simply said, look we have authority on our lands. 

The province is not recognized. You do not have the authority 

to come on the First Nations land, and so we’ll basically do 

what we want to do and that’ll be it. By the same token, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were certainly wanting to 

see a good framework put in place, and that obviously that there 

was a lot of folks that really wanted to see a good co-operative 

effort being made by the provincial government and many of 

the First Nations that were operating casinos or gaming rooms 

of any sort. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think some of the examples and the 

challenges we had of earlier years were . . . SLGA’s 

relationship with SIGA, Mr. Speaker, is something that we 

ought to learn from when we look at any go-forward strategy or 

bills of this sort, when we want to make sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan, including First Nations, are a full partner in the 

opportunities and meeting some of the challenges attached to 

the gaming file. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously there is a lot of activity within a lot 

of the First Nations communities. I know that I attend a number 

of Texas hold’em tournaments. It’s a great fundraiser. I know 

people sell break-open tickets, Mr. Speaker. They also have a 

number of table games, and it’s a lot of great fundraising that is 

happening locally.  

 

And when you see the effort that the Saskatchewan Indian 

Gaming Authority has undertaken over the past number of years 

to really work, to really work with the province overall, and you 

look at the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming as a good example of 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4337 

how in this particular bill they want to make sure that they 

begin to name the gaming employees of some of the SIGA 

operations or the SLGA operations, they also want to name 

some of the suppliers, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a great 

opportunity, a great opportunity for many of the First Nations 

operations to show their co-operation. And that’s exactly what 

they’re doing, Mr. Speaker.  

 

But I would argue, Mr. Speaker, and it’s really important that 

we do that, is that you’ve got to respect the relationship that you 

have with many of the First Nations and the ones that are 

operating many of the not only the casinos but some of the table 

games and the Texas hold’em and certainly some of the other 

break-open lottery sales that they have on many First Nations 

throughout the province. 

 

So they have come a long way. The First Nations certainly have 

had to recognize the role of the province. They didn’t have to 

do it, Mr. Speaker. They certainly had autonomy, and many 

people to this day certainly take that position, that they have 

total authority. But they understand now that there has to be a 

respectful one-on-one discussion with the province, and that’s 

the only way that this is going to work. And I see some of the 

bonuses, Mr. Speaker, when they come along, they say okay, 

we will not only start working close with some of the other 

fundraising that we’re having with SLGA, but we’ll also talk 

about putting forward gaming employee names and certainly 

the suppliers as well. 

 

And you see bit by bit, Mr. Speaker, how the co-operation is 

coming forward from many First Nations operations. And it’s 

all under one thing, and that is having a respectful partnership 

with the province. And that’s why when the province comes 

along and starts talking about gaming, and SLGA’s part of the 

mix, we want to make sure that the . . . Sorry, SIGA’s part of 

the mix, we want to make sure that SIGA has a partnership of 

power, a partnership of decision making and certainly a 

partnership of building the gaming industry together, alongside 

of the province. And once that particular mindset is established, 

Mr. Speaker, then you’re able to successfully say that this is a 

true partnership.  

 

And that’s some of the concerns that we have. We want to make 

sure that we speak about how SIGA has met with some of the 

obligations behind this bill. Have they been consulted? Do they 

support some of these bills? What are their positions? What 

kind of concessions were made to SIGA, which I think are 

really important? And that you should know that this 

government’s track record of managing some successful 

industries within gaming has not been positive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly I mentioned the horse racing, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, that you look at some of the problems that occurred as a 

result of this government making a choice where they picked 

winners and losers, Mr. Speaker. And I want to just for the 

record make reference to a press release, Mr. Speaker, that was 

issued this past June. And this is exactly what I warn the First 

Nations about everywhere we go: do not trust this particular 

government because you can show good co-operation, you can 

show some really good support to them but, all of a sudden, Mr. 

Speaker, you will see that they’ll try and change something 

somewhere along the line, and that’s simply meant to use the 

process to their advantage and to be very careful when you deal 

with this particular government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to read this press paper and the 

headline is, “No 2013 Racing at West Meadows.” This is an 

example, Mr. Speaker. And I quote: 

 

On Wednesday, West Meadows Raceway President Jane 

Grainger announced that the Regina-area track will not 

host live harness racing in 2013. 

 

“This is probably the most difficult announcement I have 

had to release,” said Grainger in a statement. “We are 

forced to cancel the 2013 racing program due mostly to the 

Saskatchewan Government’s refusal to issue a Home 

Market Area (HMA) licence to us for Southern 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

The move to cancel the West Meadows meet came as the 

result of the province cancelling racing grants that have 

been previously issued annually in the province for 35 

years, and refusing it an opportunity to earn 

industry-related revenue through HMA assignment. 

 

“The province of Saskatchewan is a rich province. It is 

plenty big to share two Home Market Areas as it has 

through several decades, so that both industries have an 

opportunity to grow,” stated the release. “The government 

basically chose to support one city, one group . . . over the 

other . . . It is just wrong that revenue from the Regina area 

would go towards the Saskatoon track and not the Regina 

track.” 

 

Home Market Area was created by the Canadian 

Pari-Mutuel Agency to support and protect local racetracks 

and [have] their live . . . race programs. Being assigned a 

HMA allows a track to generate revenues to support live 

racing by setting up teletheatres and telephone account 

betting accounts in their designated area. 

 

Prior to 2002, Queensbury Downs and Prairie Park 

mutually agreed that it would be fair to split the province 

for HMA and Saskatoon (the thoroughbred race program) 

would have HMA from Davidson north and Queensbury 

Downs (the Standardbred program) would receive HMA 

from Davidson south. When Queensbury Downs decided 

to change priorities and discontinue live horse racing, 

Prairieland Park purchased the teletheatre equipment from 

them and SLGA transferred the teletheatre license to 

Prairieland Park since Queensbury Downs was no longer 

able to operate the teletheatres without a live racing 

program. 

 

In fact, the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 

issued a three-year license to thoroughbred track 

Prairieland Park in Saskatoon and granted that track the 

HMA for the entire province. According to the release, this 

is the first time the annual license has ever been granted for 

more than one year at a time. 

 

[15:00] 

 

“West Meadows Raceway was built by shareholders who 

wanted to be a part of the revival of harness racing in this 



4338 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

great province,” continued Grainger. “We built a great 

facility and set modern day wagering records in both years 

we raced and it proved we were right — Regina loves 

harness racing. They want it back for good and responded 

even better than we expected. Showing much promise for 

the future, the daily wager for harness racing increased 

dramatically in those days . . . at the West Meadows 

Raceway, something we worked hard at, and are very 

proud of.” 

 

Saskatchewan’s other racetrack, Cornerstone Raceway at 

the Yorkton Exhibition grounds is operated by the Yorkton 

Exhibition Authority. That group entered into an 

“Agreement in Principle” with Prairieland Park (Marquis 

Downs) in Saskatoon to explore “mutually beneficial” 

funding opportunities for horse racing on a going forward 

basis. Prairieland currently conducts a thoroughbred race 

meet during the summer, and Yorkton was approved 

earlier this year to host 12 days of racing, giving 

Saskatchewan’s harness racing community its only live 

racing dates for this year. 

 

“The other harness track chose not to join us in pursuit of 

an HMA license for the harness racing industry, but instead 

entered into an agreement with the thoroughbred track in 

Saskatoon,” stated the West Meadows release. “We could 

have had six months of harness racing between us, which 

would have been a win-win for everyone. It is a sad time 

here for those who worked so hard so the industry would 

have a permanent harness racing home in a bigger market 

and a future that horsemen could build stables around and 

depend on for the long term. 

 

Standardbred Canada, Mr. Speaker, certainly brought forward 

some of those issues as a result of how SLGA was very 

argumentative with them and basically chose winners and 

losers. And, Mr. Speaker, this particular association of harness 

racers, they actually got advertisements. And I have a picture of 

this here, Mr. Speaker, where they say quite frankly “Horse 

racing cancelled. Sask Party picks winners and losers.” Mr. 

Speaker, that was the billboard that they put up in which SLGA 

really walked these guys down the garden path and — bang — 

Mr. Speaker, they put this kind of proposal in front of them. 

And they basically, from our perspective, they basically told 

this particular organization that they don’t have a right to exist 

any more and that they chose winners and losers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of them that are quite, quite 

upset over this. And this is one example, Mr. Speaker, of . . . 

And the reason why we’re bringing this up is we tell people in 

Saskatchewan that SLGA has not been fair and certainly has not 

been proper in its approach to a number of players out there in 

the gaming industry. And the horse racing is one particular 

example that I would want to highlight as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I spoke earlier this week about Guy Bouvier 

who ran horses as well. He worked very hard all his life, and I 

basically spoke about Métis politics in general. But Guy was 

also a guy that spent a lot of time working with horses, and I 

know that his younger brother is now doing that as well. So we 

wanted to recognize not only Guy and his passing for some of 

the work but also his brother Mervin. Mervin Bouvier is 

currently working to try and build a horse business, Mr. 

Speaker, for riding and certainly for providing extra 

opportunities in and around the Northwest, and we wanted to 

commend him for that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to be very careful that we don’t 

look at the horse business in terms of not only the raising of the 

horses but actually getting into the racing, that we do all we can 

to support them. And this is why SLGA and their rules and 

regulations need to have a lot of scrutiny, and that’s one of the 

reasons why we would tell people to come forward with stories 

of that sort. 

 

And you look at SLGA, Mr. Speaker, and the relationship that 

they had with SIGA, the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 

Authority, that was also built on the premise of, look we have to 

work together to build this industry. We have to be accountable 

to each other. We can’t all have a whole bunch of casinos. 

There has to be some rhyme and reason as to how these casinos 

are developed and where they’re placed. And I think SIGA 

come a long ways. I think SIGA come a long ways to recognize 

the role of the province and to work with the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it really looks . . . I look at the history. I look at the history 

of SIGA. I look at how they’ve really reached out to the 

province, and how they’ve made concessions here and there. 

And we need to talk to SIGA. We need to see what their take is 

on this particular bill because there’s a lot of issues that could 

affect that partnership. And we don’t want to see the apple cart 

upset, so to speak. We want to see that co-operation continue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about looking at the 

regulations. They want to look at the regulations. So I’m 

assuming that it’s regulations that would have some effect and 

impact on SIGA. They want to talk about subsidiary 

corporations where they’re fully able to explore how they can 

build these subsidiary corporations. Are they inviting SIGA into 

this subsidiary corporation fold, so to speak? I don’t have that 

information, Mr. Speaker, so we need to make sure that we take 

the time to understand what exactly they want to do through this 

bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said time and time again, if there’s 

some common sense points that this bill is bringing forward, 

our leader has indicated that as long as they have done the 

proper consultation and that there is good support for it and it 

makes common sense, we would not stand in or on the way. 

That was the message we got. And we certainly want to make 

sure that that is the message that is getting out there. 

 

So when our leader talks about ensuring that the common sense 

issues that have good agreement on and certainly are very, very 

apparent to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they 

do make sense, then we wouldn’t hold up any part of the bill 

that fit that criteria. 

 

However, the other message we get is we need to network with 

our organizations that are impacted by this bill, sit down with 

them and speak with them, get their perspective and their take 

on how and why this government cannot be trusted on certain 

parts of the bill. That is what some of the work that we’ll be 

undertaking. So I would encourage people out there that are 

being impacted by this particular bill to reach out to the, you 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4339 

know, to the opposition and to talk to the opposition about how 

we can strengthen this bill from their perspective to make sure 

that the Saskatchewan people are being served and that there is 

no untoward act by the current government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So actually I look at some of the aspects of this bill. At first 

blush one would assume that there is some intrusion from 

SLGA that comes to the SIGA operations, Mr. Speaker. I think 

it’s important that we be very, very careful on that front, that it 

not be considered intrusion but a co-operative effort between 

both parties. If we had that kind of language, it would make 

much better sense for us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated time and time again, that 

SLGA could be only useful is if they work with the 

organizations that they’re supposed to monitor and the 

organizations that they’re supposed to work with, that if they 

come on to a First Nations community or any . . . even Métis 

communities, Mr. Speaker, and they start dictating rules and 

regulations around break-open tickets or gaming tables or Texas 

hold’em, then they ought to be told that we need to take a more 

proactive, co-operative approach and not have this kind of 

confrontational approach when it comes to working with the 

Aboriginal community. And I would certainly include Métis 

communities on that front as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of questions as to what SLGA’s 

proposing, what the minister wants to do. There is a history of 

failure on their part when it comes to working with the different 

players, which I’ve identified. There’s a history of co-operation 

between SIGA and certainly SLGA that we built when we were 

in government. We want to see that protected. We don’t want to 

see that compromised. And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that 

our First Nations partners, in dealing with some of the SLGA 

intrusions into their particular land or their operations have been 

met with co-operation. 

 

The First Nations community have co-operated a lot with 

SLGA, and that’s why it’s so important, it is so vitally 

important that we keep that relation respectful. That’s what’s 

really important to us because we do not want to go down the 

path of confrontation. Because the First Nations will defend 

their rights. They will certainly stand up and they will defend 

their territory or they’ll defend their lands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s not as if they do that in disrespect to the rest of 

Saskatchewan. It just goes to the natural instincts of any people 

that they want to be protective of their home territory, that they 

want to be protective of who they are and, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

all they’re trying to do, is assert who they are when they sit 

down and say, look you don’t come and give us a whole bunch 

of rules and force them on us, that we have to work our way 

through and negotiate our way through this stuff. And that’s 

exactly what they afforded us when we were in government. 

And we’re telling the Sask Party they should afford them today 

to ensure that we have peace in the valley when it comes to 

gaming, when it comes to casinos, and when it comes to all 

kinds of fundraising opportunities that are being undertaken 

throughout the province. 

 

And I’ve read just one example of how this government has 

betrayed the trust of one particular player when it comes to 

gaming or through horse racing, Mr. Speaker. I think there’s a 

lot of history of how this government has muddled through 

some of these files. 

 

So again we have a lot more issues that we want to raise and 

we’ll continue looking at this particular bill. And on that note I 

move that we adjourn debate on Bill 122. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill 122, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2013. Mr. Speaker, this new legislation will repeal a number of 

public and private health Acts, related Acts, that are obsolete 

and outdated. The public Acts included are: The Dental Care 

Act, The Medical and Hospitalization Tax Repeal Act, The 

Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Association Act, and The 

Senior Citizens’ Heritage Program Act. 

 

The 14 private Acts included in this legislation are connected to 

community organizations and, in particular, religious 

congregations. Mr. Speaker, these organizations have played a 

significant role in our province’s health care system. At the time 

these groups became active in the delivery of health services, 

the only way they could be given authority to provide services 

was through a private Act of the Legislative Assembly. 

Typically private Acts are almost always amended or repealed 

at the request of the Act’s sponsor and are handled through the 

private bills procedures of the Legislative Assembly. However a 

number of these organizations have, over time, withdrawn from 

providing health services. While these Acts have no direct 

effect on health care delivery, their continued existence does 

create ambiguity around the status of these facilities. Repealing 

these outdated Acts and amending several others will clarify the 

status of these facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is providing leadership in making 

the changes needed to strengthen and sustain the system in the 

future, for the future. For this reason we believe it’s important 

to bring this legislation to the House today. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2013. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act (No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to again, on behalf of the official opposition, give the first look 

at this bill and certainly share some of my comments on this 



4340 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

particular bill. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that 

when you look at some of the organizations that helped deliver 

health care over the early years of the province of 

Saskatchewan, we obviously want to give them thanks, Mr. 

Speaker, because I know that there are many organizations out 

there that had a history of supplying supports to those that 

needed health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I look at some of the examples: the Grey Nuns out of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker; and in Ile-a-la-Crosse, the Catholic 

Health Council operated the St. Joseph’s Hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

So I’m assuming these are some of the organizations that the 

minister’s speaking about when he talks about repealing some 

of the private Acts of some of the folks that operated some of 

the hospitals or volunteered to operate some of the hospitals and 

the fact that they’ve withdrawn that activity over the years as 

the government has more and more of the challenge of . . . or 

meeting more of the challenge of delivering health care to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have had a great look at some of the 

challenges that many in the health care system has had in the 

province over the last number of years under the Sask Party 

watch, Mr. Speaker. You look at some of the hospitals that are 

currently being impacted by this government. I’ve got a list of 

them, Mr. Speaker. And it’s kind of, it’s kind of important that 

you look at the impact of what they’re doing versus what some 

of the organizations that used to operate some of these facilities, 

what some of the efforts that they undertook, when you look at 

their history and their involvement and you compare that to 

where the government is currently operating these services. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the early years, I can tell you that the 

Catholic Health Council would come into the community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I served as a mayor there. And they 

certainly were involved with health care. They made decisions 

around the hospital, and they would be involved with many, 

many of the activities and the fundraising and the direction that 

the facility took. Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously as life goes on, 

you see some of these organizations that would not be playing a 

role in the delivery of health care overall and that gradually that 

their role and their importance would be again it would be 

diminished over time. 

 

Now if this is what this bill is doing, then obviously it is a 

signal to all those organizations that certainly that this 

government sees that their role has been diminished to a point 

where they’re now actually repealing their activity. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to be able to say one thing to them first of all, 

and that is thanks for the many, many years of commitment 

towards health care, and thanks for the many, many years of 

working with many of the organizations as in the case that I was 

involved with for working at the Ile-a-la-Crosse hospital and the 

Northwest in general. 

 

I think La Loche’s hospital and Ile-a-la-Crosse’s hospital were 

operated by the Catholic Health Council, Mr. Speaker, and 

many of the members of the health council would come into the 

communities, and they would sit with local people and talk 

about some of the decisions around these facilities. And I can 

tell you that in the early years, some of their advice and some of 

their involvement was very, very crucial and very, very 

important to the community overall. 

 

So I’m assuming that the minister’s talking about repealing 

some of the religious entities that operated facilities and, Mr. 

Speaker, we want to make sure that if that’s the case, that’s the 

intent of the bill, that we offer our thanks and support for their 

guidance and certainly recognition of their service to their 

fellow man. I think it’s really important that we do that. But 

now that we’re in the process of having this government again 

take over the health care field, Mr. Speaker, we want to make 

sure that we recognize their particular challenges of how they 

have made so many mistakes. And we need to get on this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Things like the Wolseley hospital. Certainly the Pasqua 

Hospital, the emergency services that they were going to 

interrupt till they got exposed by the opposition. And the 

overcrowding at the General. These are all some of the things 

that people are starting to see when it comes to the health care 

field. The fact that there are many, many people out there that 

have many concerns and, Mr. Speaker, we’re just starting to get 

some of those concerns sent to us by email, by telephone calls, 

and certainly by people coming to visit our offices. 

 

And you look at some of the challenges that we have 

throughout the province, whether it’s the town of Wakaw where 

they have an emergency room that’s closed. Watrous, the 

emergency room is closed. Central Butte, the emergency room 

is closed, no in-patient acute care. Lestock, emergency room is 

closed, no in-patient acute care. Redvers, emergency room 

closed, no in-patient acute care. Big River, emergency room 

closed, no in-patient acute care. Mr. Speaker, Spiritwood has 

the same problem. Shellbrook as well, that the room is closed. 

Balcarres, Maple Creek, Preeceville, Turtleford, Biggar, 

Rosetown, Davidson, Macklin, Estlin, Kerrobert, Coronach, 

Weyburn. A lot of these services, Mr. Speaker, are in the Sask 

Party’s backyard, and, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . we’re 

seeing evidence on a daily basis of how this government has not 

met its obligation to deliver a really solid health care plan that is 

required for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And once again these kind of bills that come forward are taking 

players out of the game, so to speak. And I hate to use the word 

players, but for lack of a better word, people that have 

committed so much of their time, so much of their fundraising, 

and so many, so much of their resources overall that they come 

along and you say, oh okay, we’re happy to see you have 

served. Now we’re kind of exiting you, and we’re taking over 

the health care field. And some of that work’s been done in 

previous years. I recognize that. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that you look at some of the 

challenges that we see in front of us when it comes to health 

care. We still don’t have no confidence when it comes to this 

government and its bungling of all the health care files 

throughout the province, and we need to find some better 

solutions from a lot of players. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to again indicate to people out there, 

the people that had been involved with the delivery of the health 

care system, the volunteers at the local bases, if they have 

information for us on this bill that they want to share with the 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4341 

opposition, now is the opportunity to do so, where you can 

actually contact our office or our critic and to bring forward 

some of the concerns. 

 

And that’s exactly what I think is important here when you look 

at the bill and its intent is, did they consult with the people that 

they’re going to impact? And did they really, really sit down 

with these organizations and tell them, this is what you want to 

do? And what were these organizations’ reaction to some of the 

intent behind this bill? We don’t have that information, Mr. 

Speaker, because the government is not going to give us that 

information. They’re going to put a brave face on everything 

and anything they do when in fact there could be a lot of 

potential problems. 

 

And that’s the role of the opposition, is to make sure, to make 

sure that we have that particular information ahead of time so 

when the bill does come to the floor that we’re able to debate it; 

when the bill does pose some questions that is deserving of a 

good answer, that we’re able to bring it up in question period 

and hope and pray for a good answer so the organizations and 

people out there can hear what the government has to say and 

can basically judge the government from their answer. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more on this particular bill 

that we have to pay attention to. It is something that I think any 

time we talk about a health bill, we’ve got to take the time to 

read it. And that’s exactly what we’re going to do. There are 

many people in the opposition that have a special interest on 

any bill this government brings forward when it comes to 

health. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that these folks have 

had a lot of problems in health care, a lot of problems. 

 

And that’s why when any health care bills come forward, we 

pay very close attention to that, this and The Election Act 

because, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to do a number of things 

that I think are probably improper on the election front. But 

certainly when it comes to health care, we want to learn as 

much as we can about what they’re intent on or what their 

intent is on any bill as it relates to health, Mr. Speaker, and this 

bill is no different. 

 

So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 123. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 123, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

on behalf of my hon. colleague, the Minister of Health, to move 

second reading of Bill No. 124, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, the new miscellaneous statutes 

repeal Act, 2013 will repeal a number of public and private 

related Acts that are obsolete and outdated. As a result of this, 

three other pieces of legislation require minor amendments to 

remove references to an Act that is being repealed: The Health 

Information Protection Act, The Insurance Premiums Tax Act, 

The Pharmacy Act, 1996. Each of these Acts will have 

references to The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Act 

removed as it is being repealed under The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to keeping 

Saskatchewan’s legislation up to date and relevant in support of 

a strong, effective health care system. Accordingly, I am 

pleased to move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved second reading of Bill 124, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question?  I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased to stand on behalf of the official opposition 

and give our first comments and our first points I’m going to 

raise on this particular bill. 

 

I think the bill, Mr. Speaker, we look at the whole notion of . . . 

I think the intent of the bill right now is to talk about the 

community clinic in the sense of making sure that the word 

community clinic cannot be used in the generic term. It has to 

be a co-operative. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of rule 

changes that I want to make myself familiar with when it comes 

to the difference between a community clinic versus a 

co-operative because obviously we want to make sure that what 

the bill is trying to do . . . that there is some good support for 

the bill. 

 

There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about trying to 

formalize and to update language when it comes to health care, 

that is absolutely crucial, I think. And any time that you’re able 

to modernize language, to bring some of the legislation more in 

line with what modern language is, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have 

a fundamental problem with that. But we want to make sure that 

the intent behind identifying some of the changes that the 

government is trying to undertake is pure. And many times we 

find, based on our experience with this particular government, 

that there’s a lot of hidden agendas, Mr. Speaker, and that 

there’s a lot of different intent that the government has when it 

comes to dealing on some of these particular issues. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that when we talk about 

health care in general, it’s so important that, even some minor 

changes when we talk about the community clinic as an 

example, of modernizing the language as another example, that 

there be some consultation. We have always indicated that 

that’s important. And consulting and getting support from these 

organizations, as I’ve always made that point as well, is that we 



4342 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

need to find out which groups have they consulted with. Who’s 

driving this particular change? Is it the SMA [Saskatchewan 

Medical Association]? Is it SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses]? Is it a different organization? Is it all the organizations 

that are involved? 

 

Mr. Speaker, from our perspective as an official opposition, we 

support co-operative health clinics. We think that there’s a lot 

of opportunity for a lot of these clinics to offer some great 

services. As I mentioned, having good service for patients and 

having medical staff governed by a co-operative is a great idea. 

We think that these kind of ideas serve our health care system 

well and there is something that’s really fundamentally 

important when you recognize the co-operatives’ role, that 

governments cannot fix health care with the wording changes. 

We need to have more clinic options for people and more 

efforts to recruit physicians and health professionals that 

Saskatchewan needs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I noticed in a list of challenges that the 

northern communities as well . . . I know La Ronge, that my 

colleague will have the opportunity to speak about the 

Cumberland constituency. But in our area, whether it’s the Far 

North hospital, Mr. Speaker, that’s in Black Lake or whether 

it’s the St. Martin’s Hospital in La Loche or whether it’s the St. 

Joseph’s Hospital in Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Speaker, that all these 

facilities, Mr. Speaker, there’s constant challenges to bring 

doctors to these facilities. And even though the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], through the northern medical 

services, does provide hospital services and clinic services, Mr. 

Speaker, that there’s always a constant challenge of finding the 

doctors to stay in these communities, to come to these 

communities and to live and work and play in these 

communities. That is a constant work-in-progress. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many of the community leaders, they aspire, 

and I know that to be the case in Ile-a-la-Crosse and I’m sure 

it’s the same in the other facilities, that they really want to see 

the doctors live in their community. Which community in this 

province does not want to see their doctors stay in their 

particular community? I think every northern community 

aspires to that as well. I think La Loche wants to keep their 

doctors there. I think the Far North wants to keep their doctors 

at the hospital on Black Lake. And of course Ile-a-la-Crosse is 

there as well. 

 

Now some of the struggles that they’re having, Mr. Speaker, is 

that in particular the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse — I’ll 

certainly use that as the example — that when you have these 

co-operative clinics in place, Mr. Speaker, where you go in and 

there’s three or four doctors working, in the community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse they have worked very hard to try and make the 

doctors feel welcome. And they’ve had some success, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve had some success. 

 

Ile-a-la-Crosse has certainly got a lot of supports that they 

direct towards their doctors. I think the community is very 

welcoming. I think they make the doctors feel at home and, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s housing that’s available as well. And overall 

they’re trying their best to bring a social life to the doctors’ 

experience in Ile-a-la-Crosse as well because it’s not always 

about work. And so there’s a lot of effort locally to try and get 

the doctors coming to Ile-a-la-Crosse and staying there. 

[15:30] 

 

And we’ve had some great success over the past number of 

years. If you look at Dr. Britton who’s been there for a great 

number of years . . . I think he’s been there over 20 years. And 

you look at some of the examples of some of the doctors that 

lived in Ile-a-la-Crosse for a great number of years. And Dr. 

Chandler was another one that stayed there for 15 years. And 

we have other doctors that actually live in the community and 

are glad to be there. Some of them have been there for four or 

five years because when they come to the community they 

certainly like living there and they certainly stay there for a long 

time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we as MLAs recognize one 

fundamental point when it comes to the northern placements of 

doctors, is that the communities aspire to keep those doctors 

there to live in those communities. And northern medical 

services, Mr. Speaker, who bring the doctors to us in the first 

place, we have to recognize that, that they do their best to find 

these doctors and to recruit the doctors. And when they bring 

the doctors to, whether it’s La Loche or whether it’s to the Far 

North or whether it’s to Ile-a-la-Crosse, they have a process 

called the itinerant physician. And what the itinerant physician, 

Mr. Speaker, is, is they find temporary doctors and they fly 

them in to do their clinics and to provide their services. And so 

they do that to facilitate an ongoing challenge of finding doctors 

to work in these communities. And some of them are there on a 

short-term basis. Others stay for longer periods of time. 

 

And to me, I tell people that are involved with this particular 

aspect of trying to find doctors, whether it’s the local leaders or 

whether it’s the folks at northern med services, that they should 

allow the communities every option, every option to find 

doctors that want to come live in Ile-a-la-Crosse permanently or 

for as long as possible. Let the communities do some of that 

work. We think it’s important. Because the longer a doctor 

stays in the community I think the greater the relationship the 

people have with him locally, and they trust him more and so on 

and so forth. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that kind of action and activity is so 

important. It’s so important that we allow the local communities 

to do that kind of work. At the same time northern med services 

has the difficult task of finding doctors to staff all their clinics 

throughout the Northwest, including La Ronge and La Loche 

and of course the Far North. But the problem that they have is 

that they’re not going to find enough doctors to want to move 

and live in these communities. So they have this itinerant model 

that’s put in place, where they place these doctors in these 

clinics on a temporary basis, some as short as two weeks and 

others as long as two years or three years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is not necessarily a clash between the two 

basic models that are being proposed when it comes to getting 

doctors in place. I think that there should be a co-operative 

approach between the two entities. By the two entities, I’m 

talking about northern med services and I’m talking about the 

local leadership that are requiring, requiring recognition of what 

they think is their role, and that is to attract and retain doctors to 

live in their communities for as long as possible. And what’s 

wrong with recognizing that the communities want to achieve 

that? 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4343 

So I think we need to have a lot of discussion on that particular 

front because the community clinics that we’re talking about, 

the co-operative health clinics where you have a number of 

doctors operating and working, we need to be able to have some 

experience in learning from each other and talking to each other 

about how we deal with the doctors issue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that there’s a lot of issues 

that we want to pay attention to when it comes to health care. 

When we talk about a co-operative health clinic, those are some 

of the experiences I have, when I see the co-operative effort that 

is in place in some of these northern communities. We think 

that that’s a good model to use. There’s always, always 

challenges, and the number one fundamental problem we have 

as a province is finding the adequate doctors and nursing staff 

and lab techs to man many of the facilities or to operate many 

of the facilities throughout our province. 

 

So again it’s important that we encourage people to look at the 

co-operative health clinic because the governments cannot fix 

the health problems that they’ve created as a result of the lack 

of focus that they’ve had on this particular file, and that we 

need to do some of that work locally on our own. And I want to 

say at the outset that the doctors that do stay longer in these 

northern communities, longer than they planned to, that we 

want to say to them, thank you very much. Because the region 

and the northern communities desperately need doctors, and this 

need is apparent all throughout the northern communities. 

 

So these are some of the initial comments we want to make on 

this particular bill, and there’s much more comments that we 

have to make from a number of perspectives from the official 

opposition. So on that note I move that we adjoin debate on Bill 

No. 124. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 124. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to move second reading of The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). The Act administered by 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance outlines the laws 

regarding road use in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first few amendments I’d like to outline are 

designed to help save lives and prevent injuries on 

Saskatchewan roads. These changes came out of the 

recommendations made by the Special Committee on Traffic 

Safety led by the member from Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, drinking and driving continues to be a leading 

cause of fatalities on Saskatchewan roads. To address this, 

we’re proposing a number of changes focusing on 

inexperienced drivers, repeat offenders, and drivers with high 

blood alcohol levels — all are drivers who are overrepresented 

in fatal crashes involving alcohol. These changes include 

implementing zero drug and alcohol tolerance for drivers under 

19 years of age and for all drivers in the graduated driver 

licensing program and the motorcycle GDL [graduated driver’s 

licensing] program. In addition, Mr. Speaker, the changes will 

subject drug-impaired drivers to the same sanctions as 

alcohol-impaired drivers. 

 

We also want to strengthen penalties for drinking and driving, 

based on the driver’s experience and the number of offences 

they have. Amendments include longer suspensions, vehicle 

impoundment, and mandatory ignition interlock requirements. 

Mr. Speaker, these changes will give Saskatchewan one of the 

toughest packages of impaired driving legislation in Canada 

but, more importantly, will help to save lives and prevent 

injuries on the road. 

 

We’re also making other changes in the interest of traffic safety. 

Mr. Speaker, booster seats are proven to significantly reduce 

serious injuries and deaths in young children who have 

outgrown the car seats they used as toddlers. That’s why we’re 

making booster seats mandatory for children up to the age of 

seven or who meet certain height and weight guidelines 

outlined in the legislation. 

 

We also want to ensure children are protected in school zones, 

Mr. Speaker, as well as protecting all road users in 

high-collision areas. That’s why we’re making legislative 

changes to allow for a two-year photo radar pilot project, 

another of the recommendations brought forward by the Special 

Committee on Traffic Safety, for school zones and specific 

high-risk locations. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the ultimate goal of all of the changes I’ve 

mentioned so far is to save lives and prevent injuries on 

Saskatchewan roads. 

 

The next set of changes I’d like to outline, Mr. Speaker, are part 

of harmonization efforts under the New West Partnership 

Agreement. First we’d like to shift vehicle registration 

exemptions from legislation to regulations. This will allow 

Saskatchewan to align its vehicle registration regulatory 

framework more closely with Alberta and enable SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] to be more responsive 

to new and emerging registration issues for vehicles of unusual 

size, weight, and operating characteristics. 

 

There are also a number of changes affecting commercial 

carriers, Mr. Speaker, and these include increasing weight 

thresholds for monitoring, moving the authority for commercial 

carrier safety from Highway Traffic Board to SGI, and publicly 

releasing carrier safety information which will align 

Saskatchewan with other Canadian jurisdictions. 

 

In addition to above, we are making a number of minor 

amendments that are housekeeping in nature. Mr. Speaker, I 

move second reading of The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 

2013 (No. 2). 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 



4344 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

has moved second reading of Bill 125, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, I 

am very pleased to stand and speak and give our initial 

comments on Bill 125. Now, Mr. Speaker, we want to speak 

about some of the experience that we’ve had as the official 

opposition in our role on a committee that was established to 

look at some of the bills that are being proposed under Bill 125. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we should point out that the two 

representatives that the opposition put in place, the member 

from Cumberland and the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 

where they spent a number of weeks this past spring I believe 

and travelled through a number of regions and certainly 

attended a number of community meetings to talk about the 

traffic safety issue that challenges many jurisdictions. 

 

And certainly Saskatchewan is one of the jurisdictions that 

deserves some attention. Mr. Speaker, I understand from some 

of their comments and some of the points that they’ve raised 

that Saskatchewan leads the country — correct me if I’m wrong 

— and certainly the provinces, they lead the provinces in terms 

of death created by alcohol overall. And that’s one of the things 

that I think when we talk about vehicle safety, that’s one of the 

issues that we need to certainly highlight and that we need to 

speak about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that when the two members joined 

the process they had some very good intentions to look at the 

issue overall. And at the end of the meeting they talked . . . of 

the series of meetings. They issued a second document that they 

put forward. And the government had their particular agenda 

and they put through their changes that they’d like to see. And 

the two representatives of the opposition, they also said, well 

we agree on some of the points that you’ve raised, but we don’t 

fundamentally agree on one of the most important issues that 

needs to be part of the directive. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that fundamental change that I’m speaking 

about, I’ll get to it in a minute. But I would like to read what 

was the press release that was made by the opposition caucus. 

And I’ll just read very quickly: 

 

NDP submits minority report on Traffic Safety. 

 

[Mr. Speaker, it says] Opposition MLA Danielle Chartier 

and Doyle Vermette believe a life-saving measure was 

wrongly dismissed by the Traffic Safety Committee, and 

have submitted a report alongside the committee’s final 

recommendation. 

 

Chartier and Vermette, the two Opposition MLAs on the 

seven-member committee, believe short-term vehicle 

impoundment should be included in the committee’s 

recommendations and implemented in Saskatchewan. After 

Alberta and British Columbia each implemented a 

three-day vehicle impoundment the first time a driver is 

caught with a .05 blood alcohol concentration, the number 

of alcohol-involved traffic deaths dropped by half in each 

of those provinces. This information was presented to the 

TSC, but short-term vehicle impoundment is left out of the 

committee’s final recommendations. 

 

“It’s our neighbours, our friends and our kids out there on 

the highways. The evidence says short-term impoundment 

saves lives — the NDP wants to take that step,” said 

Chartier. “This government is missing an opportunity to 

get it right and prevent as many deaths as possible.” 

 

Chartier and Vermette agree with the 26 recommendations 

made in the committee’s final report, and urge the 

government to act on the recommendations and not let the 

report gather dust. 

 

“I urged the government to act on traffic safety at the end 

of last year when the number of highway fatalities, sadly, 

hit record numbers, said Chartier. “Convening a committee 

is only a first step — Saskatchewan families need to see 

immediate action to help everyone get home safe.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the things that’s really, really 

important when you have a government that’s moving forward 

to address the challenges of deaths and injuries on our 

highways, and they all basically have some very compelling 

information presented to them on impounding a vehicle for 

three days. Mr. Speaker, BC [British Columbia] and Alberta, as 

was indicated in the press conference, basically followed that 

particular advice. And again you’ve seen a huge issue that was 

averted in terms of, I think the number was half the deaths that 

were . . . or the deaths were cut in half when they implemented 

that particular three-day impoundment of the vehicle. 

 

So that’s one of the reason why I think, I think that the two 

members of the opposition deviated somewhat from the 

government’s position, that they thought, our two members, 

thought that they ought to have a three-day impoundment on the 

first offense for anybody above .05 in terms of blood alcohol 

concentration. Because, quite frankly, they have heard from 

Alberta and BC when they put that measure in place, it does 

save lives. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now why this was not part of the overall Bill 125, we don’t 

know, Mr. Speaker. We need to find out why the government 

ignored that particular aspect, why they didn’t put that 

particular aspect or that particular rule in place.  

 

Obviously there’s been a number of organizations that made 

some very compelling presentation and some very compelling 

and more than likely heart-wrenching stories. I wasn’t privy to 

some of the presentations, but I can only imagine some of the 

presentations that families that lost loved ones or an 

organization like MADD [Mothers Against Drunk Driving], 

whether they come forward and they give us the compelling 

advice and information. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important. It’s 

important that we, you know, we all learn that if there’s issues 

out there that could save lives, then we have to pay attention to 

it. Because obviously there’s a lot of experience when the 

families come forward and give some of this advice. 

 

And that’s exactly what our leader indicates to us, as an 

opposition. Where things make common sense, where there’s 

been good consultation — and there’s been some good 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4345 

organizations that have been at these meetings — and they 

agree with some of the recommendations, then we in the 

opposition would support some of those changes, some of the 

recommendations that the minister alluded to in her bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a couple of our members on our behalf 

attended some of these hearings. I believe they went to seven or 

eight communities, and it took them a period of six to seven 

weeks of travel to hear what these evidence . . . what some of 

the compelling issues were. And they heard. And they heard, 

and they listened first-hand. And certainly they also were able 

to gather from some of the presentations an unfiltered lens, so 

to speak, as to what many of our people in Saskatchewan 

believe are the solutions to reducing traffic deaths attached to 

the driving while impaired challenge that we all have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we pay attention. 

And it has been something that the people of Saskatchewan 

would assume is a common sense thing, that if BC and Alberta 

brought forward some compelling statistical information and 

some very solid points indicating to us as a province that if you, 

if you put these and this measure in place you could reduce 

your deaths by 50 per cent, our only point on this side of the 

Assembly is why ignore and why not put that particular 

recommendation in the Traffic Safety Committee report? 

 

That is the fundamental question that we ask of the Sask Party 

on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. A lot of the changes that the 

minister alluded to . . . And we’ll certainly go through the 

changes that she presented. And I think our members having the 

experience of going to these hearings and sharing some of the 

stories, I’m sure they will, when they have their opportunities 

on this particular bill, that they’ll be able to present what they 

heard. And they’ll be able to corroborate what the minister is 

saying today, that some of the safety measures that she’s 

indicated today would be very valuable to support as the official 

opposition. 

 

And as our leader has instructed all of us, if it makes sense and 

the good consultation was there and the corroboration is 

affirmed by our members, then why would we stand in the way 

of something that’s important? We would simply support those 

measures and ensure that Saskatchewan people are indeed kept 

safe. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why I think when 

we look at the bill and its rules and regulations that the minister 

is trying to move forward, some of the processes we would 

naturally automatically support, as I mentioned, if they make 

sense and they haven’t been vetted through the process 

properly. But again the points that I would raise on behalf of the 

official opposition with corroboration from the two members on 

this committee is the whole notion of vehicle impoundment on 

the first offence for anybody above .05 for three days because it 

does save lives. So the question I would ask is, why wasn’t that 

put as part of the recommendation? Because sometimes that 

happens, Mr. Speaker, and that’s one of the things that’s really, 

really important. 

 

Now we look at some of the points that we would raise is that 

when you look at the overall safety numbers in the province . . . 

And I think the one stat that we lead the nation in terms of all 

the other provinces is in alcohol-related deaths when it comes to 

traffic accidents. And certainly from our perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to make sure that if that was the initial 

mandate of the committee, that they implement, they implement 

that particular plan to the fullest. Because why would you put a 

committee in place and not deal with the issue totally? And 

that’s one of the questions that our members have on our side of 

the Assembly is, why did you exclude that particular part? 

 

I’m not sure as to who made the recommendation, whether it 

was an organization or whether it’s a series of people at a 

number of these meetings. Or was it the police that made the 

presentation? Or was it a judge that made the presentation? Or 

was it all these groups that made this presentation that had you 

followed the BC and Alberta examples of a three-day 

impoundment, then it does save lives. And whoever presented 

this obviously had a lot of good information for the committee 

members to digest and to hear, and that’s what’s really 

important. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you look at some of the issues that are 

important, that the committee hearings themselves, some would 

say that they’re perhaps too short, that they needed maybe 

another three or four months of more compelling information. 

Others would say that they only went to a certain number of 

places, that you should have had maybe twice the amount of 

hearings and twice the amount of communities and then you’d 

hear a lot more information. But I think the information that 

was received at the series of meetings that were held were 

probably pretty consistent in terms of the advice that people 

gave to the committee members. And I’m not sure of the 

format, and I’m sure my colleagues will explain the format as 

we speak more on this bill, but it’d be sure nice to be able to tell 

the people out there in Saskatchewan that as the opposition, of 

course we would want to see more information, more input, and 

more advice from some of the organizations involved with 

traffic safety overall. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that most recently 

when I travel home, we find that traffic safety is really 

important, that when you come across a bridge crew there’s 

adequate lighting. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of times you’re busy 

travelling, and you’re flying down the highway at 60 miles an 

hour. And of course you come across these lights and the sign is 

saying obviously that there’s a bridge construction crew in 

place, to reduce your speed by 60 kilometres. And then there’s a 

sign that says, fines triple. And then there’s a sign that says, 

being enforced by photo radar. And you see all these measures 

in place. And finally when you get to where the crew’s 

working, you’ve got to be totally dismissive of all the warning 

signs and still drive through there at a higher speed than what is 

allowed. 

 

So it’s important to know that all the signage is there and that 

people still have a difficult time in paying attention to the 

signage and slowing down to under 60 kilometres, Mr. Speaker. 

There was a few times that just before I got to the 60 kilometres 

zone, where I had to put my brakes on to make sure that I was 

under 60. And these are some of the things that people have to 

get used to and that traffic safety is always a challenge. And it 

is always a serious, serious effort that everybody has to 

undertake on a continual basis. 

 

So there’s a lot of questions that we have on this bill. We want 



4346 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

to be able to give our participants in the Traffic Safety 

Committee the opportunity to speak about some of their 

involvement. And I’m sure we will hear, Mr. Speaker, some 

very compelling stories of why they wanted us go to the extra 

step, to do the complete work that was necessary. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that that opportunity for them to be able to speak, we 

would hear some very good words of advice, some very good 

words of advice. And it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing 

that you look at some of the challenges that we’ve had over the 

years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I speak from a bit of a background when we 

talk about vehicle safety itself. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had my share 

of tickets. And certainly from my perspective, I think what’s 

important is that we’ve learned that speeding is something that 

you have to be always aware of. And so we obviously learn 

from that lesson. 

 

But a lot of people don’t realize that we have lost two brothers 

and a sister in vehicle accidents, which is a very difficult thing 

to go through. And over the years, you start thinking about, you 

know, what caused that. You try and find out what happened 

because the shock of it initially happening is very difficult. But 

you know, it’s kind of important that you pay attention to that 

stuff. Because obviously we’ve had our share — too much at 

times — of some of the deaths that occurred in a tragic vehicle 

accident, and certainly one vehicle accident took the life of a 

six-year-old sister. So it was a tough time to go through at the 

time. But certainly that person was caught and was charged and 

certainly paid for his crime, but it would have been nice had we 

had a lot more measures in place to stop that from occurring. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is a tough round I’ll tell you to, I’m sure, 

to hear some of the compelling stories of many other families 

that have gone through that. So it is a tough file. There’s no 

question about that. And if we can make Saskatchewan a better 

and a safe community by doing a very thorough, comprehensive 

plan to deal with traffic safety, certainly I think we need to 

undertake as many of the measures as possible. 

 

And as my colleagues have indicated, it’s important that we 

take the full step forward. And that’s why I think the three-day 

vehicle impoundment is something that’s important to them, 

and that’s one of the reasons why they issued a second report on 

their own to ensure that that particular aspect was highlighted 

and that the government did not choose to implement as part of 

the bill that is being presented today. So, Mr. Speaker, they’ll 

have a lot more to say on this particular bill. As I said I’m 

looking forward to their presentations to hear what they have to 

say. 

 

And it’s important to note, it’s important to note that evidence, 

not just from the presenters themselves but from jurisdictions of 

BC and Alberta, you know, they’ve got a lot of 

forward-thinking folks out there that have a lot of experience. 

And when they give you advice — and I often tell people this 

— when you get advice from anybody, you don’t have to take it 

all, but you should listen to it because maybe somewhere along 

the line that could serve you. 

 

So I think again I would point out that the bill itself got some 

good work to it. We’ll support certain aspects of the bill. But 

does it go far enough? My colleagues say no, it doesn’t. And I 

certainly am going to pay attention to what the member from 

Cumberland and the member from Riversdale may indicate as 

to what their reasons for asking for the extra step because I’m 

sure they have been subjected to some very heart-wrenching 

stories and some very difficult presentations. 

 

So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 125, The 

Traffic Safety Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 125, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Athabasca not Cumberland. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Oh the member from Athabasca — 

sorry — has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 125, The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 109 — The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise and speak to The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013. Mr. Speaker, this 

is a relatively short bill, but it affects many people in the 

province and many businesses in the province. And I note that 

the minister’s speech explaining this bill was quite simple. It 

didn’t have a lot to it. So I’m going to try to fill in what I think 

is happening here so that on the record we’ll have something to 

look at later if it’s ever a question about what’s happening. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now right off the top, this whole area or this type of legislation, 

The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act 

relates to having Saskatchewan people invest their money in 

Saskatchewan businesses, especially some of the businesses 

that might be a little bit riskier or a little bit not as developed as 

some of our really large businesses in Saskatchewan. And for 

many, many years, entrepreneurs had a hard time getting the 

capital that they needed when it was basically in a smaller 

category. 

 

And I guess when I say that, I’ll reflect back say 15 years ago. 

If you had to borrow money for a business that was under 5 

million, maybe up to $10 million, it was quite hard to get that 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4347 

money because . . . It wasn’t just for borrowing, but you also 

would be interested in having people invest in shares in your 

company. It was very hard to get that. And as the government 

of that day, we looked at many different things to put in place 

that would encourage people to invest. 

 

What we knew was that if people were interested in amassing 

relatively large sums of money through a share offering, they 

could do it with the assistance of the bankers and primarily go 

through the Toronto Stock Exchange but also I suppose 

sometimes through some of the other stock exchanges in 

Canada. But there was a whole gap of ability to invest. This 

legislation, and developed in conjunction with federal 

legislation, gives a tax credit or deduction for people who invest 

this money in some of the smaller operations that are available. 

 

Now we have quite a few years of experience with this type of 

legislation, and there are a couple of triggers to bringing in this 

amendment legislation today. I would say the first trigger is that 

the federal government has taken steps to change the national 

program. And I’ll quote directly from the SaskWorks 2013 

annual report, and I want to put some of the information from 

this report on the record because this kind of information was 

not provided by the minister as he brought forward his 

legislation. And so what is stated on page 8 of the SaskWorks 

2013 annual report is this: 

 

As an aspect of its 2013 Federal budget, the Government 

of Canada announced a draft legislative proposal that 

would phase out the 15% Federal tax credit beginning in 

the 2015 tax year by decreasing the Federal tax credit from 

15% to 10%, followed by a decease from 10% to 5% for 

the 2016 tax year and 0% for the 2017 tax year and 

beyond. The draft proposal is currently the subject of 

public consultation being undertaken by the Government 

of Canada. The announced proposed phase out of the 

Federal tax credit does not affect the Saskatchewan tax 

credit of 20%, which was reconfirmed in the 2013 

Provincial budget. 

 

Now what happened is a fair bit of discussion was started by the 

fact that the federal government was going to make these 

changes as it related to labour-sponsored venture capital 

corporations. And so what we have then now is this amendment 

legislation before the House. And unfortunately the rules are 

being changed. There’s no question about that. But it’s not clear 

in the legislation how they’re going to be changed, or it’s not 

clear in the minister’s speech how they’re going to be changed. 

But effectively all of those changes will be done by regulation 

after this legislation is passed. 

 

And it’s for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m going to 

read in the next part of the report from SaskWorks because this 

sets out the understanding of one of the labour-sponsored 

venture capital corporations in Saskatchewan as to what’s 

intended to happen with this legislation that doesn’t have the 

detail that we need. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to now quote 

from page 9 of the SaskWorks 2013 annual report. 

 

In the 2013 Provincial budget, the Government of 

Saskatchewan implemented additional investment criteria 

for labour-sponsored venture capital funds. Commencing 

with the 2014-2015 investment period and all subsequent 

investment periods, of the Fund’s annual net capitalization 

(annual capital raised less annual capital redeemed, 

multiplied by the Fund’s standard pacing requirements), a 

portion is to be invested in the innovation sector as 

follows: 

 

15% in 2014/2015; 

20% in 2015/2016; and, 

25% in 2016/17 and subsequent years. 

 

The innovation sector has been defined as companies 

operating within the clean/environmental technology, 

health and life sciences, crop sciences, industrial 

biotechnology, information and communication 

technology, alternative energy industries; or, companies 

developing and/or employing value-added processes or 

technologies in Saskatchewan’s traditional sectors (i.e. 

energy, agriculture, and manufacturing). 

 

Based on the nature and amount of the Fund’s deal flow 

and its applicability to the innovation criteria, as well as 

the required annual innovation placement amount, the 

Manager is confident that it will not be required to alter its 

investment strategy or processes in order to remain in 

compliance with the newly introduced criteria. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are these changes that must be 

somewhere and that are going to show up in the regulations 

based on the Act that we have here before us that will set out 

that policy. And I think it’s important we put on the record what 

the understanding of that policy is because the government has 

not done that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote a little bit more from this 

report that also talks about changes that are I think included in 

this legislation, but it’s only included by reference to the fact 

that the minister and the Lieutenant Governor in Council can 

make regulatory changes. And so quoting again from page 9 of 

the 2013 annual report of SaskWorks: 

 

Further changes introduced by the Government of 

Saskatchewan include changes to the definition of an 

eligible business investment under the Saskatchewan Act: 

 

Investments in public companies with a market 

capitalization of $500 million or more are prohibited and 

any investments in public companies with a market 

capitalization of $500 million or more must be divested 

by the labour-sponsored venture capital corporation prior 

to December 31, 2014. If an investment is acquired 

through acquisitions or mergers and the resulting 

investment has over $500 million in capitalization, such 

investment must be disposed of within two years of such 

acquisition or merger, and, 

 

New investment in agricultural land acquired primarily 

for rental or leasing purposes will be prohibited. 

 

None of the above changes are expected to have an adverse 

effect on the performance of the Fund. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve read that section in as well because it 

appears to confirm what the intention of the government is, at 



4348 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

least as understood by one of the major labour-sponsored 

venture capital corporations. Ideally that kind of information 

would have been presented by the minister so we would all 

understand in the legislature what’s intended with this 

legislation. 

 

Now I think that practically there appears to be an 

understanding of what the government intends to do with the 

legislation, which does not have an adverse effect on the 

labour-sponsored venture capital corporations in Saskatchewan 

at this time. Part of our job as we look at this legislation will be 

to make sure that the intent as understood by the major players 

in the industry is followed. And also I think that we will be 

interested to follow what’s happening on the federal level with 

the changes that are proposed there to see how they mesh with 

what’s happening in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, with that 

information provided for the record, I move that we adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 109, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 112 — The 

Accounting Profession Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to enter the discussion today on Bill No. 112, An Act respecting 

the Accounting Profession and the Institute of Chartered 

Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan, or as it’s known or 

easier to say, The Accounting Profession Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill is part of a much larger initiative 

that’s been under way not just here in Saskatchewan but in 

Canada and internationally as well. What it will do, what this 

bill proposes doing is merging three main professional 

designations — the chartered accountants, the certified 

management accountants, and the certified general accountants 

— into one body which will now be called the Chartered 

Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan. Right now here in 

Saskatchewan there are currently 4,400 members of all three 

groups who this will currently impact. As well there are about 

970 students in the three respective accounting bodies, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . oh, Mr. Speaker now. You go and change 

things up on me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what this will do is . . . Apparently worldwide or 

internationally, the chartered professional accountants is a 

designation that is internationally recognized, and there is a 

certification process actually in fact for chartered professional 

accountants. And what this will do is . . . Well this certification 

program internationally has combined and taken the best of all 

the designations and rolled it into one, Mr. Speaker. So this bill 

also will be streamlining and modernizing the regulatory 

regime. 

 

The opposition, our Finance critic actually, has met with all 

three designations here in Saskatchewan, and they do 

collectively support it and have asked for these changes. 

 

It’s interesting in other parts of Canada what’s going on now. 

Actually Manitoba is in a slightly earlier stage. They actually, at 

the end of November, just announced a memorandum of 

understanding between the three groups and will be taking the 

vote to the members of their three groups come January for 

approval and hope to have legislation at some point in the near 

future. Ontario is in the process of doing the very same thing, 

and apparently one of the bodies had backed away from the 

negotiations but is back at the table, and so Ontario is working 

on this chartered professional accountant designation as well. 

 

Again there are a large number of members in all three groups 

here in Saskatchewan, more than 4,000 that are impacted by 

this, and it’s interesting. So we’ve heard from the three bodies 

who believe that this is a very good idea, but I think one of the 

goals going forward when a bill comes before us is we have to 

make sure that the bill reflects what the three bodies have asked 

for. It seems to on the surface, but I also know it’ll be 

interesting. I have spoken to one chartered accountant who 

actually, in her own body, did not support this, and I haven’t 

had an opportunity to follow up. But it’s good to see . . . It’ll be 

good or interesting to find out what her perspective is and why 

she didn’t support the change. And perhaps there’s an 

opportunity to strengthen this piece of legislation before it’s 

passed. So in the upcoming months this is what we will be 

doing. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I have a few other things here, Mr. Speaker. I know that the day 

when the legislation was introduced, the professional 

accountants, the chartered professional accountants, again 

which is the new designation, the chartered professional 

accountants Saskatchewan joint venture, which was the body 

charged with ensuring that this merger goes forward, they put 

out a letter on November 7th in support of this. And they 

believe, actually Ms. Keri Ziegler who is a CA [chartered 

accountant] and was the CEO of this joint venture, believes that 

this will benefit the public by eliminating the confusion over the 

qualifications of the three different designations for accountants 

and by improving the standards of the profession. She said, 

“Through this unification initiative, we have brought together 

the best qualities of each of the different predecessor 

organizations. Our members will benefit from the best of all 

three worlds.” And that was again Ms. Keri Ziegler who is the 

CEO of the CPA [Chartered Professional Accountant] 

Saskatchewan Joint Venture. 

 

One of the things that’s important to note in this legislation is 

that there will be a transition measure called tagging. So when 

new graduates finish the new CPA certification program, they 

will simply use the designation CPA, or chartered professional 

accountant, after their name. But current members of any of the 

three organizations, the predecessor associations, will 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4349 

distinguish their different qualifications by using CPA, CA; 

CPA, CMA [chartered management accountant]; or CPA, CGA. 

And this tagging will be mandatory for 10 years, and after that 

10 years, the use of the legacy designations will be optional. 

 

And I think one thing to note when we talk about the chartered 

professional accountants, I know in some of the things . . . One 

of the arguments for this again is the opportunity for 

accountants here in Saskatchewan to be able to better interact 

on the international stage. I know some of the arguments have 

said that the members would retain their current designation and 

add the Canadian chartered professional accountant designation, 

which would become the pre-eminent designation and business 

credential for professional accountants who work in every 

sector of the economy. 

 

And the Canadian CPA designation would represent a unique 

combination of expertise in all areas of accounting, including 

financial and management accounting, assurance and taxation, 

would evolve into a globally recognized business credential in 

the areas of financial and strategic management, business 

leadership and auditing, and assurance competencies. And there 

will be steps taken so that members would have access to 

post-designation specialty programs. 

 

So I know again that the government seems to have consulted, 

and I know my colleague from Regina Rosemont has had an 

opportunity to talk to all three organizations who by and large 

support this. But again it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that now 

that the legislation is on the table that we check back with 

stakeholders and make sure that the legislation does in fact 

reflect what they’ve been asking for or if there’s any way to 

improve it in any way. So we will be doing that in the coming 

months. 

 

But I do know that I have colleagues who will be interested in 

weighing in on this discussion over the next . . . as we continue 

to sit here, Mr. Speaker. So with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 99 — The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate and discussion as it relates to Bill 99, 

The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013. 

Just, you know, there’s a couple of notes before I get into some 

of the contents of the bill. Certainly the public employees 

pension plan is a very important pension plan to the people of 

this province. It’s important to so many families who have 

provided service and work to their province, to their 

communities, who have worked as public servants and in many, 

many roles. 

 

In fact there’s 79 different employers that utilize the public 

employees pension plan. This is a plan that has over 53,000 

members, which just tells you how important this plan is to the 

lives of so many families as it relates to the real important 

challenge of ensuring income security, ensuring adequate 

retirement security, ensuring retirement for those that have 

worked, those that have contributed, and ensuring they have the 

ability to have a dignified retirement and the adequate funds to 

support that. 

 

Certainly the fund itself is well run. It’s had good governance, 

and it’s been efficient and has had quite strong returns, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a defined contribution pension plan and it’s 

managed by the . . . or administered by the Public Employees 

Pension Board. And right now I believe the current assets are in 

excess of $5.6 billion. Certainly it’s a plan that’s important to 

many families in this province, and of course those are 

important investments that have been made as well. 

 

As it relates to the changes that have been made here today in 

opening up this Act, what we do want to fully understand and 

what we’ll be seeking some clarity on is, where exactly have 

these recommendations come from? Who’s made these, who’s 

requested these changes? And in opening up the bill and in 

expanding the bill, what was the scope of considerations for 

changes? And were there other recommendations that were 

brought forward that would be in the best interests of retirees or 

of workers here today that could have been addressed through 

the bill? Those are the kinds of questions we’ll be putting to the 

minister. 

 

I know some of the changes that have been brought forward, I’ll 

address some of them here. The minister states, and I quote the 

minister, that the Act will do the following: 

 

. . . clarify that a simple majority of board members is 

required for all decisions made by board; allow the board 

to undertake short-term borrowing for the purposes of the 

administration of The Public Employees Pension Plan Act; 

allow the Lieutenant Governor, by order in council, to 

designate the default fund into which all member 

contributions shall be deposited unless otherwise directed 

by the member; provide that the Lieutenant Governor may 

order that members who have never chosen a fund for their 

PEPP funds be moved into a default fund; and authorize 

the Lieutenant Governor by regulation to permit the plan to 

receive members and funds from a registered pension plan 

wanting to become part of the PEPP . . . [to start] which 

specialty funds transferring into PEPP are eligible for. 

 

So I see a couple of changes there. We’ll be certainly following 

up with the minister on it. But decisions made by board, there’s 

some changes to those processes, some changes around 

responsibility for short-term borrowing and some greater 

authority on those fronts, and then as well the ability to 

designate, or of government’s ability to designate someone who 

maybe hasn’t chosen, if I understand this properly, the fund that 

they would like their dollars to be placed within, then there’ll be 



4350 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

a default fund that government can choose on that front. 

 

I believe right now there’s about six different asset allocations 

that members can choose on that front. I believe there’s a range 

in risk and potential return on those fronts. And so I believe 

what this is probably addressing, there must be a host of 

individuals, many workers possibly, that haven’t indicated 

which fund they’d like to see their funds being placed in, and 

this maybe gives legal authority for government to act on their 

behalf. So we’ll make sure we understand the full consequences 

of that. Certainly it seems that maybe it’s addressing a practical 

challenge that fund administrators are dealing with right now. 

 

Also I’m looking forward to learning a little bit more about the 

provisions in this Act to allow for other funds, other 

investments or for those, I should say, that have funds 

elsewhere to be able to move those funds into PEPP [public 

employees pension plan]. So I want to understand I guess the 

constraints on that or what that means specifically, and we’ll be 

fleshing that out in committee. 

 

I guess just in closing, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important 

pension plan to the people of this province. It’s a fund that’s 

contributed into by both employer and employee. It’s something 

that ensures those that are working hard and spending their life 

in public service or providing work to their community, 

ensuring that they have some adequacy to their retirement 

savings. So certainly we want to make sure that any changes are 

in the best interests of those 53,000-plus members across this 

province. 

 

Retirement security is a significant challenge for many. It’s an 

important place for public discourse. It’s an important place that 

we need to move the yardsticks in a positive direction for 

Saskatchewan families because it’s an area of stress for many, 

many Saskatchewan families, those that are young and working 

right now and looking down the road, those that are close to 

retirement, Mr. Speaker. And I do think it’s important while on 

this record to just reiterate the opposition’s support for the 

expansion of the CPP, the Canada Pension Plan, the efficient, 

effective pan-Canadian solution that it is, providing a base level 

of income security for all Canadians, all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Other provinces have taken leadership roles on this front. Our 

government has been less supportive, noncommittal, less than 

clear as to what sort of advocacy they’ll provide on that front. 

 

But it’s very important that we recognize the challenge of 

income security, the importance of a dignified retirement, the 

importance of retirement security to thousands of families right 

across our province, right across our country. And certainly that 

pan-Canadian solution, the expansion of the Canada Pension 

Plan is something that we’re going to continue to push as the 

official opposition New Democrats. It’s important to the 

families here in Saskatchewan. 

 

These changes come on the heels of some monkeying around 

that we saw in the spring as it related to labour-sponsored 

venture funds. We saw the changes federally where the federal 

government is abandoning labour-sponsored venture funds, and 

we see the provincial government that imposed, with a real 

heavy hand, direction to those investment holdings which 

would have had a direct impact on the return that Saskatchewan 

families would have received. We saw that as wrong-headed at 

that time. We called on government to resolve that. They’ve 

been working, I understand, to address the challenge that they 

created. They still haven’t lifted the cap that they’ve imposed 

that will cut investment in our province and that will prevent 

many, many families from being able to invest into the 

labour-sponsored venture funds. 

 

But when we look at those funds, they’re certainly an important 

piece of the retirement puzzle for many Saskatchewan families. 

As well, I believe, their members are in excess of 55,000. And 

certainly we’ll continue to track government’s decisions on this 

front. Certainly we’re pleased and welcome, as we encourage 

government to reconsider some of the decisions that it had 

made — reckless decisions, decisions that were not in the best 

interest of those members, those families across Saskatchewan 

that have invested in those funds, those funds that have been 

well managed and have provided good returns to Saskatchewan 

families but that have also capitalized our province and 

provided a really strong economic boost and succession in 

business in many regions and right across our province. 

 

So we’ll continue to track progress on that front. We certainly 

continue to call for government to rescind the cap that they’ve 

placed on those funds and allow more investment in our 

province and allow investments by Saskatchewan people within 

their province. 

 

But with all that being said, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

public employees pension plan, this is a very important pension 

plan to the people of this province, impacting thousands of 

families on an issue that’s critical to many — retirement 

security, income security — and an area that we need quite 

frankly to ensure that governments are more involved in 

stepping up to the plate to ensure better protection for 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

With that being said, I certainly look forward to discussion at 

the committee, moving forward with the minister, and gaining 

some clarity as to the specific changes. And I don’t have 

anything else to say at this time as it relates to Bill 99, The 

Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013, and I do 

look forward to following up with more detailed questions in 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 99, The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4351 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The Child 

Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to wade 

into discussion about Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act. What 

this bill does, it’s pretty straightforward, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

repealing the previous bill and replacing it with a bilingual bill. 

So now we have the legislation and regulations in both English 

and French. 

 

And this came directly from a request from, well, several 

organizations actually — the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises, 

or CÉF, and the Association des parents fransaskois, or APF — 

who wanted the legislation in French because there are many 

francophone providers of child care currently now in this 

province. And it continues to grow, Mr. Speaker, the demand 

for francophone child care continues to grow. 

 

We’ve had many newcomers come from places like Africa, just 

to name one, Mr. Speaker. And my daughter actually attended 

l’École canadienne-française and had the opportunity to go to 

school with many of these children whose first language, or one 

of many languages that they already speak, happens to be 

French, and English was an additional language for them. 

 

So the child care providers wanted to ensure that the 

requirements outlined in the Act could be understood and 

interpreted correctly by French-language child care providers 

and their professional organizations, so making sure that they 

are meeting the rules for providing safe, quality child care in 

Saskatchewan were very important to these providers. 

 

The bill also has some minor changes. And actually the minister 

pointed out what some of these minor changes are, aside from 

the very big translation piece which was the large change, Mr. 

Speaker. But some of the minor changes, the minister says or 

refers to them as housekeeping in nature: first, there was the 

removal of alphabetical listing from interpretation; secondly, 

there was the removal of previously repealed sections; third, the 

minister says there’s legal modernization of language; four, 

there’s the reorganization of sections for clarity; five, references 

to department change to ministry; and six, section on 

inspections and investigations split to provide legal clarity and 

in addition allows the investigation section to include search of 

vehicles. 

 

So those are generally the changes in the bill, in Bill No. 98, 

The Child Care Act. But I think the thing that . . . I’m very 

pleased to see it translated. Again as I’ve said, I’ve had an 

opportunity to meet many of these child care providers who are 

working in French, Mr. Speaker. But I think this was a key 

opportunity missed for us here in this legislature. Child care is 

an absolutely critical part of ensuring that our children in 

Saskatchewan start off with a bright future. It’s about early 

learning and education, but it’s also an economic development 

strategy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan there are about 70 per cent of women 

with children under 5 who are in the paid labour force. So that 

is a huge number of people who need to rely on child care, 

some kind of child care and, more often than not, these 

individuals are not relying on licensed child care because it’s 

not available. We have fewer than 13,000 spaces, active spaces, 

at the moment. I know the government likes to talk about 

working on getting to that number and they’ve committed to 

spaces, but all those spaces aren’t open. 

 

So I think again I need to emphasize that we have a piece of 

legislation before us and a key opportunity to do some really 

great things here in ensuring that families have support to go to 

school and to earn money, Mr. Speaker. We hear all the time 

from employers across the spectrum, from skilled labour force 

shortages to labour force shortages in some of our fast food 

outlets. And we’ve had to rely on temporary foreign workers, 

Mr. Speaker, because by and large we don’t have people to fill 

these spaces. Well, ensuring that people have child care is one 

way to ensure that you help address the labour force shortage. 

 

I think it’s important to talk about the turning point. And so for 

anybody who is interested, the turning point is the point at 

which you no longer are eligible for the maximum child care 

subsidy, which isn’t incredibly high to begin with, Mr. Speaker. 

But if you earn $1,640 and have one child, any amount over 

that, you will start to lose the maximum subsidy. So $1,640 in a 

month is not too far off minimum wage, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I think it’s important to point out that that number hasn’t 

changed; that turning point has not changed since the early 

1980s, Mr. Speaker. So this is a key opportunity, would have 

been a great opportunity to change that turning point to ensure 

that more families have the support that they need to provide, to 

ensure that their children are in good care, that they’re not using 

all their family budget on child care and have a little bit of 

money left over at the end of the day. 

 

I think it’s important to talk about what some other provinces 

are doing. I know in estimates last spring I had the opportunity 

to ask the then minister about how they came up with the target 

of 500 child care spaces in the last budget. And the minister told 

me, well, that’s an aggressive number that we’re pursuing. And 

I said, well what is the demand for child care here in 

Saskatchewan? And he said they didn’t know the demand and 

there was no way of knowing the demand. And then later this 

summer with respect to standardized testing, that same minister 

with respect to standardized testing said something, and I don’t 

have the quote in front of me so I’m paraphrasing. But he said, 

well you can’t improve what you don’t measure. Well I would 

argue with child care, if you have no idea what the demand is, 

how can you improve it and how can you ensure that families 

have what they need? 



4352 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

So I can point to four years. I believe in my Throne Speech 

response I said five years, but it’s four years; 2009, ’10, ’11, 

and ’12, there were 60,000 live births here in Saskatchewan. In 

’09, ’10, ’11, and ’12, 60,000 babies born here in Saskatchewan 

in those four years. And adding 500 child care spaces a year is 

simply a drop in the bucket and does nothing to solve the very 

real crisis, the very real crisis that families face, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to finding care for your children. 

 

I can tell you as a parent of young kids myself, there is nothing 

worse than leaving kids at the best of times, even in care that 

you trust. I mean that parental guilt, we all want to be there for 

our children. But there is nothing even more stressful than 

having to leave your children in care that you’re not convinced 

is totally reliable. And this is why the onus should be on the 

government here to ensure that we’re creating high quality, 

affordable, accessible, licensed child care spaces that actually 

meet families’ needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have spoken to so many directors and people who work in 

child care and they tell me about staff retention, how difficult it 

is to keep people employed, partly because child care workers 

are paid not much more above minimum wage. The people we 

are charging with the care of our children, we don’t value them 

enough to pay them, in some cases, much more than minimum 

wage. I know directors of child care centres who’ve been in 

child care for more than two decades have said to me that no 

one is following behind us, Danielle. There is no one to take our 

spaces and continue to provide care. Because what ends up 

happening, people do the training and then get scooped up. 

Instead of working in child care centres, they end up working in 

other places as educational assistants in less stressful 

environments where it is greater pay. 

 

I know I’ve talked to directors who worry about staff retention. 

Again, what ends up happening is they don’t get to do 

professional development. So there is some professional 

development that is mandated, but because they are often short 

staffed and have trouble finding replacements, that the people 

working in child care don’t have the opportunity to constantly 

improve themselves, or it can be incredibly difficult to take the 

time to do that professional development. 

 

So we have great difficulties with the cost of child care. We 

have great . . . for families. And again I spoke to the turning 

point. We have difficulty with staff retention and being able to 

recruit the best possible people who will stay in those roles. 

There are many wonderful people who work in child care and 

are completely undervalued. 

 

Again I think I didn’t finish my comments around being able to 

measure the demand here in Saskatchewan. Manitoba and 

Prince Edward Island have online child care registries. One of 

the goals there is to simplify it for families. So they’ve got 

one-stop shopping, so they don’t have to put their name on 10 

different child care lists. So it’s a central point, Mr. Speaker. So 

that helps families. 

 

But secondarily, and this is . . . I have spoken to someone in 

Manitoba about this. I haven’t in PEI [Prince Edward Island] 

but I’m assuming it’s the same thing. They’re able to track what 

the demand is for child care through this online child care 

registry. Can you believe, Mr. Speaker, they actually have a 

sense of what their demand for licensed child care is? What a 

novel concept. It would be great to have seen the government in 

this bill . . . or we’ve got a piece of legislation before us. This 

could have been a really great opportunity to include some of 

these things in this legislation and in regulations. And I’m 

incredibly disappointed to see that. 

 

I know families deserve more that . . . Enhancing child care is 

in fact a smart growth plan. It’s ensuring that families have the 

opportunity to have great early learning and care for their kids, 

but also have the opportunity to work or earn a living — two 

things that we want people, adults to do here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, I am disappointed that there wasn’t more. I’m glad 

that the bill has been translated into French — very important 

— but disappointed that this government has not done more on 

child care. There are so many places of improvement that could 

happen, Mr. Speaker, so many places of improvement. And it’s 

2013, Mr. Speaker. Now is the time to act. And I look forward 

to having further conversations about this in committee, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 

question before the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 100 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter discussion as it related to Bill No. 100, The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013. 

Certainly this is a very important agency to the people of our 

province. It’s important, ensuring proper and adequate taxation 

and revenues for municipalities for our education system. 

 

And certainly some of the changes that have been put forward 

seem to be quite practical in nature in allowing the SAMA 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4353 

[Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency], the 

Saskatchewan assessment agency, management agency, to be 

able to be flexible in meeting the needs of our communities and 

meeting the realities of our taxation system. I believe it also 

responds to some of the changes that were made to taxation by 

that government as it related to funding of education. So there’s 

a few of those that are probably consequences of some of those 

changes. 

 

The piece of this that I want to have a better sense of is just 

ensuring the full consultations that would have occurred or 

should have occurred with partners. So certainly we want to 

make sure we fully understand what some of the 

recommendations from SAMA were as it related to these 

changes. We also want to make sure that the urban 

municipalities, the rural municipalities, SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] were fully engaged in 

developing this piece of legislation and that they fully support 

the changes that have been put forward. I believe that’s been 

referenced here by the minister that there’s full support, I 

believe he says, or there’s no objections, he says, by way of 

SARM or SUMA, the municipal partners across the province or 

the municipalities across the province. But certainly we want to 

be certain of that. 

 

It is interesting they’re changing the threshold or the revenue 

agreement for funding SAMA, and it seems to me that that 

could have the consequence of calling upon municipalities and 

property tax payers to pay more for this agency. Certainly this 

is an important agency, and we need to make sure it has the 

adequate resources to respond to our growing communities and 

changes in taxation and making sure that assessments are able 

to be completed in a timely and efficient way, in an accurate 

way, to make sure that tax revenues are collected properly that 

exist within the province. 

 

But we also want to make sure that there’s not a heavier burden 

placed upon property tax payers in this province. And when I 

look at the pressures our municipalities are facing, it seems to 

me poor timing to be potentially offloading the revenues 

required on this front onto property tax payers. We hear about 

the big increases across cities and municipalities in our 

province. We know that the current government is failing to 

properly fund the growth within municipalities, failing to 

properly fund the infrastructure demands within our 

municipalities, and so we just want to make sure that this isn’t 

something that’s going to further exacerbate that downloading 

or the property taxes of ratepayers across the province. 

 

[16:45] 

 

That being said, we know that many of these changes are quite 

practical in nature, allowing SAMA to make sure they meet the 

needs of communities and of our province and making sure that 

revenues are collected in a fair and appropriate way. That all 

sounds reasonable. There’s some reference that SAMA’s been 

quite involved in these consultations. We look forward to that 

discussion. We also want to understand what the scope of 

considerations were when this bill was opened up. 

 

But as I say, where probably my concern is right now and 

where we’ll, you know, certainly extend some discussions with 

municipal partners is that this is a change that will certainly, it 

seems, cause municipalities to be larger funding partners of 

SAMA. And again, this is the wrong time for that government 

to be doing further offloading onto the municipalities of this 

province. In fact, this is the time where they need to be stepping 

up and supporting our growing communities and the 

infrastructure needs that are there. 

 

And really it’s, you know, it speaks to the importance as well of 

establishing dedicated capital funding for municipalities across 

our province, something that isn’t in place for infrastructure 

right now. And certainly the consequence of not having that in 

place is higher, significantly higher property taxes for 

homeowners and businesses across this province, high levels of 

debt that are being forced upon municipalities by this 

government. 

 

And we believe, in a full smart growth agenda, there’d be 

understanding of the need for infrastructure investments back 

into our municipalities, an understanding that municipalities are 

under significant strain with very limited revenues to bring to 

bear to address the challenges and the opportunities that they’re 

presented. 

 

We’ll engage with the minister at committee to follow up with 

further detail, further questions on this bill, understanding some 

of the direct perspectives of SARM and SUMA as well, both 

those that have been shared with the minister but those that are 

also shared with us. And I invite all municipalities to engage 

directly with any concerns that they might have or any thoughts 

they might have on this piece of legislation. 

 

With all that said, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to committee 

with the minister. Certainly we need to make sure SAMA is in a 

strong position, moving forward. As I say, the concerns simply 

are of financial off-loading onto municipalities that we see once 

again from this government onto municipalities and a failure to 

step up with the proper recognition of the infrastructure needs 

our communities, our growing municipalities are facing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But we’ll follow up in committee. At this point in time as it 

relates to Bill No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013, I have nothing else to say in this 

Assembly and look forward to discussions in committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 

100, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 

2013 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 



4354 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2013 

The Speaker: —I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 100, The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the committee on 

intergovernmental relations. 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 101 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to join 

the debate today on The University of Saskatchewan Act, 1995, 

Bill No. 101. Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of different aspects 

of the legislative agenda of this government that are brought 

forward, some, you know, some bills are fairly substantial, 

some bills not as much. It doesn’t make them any less 

important, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the legislation that governs 

this province. 

 

But in terms of The University of Saskatchewan Act, 1995, the 

Act to amend it, Bill No. 101, this is a piece of legislation that 

in one respect it’s about working responsibly with the sector, 

working responsibly with the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, which is as it should be. The legislation itself is largely 

housekeeping in nature, which again is fair enough. There are 

different kinds of legislation brought forward by government, 

Mr. Speaker, but this one most definitely would be of the 

housekeeping variety. 

 

In terms of, you know, the particular questions that we will 

have for the bill, we look forward to having the discussion 

about this legislation in committee, Mr. Speaker. But of the 

various items, the provisions brought forward in this particular 

piece of legislation, I’ll just provide a general survey of those at 

this time, Mr. Speaker. You know, existing provision no. III 

(11) where: 

 

The convocation may: 

 

(a) confer degrees and certificates approved by the 

council; 

 

(b) confer honorary degrees approved by the senate; and 

 

(c) admit graduands to the . . . [convention]. 

 

The subsection 5(c) is clarified so that the University of 

Saskatchewan may also award diplomas. Close the quote, Mr. 

Speaker. Again, clarifying to ensure that the power to award 

diplomas is known. That that is brought forward is something 

that is necessary for the university to change their legislation. 

Again, fair enough, Mr. Speaker, but hardly earth-shattering in 

nature and quite honestly a bit of a surprise that that wasn’t 

already sufficiently entailed in the Act. 

Next up in terms of the composition of the senate, again the 

University of Saskatchewan senate, Mr. Speaker — no need to 

get excited; we’re not talking about the Senate in Ottawa — but 

in terms of changes that are made to that particular provision 

and again refining who’s the composition of the senate, who’s 

all before the senate, the powers of the senate. In the context of 

The University of Saskatchewan Act, again nothing seemingly 

of particularly earth-shattering significance here, Mr. Speaker, 

but again all seemingly positive, positive changes being brought 

forward and necessary given that this is the legislation 

governing the university, and they’re looking to get these 

changes. So fair enough. 

 

Next up, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the amendments that will “. . . 

clarify the process by which student members of the senate are 

elected . . .” and the action in sections 29 and 32. Again to 

quote from the minister’s second reading speech in this regard, 

Mr. Speaker: “As well, the amendments will amend the term of 

office for the senate’s nominees to the board to allow them to 

serve a three-year, a third three-year term . . . [in] section 45.” 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a needful thing, certainly a necessary 

thing. But again the university sees this as necessary to better 

refine their governance process, so we’re glad to see this 

coming forward today. 

 

Next up, again referring to the minister’s second reading 

speech, Mr. Speaker: “. . . they will amend the powers of the 

council to facilitate the appointment of student members on 

hearing boards. This is section 61. And they’ll address the 

requirements of the corporate seal. That is section 98.” Again 

the students being lumped in with the corporate seal, but again 

when you’re whipping your way through the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, these things happen. But again in terms of enabling the 

appointment of student members on hearing boards, you know, 

great. That’s as it should be. And in terms of the requirements 

of the corporate seal, well to those of us that follow the keeping 

of the Great Seal here in the Assembly, always an interesting 

pursuit. 

 

I guess the main point I’d like to make here, Mr. Speaker, there 

are questions that we can raise pursuant to this Act here, gain 

greater clarity from the minister. But we take some assurance 

from the statements of the minister around the consultation that 

has taken place to date in terms of the University of 

Saskatchewan, the University of Regina on the proposed 

amendments. We look forward to having those letters of 

support that were referenced by the minister in the second 

reading speech. We are appreciative that there have been 

consultations take place with the University of Saskatchewan 

Students’ Union and the Graduate Students’ Association, and 

again we look forward to those letters of support being tabled in 

committee. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that the time has come in 

terms of our consideration at this stage of the piece of 

legislation. And I will conclude my comments and await the 

discussion in committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 



December 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4355 

motion by the Minister of Advanced Education that Bill No. 

101, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4323 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4323 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4323 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4323 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4323 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4323 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4324 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4324 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World AIDS Day 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4324 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4324 

 Thanks to Movember Participants  

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4325 

 Centennial Year for International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4325 

 New Facility for Naicam Sarcan 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4325 

 Company Supports Community School 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4325 

 Plans for Long-Term Care Facility 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4326 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Long-Term Care Conditions 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4326 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4326 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4327 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4328 

 Minimum Wage 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4329 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4329 

 Funding for First Nations Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4329 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4330 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4331 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 

 Funding for First Nations Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4331 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4331 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4332 

 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4335 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4336 

 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4339 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4339 

 Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4341 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4341 

 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4343 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4344 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4346 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4348 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4349 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4351 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4351 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4352 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4352 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4354 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4354 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4355 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


