




















































Hansard: November 14, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 13A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2013, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3993 

 November 14, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real 

pleasure to introduce to you today, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian 

Junior Football champions, the Regina Thunder. Mr. Speaker, 

the Thunder defeated the Vancouver Island Raiders. And as an 

Oakland fan, I’m usually not in favour of beat downs of Raiders 

on the football field, but this was an absolute exception. It was 

55 to 26; that was the score in the championship game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the quarterback — maybe he could give us a wave 

— Asher Hastings, tied a Canada Bowl record with five 

touchdown passes, Mr. Speaker. This is historic for the team. 

It’s the first of many Canadian national championships for the 

football program. We congratulate all the players and the 

coaches, head coach Scott MacAulay and his staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the coaches, I do want to single out 

a couple of Swift Current people. I think they’re there; I think I 

saw Brock, Brock Myers and Connor Duncan are there. Mr. 

Speaker, I had the privilege of coaching both of them in minor 

football. They’ve managed to overcome that and make a 

national championship team though.  

 

But we are very, very proud of them. What a great achievement 

on behalf of that entire organization. And we want to both 

congratulate them, thank them for this Saskatchewan national 

championship, and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly 

this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the Premier and welcome the Regina 

Thunder to their Assembly. We know that Saskatchewan is 

certainly a hotbed of football, amateur and professional. And 

this team was formed, of course, 14 years ago, and they now 

take their rightful place in Saskatchewan’s sporting history, in 

Saskatchewan’s football history with this Canadian Bowl 

championship. It’s rather exciting for someone like head coach 

Scott MacAulay to be there all the way through from the 

genesis of this organization as a player to now succeed as a 

coach at this stage. 

 

There’s too many board of directors and coaches to single out 

that are friends, but I welcome everyone that’s here today. And 

to Asher Hastings, wow, pretty impressive. You lit it up on 

Saturday, tied a record with the five touchdowns. And to all the 

players, thanks so much for making a whole city proud, I’m 

sure, our province proud. And also I know past players and 

alumni and past board of directors, you’ve built a very proud 

organization. So thank you so very much and we welcome you 

to your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 

with the Premier and the member opposite in congratulating the 

Regina Thunder on their victory. It was my pleasure to extend 

an invitation to the team, the coaching staff and the board to 

come out. As Regina and as a province we are extremely proud 

of your efforts. And hopefully . . . I think you’re only going to 

lose about seven players, and so we’re looking for some great 

things for next year. 

 

And I’d like to take the opportunity to single out one person in 

particular, a friend of mine, Kevin Pierce, coach. I think he’s 

coaching running backs. Kevin and I played rugby together for 

Campion Grads and also worked together at Dales House. It’s 

my pleasure to welcome Kevin to his legislature. And I’d like to 

have all members join me in welcoming and thanking and 

congratulating the Regina Thunder on their exploits. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the west gallery is 27 bright, shiny students from Peacock 

Collegiate in Moose Jaw. We want to welcome them here. And 

they’ve got a football story of their own that we will talk about 

a little bit later. But I would like all the members to welcome 

the 27 students along with Ms. Carrie Kiefer and Ms. Joanne 

Barber to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. The gym of course has been closed 

since last spring when structural difficulties at the building 

made it impossible to keep it open. There’s been a temporary 

space refurbished in the old sanctuary of Sacred Heart Church, 

but the school awaits a permanent solution for their quest for a 

gym. The petitioners point out that Sacred Heart Community 

School is the largest school in north central Regina, with 450 

students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. And 

they point out as a matter of basic fairness and common sense, 

Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym. In the prayer 

that reads as follows: 

 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 

Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 

replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 

Community School. 

 

This petition is signed by good citizens of Saskatoon here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 



3994 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2013 

Remembering Holodomor 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, today we will remember 

Holodomor, a man-made catastrophic famine and a horrendous 

genocide in which death by hunger was inflicted on as many as 

10 million Ukrainians in 1932 and 1933. A full one-third of the 

genocide victims were children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ukraine was a breadbasket. It was actually 

experiencing agricultural prosperity, but Stalin’s brutal regime 

seized crops and farms, leaving Ukrainian families to face the 

unfathomable horror of this great famine. 

 

I’m proud to have been part of this Legislative Assembly when 

in 2008 we became the first province in Canada to formally 

recognize this genocide. We must never forget this dark chapter 

in human history. We must never forget the plight of those who 

suffer the horrific consequences of hatred and extremism and 

tyranny. We must always be on guard to prevent such tragedy 

in the future. 

 

And as we join with the people of Ukraine and Ukrainians 

around the world, especially the many people of Ukrainian 

descent who call this province home, to pay tribute to those 

who suffered and died senselessly as a result of this genocide, 

we must also remember and celebrate the tremendous 

accomplishments of the resilient and courageous Ukrainian 

people who refused to give up and let their will be broken. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Regina Thunder Wins Canadian Championship 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, last weekend it was an exciting weekend of football 

right here in Regina. On Saturday our Regina Thunder football 

team became the Canadian Junior Football League champions 

for the first time in their history. The team beat the Vancouver 

Island Raiders on Saturday at Mosaic Stadium with a final score 

of 55 to 26. After opening up with a 7 to 3 lead in the first 

quarter, the floodgates opened, Mr. Speaker, and in the second, 

the Thunder extended their lead to 28 to 6. They never looked 

back from there. 

 

Prairie Football Conference co-MVP [most valuable player] 

Asher Hastings had a spectacular game, throwing for 367 yards 

and five touchdown passes, earning him offensive MVP of the 

game. Hastings’s five touchdown passes tied a Canadian Bowl 

record set in 1976 by the Rams’ Lenny Knoll and tied again in 

2009 by Regina-born quarterback, Jordan Yantz. The Thunder’s 

Nick Brown had a great game also, rushing for 20 times for 

over 203 yards and one touchdown. Brown’s rushing yardage 

was the sixth highest total in Canadian Bowl history.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to especially recognize Coach MacAulay 

on an incredible first year, winning both the Prairie Football 

Conference Championship, as well as the national 

championship. Congratulations. Mr. Speaker, that’s quite a 

rookie year. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in congratulating all 

players, coaches, and the entire team and the football 

organization and their board on a very successful season in a 

great national championship. Thank you for being great 

representatives of Regina and Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Peacock Tornadoes Win High School Championship 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 

the Peacock Tornadoes in Moose Jaw for winning the 3A 

Provincial High School Football Championship on Saturday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an exciting game that concluded an exciting 

season for the Peacock Tornadoes as they went through the 

season with a 9-0 record against teams from Central Collegiate 

and Vanier Collegiate in Moose Jaw and high school teams in 

Swift Current, Weyburn, Estevan, and Yorkton. The Peacock 

Tornadoes defeated Central Collegiate in the semifinals, then 

overpowered Yorkton in the league finals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this set the stage for the provincial championship 

game against the Regina O’Neill Titans at Gutheridge Field in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

It was indeed a championship game with all the excitement of a 

champion finish. O’Neill scored first and led at half time. They 

scored again at the beginning of the second half and were 

leading 14 to 0. Mr. Speaker, the Tornadoes weren’t going to let 

their season end on a loss, and they fought back to score 28 

unanswered points to win. The final score: 28-14 and the 

provincial 3A title. 

 

I’m asking all members to join me in congratulating the 

Peacock Tornadoes players, coaches that were led by Coach 

Blake Buettner, on an excellent season and a provincial 3A high 

school football championship. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Child Protection System 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s perhaps no 

greater responsibility of government than to ensure that our 

most vulnerable citizens are protected. We’ve heard a lot of 

concern over the past few months about our child welfare 

system, including another tragic death of a foster child, the fifth 

child in care to die under suspicious or criminal circumstances 

in just the last several years. And we had a very concerning 

report, a disturbing case about the failure of the child protection 

system to protect a toddler from horrific child abuse. 

 

At the beginning of September, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Social Services said she had many questions that she would be 

looking into, including “Did ministry policies and processes get 

in the way?” That’s an important question to ask, Mr. Speaker. 

So my question to the Premier: does this government have an 

answer to that question yet? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 



November 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3995 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you 

to the member opposite with the question. This is a very 

important question and one that our government and I take very, 

very seriously. Our biggest responsibility is for children that are 

in care. If they can’t remain with their family then to have them 

in social services is only the next best step. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have many foster families that look after our 

children and that do that with their hearts full of love. And at 

the same time, we know that the systems falls down. So when 

we lose a child, Mr. Speaker, there’s not only just a review done 

by the ministry. We contact the child advocate and we make 

sure that the systems that we’re working through, not only 

through our government but through the First Nations child and 

family agency, is reviewed as well. 

 

The report that I was talking about is not available yet, but I 

assure you that my goal is to make sure that the information that 

we receive, whether it depicts some issues that we need to deal 

with, will be brought forward because the children we’re 

talking about belong to the families. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that a report 

may be under way but the question that the minister posed 

herself was at the beginning of September. And now, Mr. 

Speaker, we are in mid-November so I think it is important to 

have an update whether or not there has been an undertaking 

and whether it’s been determined whether or not ministry 

processes got in the way as the minister suggested that it could 

have happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the significant concerns that has been 

raised is the unmanageable caseloads of front-line workers and 

the fact that child protection is being compromised as a result. 

The Children’s Advocate noted that cutbacks at the Ministry of 

Social Services mean the management of cases is not what it 

should be. The Children’s Advocate said this: 

 

The quality of case management and case planning has to 

improve. If that’s a resourcing issue, which I believe it is, I 

know the ministry has added 90 staff, but the ministry as a 

whole has cut over 100 staff members. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he agree with the Children’s 

Advocate that staffing cutbacks have compromised the 

protection of vulnerable children, or does he dismiss the 

concerns that have been raised by the Children’s Advocate? 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again thank 

you for the question. We never dismiss the concerns raised by 

the child advocate, but we also know that the people that are no 

longer working for the Social Services ministry were not 

front-line workers. We’ve hired 90 new child protection 

workers. We know that we have fewer children in care. We 

know that the needs of those children in care are often very 

complex, and our goal is to make sure that the contact 

standards, the work that we’re doing, not just through the 

ministry but through the child and family agencies, is working 

more diligently together. The work that I’ve been doing with 

First Nations agencies and with Vice-chief Kimberly Jonathan, 

our goal’s to make sure that all our children are looked at, not 

just through the eyes of the ministry but as a big part of the 

child and family committee. There’s more work that has to be 

done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about bringing forward 

issues as they come to light. I assure you that will be done. Our 

goal is to make sure the people of the province understand that 

when a child is in care, we are looking after them to our greatest 

degree. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Children’s 

Advocate recognizes in the quote that I provided that 90 were 

added, but he also noted that 100 were cut. And as he said, Mr. 

Speaker . . . And the quote, Mr. Speaker, was from CTV 

[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] news at 6 on September 

17th in 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s hardly the first time, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Children’s Advocate has raised concerns about casework 

overload. On page 21 of the most recent annual report, the 

Children’s Advocate said this: 

 

We continue to believe that part of the solution to these 

issues is to address the habitual overloading of child 

protection and family services worker caseloads, so that 

staff can better meet contact and case planning standards. 

The return on investment of giving case workers simply 

more time to spend with children and youth in care would 

be significant and could prevent many of the concerns 

referred to our office. 

 

My question to the Premier: how many times will the 

Children’s Advocate have to point out the problem before this 

government will listen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — The issue that we’re talking about, the 

protection of children, is the number one issue not only on my 

mind but on the members that are on the child and family 

committee. 

 

In the last three years, we put $53.7 million into the child and 

family agenda budgets. We’ve hired 90 new front-line workers. 

And the number of children in care has decreased. The number 

of children that are living in overcrowded foster homes has 

decreased. And the contact standards are being looked at on a 

daily basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the child advocate’s goal is to make 

sure their profile is raised, and I agree with him. The people of 

the province need to know that the children in care are being 

looked after. Our goal and the goal of everyone on the child and 

family committee and the members of my government are to 

ensure that our children are looked after. 

 



3996 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2013 

I will continue to bring forward issues to my government if 

there’s things that we can be doing. And the meetings that we 

have with the child advocate are an important part of our 

reaching goals to make sure that children are always safe. Mr. 

Speaker, to the member opposite, if there’s any issues that he 

has and thinks can work with us, I’d be more than willing to 

listen to them. The safety of our children is the most important 

thing we can be doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we can listen to the 

concerns that have been raised by the Children’s Advocate, by 

the non-partisan officer of this legislature. And the statement 

that was made by the Children’s Advocate, Mr. Speaker, said: 

 

The quality of case management and case planning has to 

improve. If that’s a resourcing issue, which I believe it is, I 

know the ministry has added 90 staff, but the ministry as a 

whole also has cut over 100 staff members. 

 

So if the government, Mr. Speaker, has questions about the 

staffing numbers, this is something that should be taken up with 

the Children’s Advocate because these are his words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a press conference several weeks ago in which 

the Premier announced changes to cabinet, he said they had not 

heard anyone express concerns about worse service as a result 

of staffing cuts in government. Well, Mr. Speaker, the sad truth 

is that vulnerable children aren’t very good at articulating such 

concerns. But the Children’s Advocate has been very clear on 

this. In his most recent annual report and again in September, 

Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate said that significant staff 

cuts have compromised management and child protection. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he admit that this 

government’s cuts to Social Services have been a mistake and 

that they are hurting vulnerable children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. And to the 

member opposite, I want to make it very clear. There was no 

cuts in the number of workers that are working with our 

children. We’ve increased funding to child and family services 

by $104 million in spite of a declining number of children in 

care. We announced an $8 million lift in December for 

front-line workers to ensure that we can keep the people there 

working for our children in care. We’ve invested money in the 

child and youth agenda, Mr. Speaker. We’ve signed agreements 

with First Nations and Métis Nations, which is a very important 

part of ensuring that our children are not only receiving the care 

but receiving the cultural identity that they want. We work with 

the Lac La Ronge First Nations delivering off-reserve services 

in the North, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The children in care are down for the first time in over a decade. 

There are 20 per cent fewer children in care, Mr. Speaker, and a 

61 per cent reduction in children living in overcrowded foster 

homes. I know that any time we have a child in care, it means 

that there’s a family that needs to be supported, and we balance 

that. And we balance that by making sure we have caring 

individuals, front-line workers that are working with our 

children at all times. 

 

The child advocate brings forward issues that are very 

important, and I continue to listen to him and I continue to care 

for the children of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Education and Employment for First Nations and Métis 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in May 2011, the 

government announced a joint task force to close gaps in 

education and employment outcomes for First Nations and 

Métis people. Nearly two years later, the government released 

the report with a number of recommendations. This initiative 

received a lot of hype and frankly it gave a lot of hope, but of 

the 25 recommendations the only policy introduced that directly 

targets the First Nations and Métis employment gap has been 

the funding of driver licences on reserves. We agree this is an 

important initiative, but it’s been the only one addressing the 

community-specific concerns from the report. 

 

My question to the minister: does he think on-reserve driver’s 

licences are enough to close the education and employment gap 

among First Nations and Métis people in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. The joint task force report was received. A number of 

the initiatives that were included in the report are things that we 

felt were appropriate to move forward with without waiting for 

a formal government response. Those included things like 

driver’s licences on-reserve and as well moving forward with 

some advanced education programs to upgrade ABE [adult 

basic education] and a number of other things. 

 

We will in the near future, Mr. Speaker, be having a response 

released but I can advise that we have over $22 million in this 

year’s budget for First Nations and Métis initiatives, $3 million 

for seed money for specific recommendations of the joint task 

force. We’re going to be moving ahead with those, Mr. 

Speaker, and the work that was done on the joint task force is a 

very good starting point. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in the spring the Premier 

suggested that the driver’s licences were one small 

recommendation, one that his government “. . . might be able to 

move on that very quickly.” Certainly quick action on small 

steps is important, but we haven’t seen any concrete plans on 

how this government will work to close this gap. 

 

School boards and communities were told to wait and see what 

outcomes of this much publicized joint task force report would 

be. Yet in this year’s Speech from the Throne, there’s no 

mention of the much touted joint task force or its 

recommendations. With so little accomplished, it’s way too 

early to be moving on. My question to the minister: how does 

he expect to make progress in addressing this crucial need when 

it appears the joint task force report has already been shelved? 

 



November 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3997 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the joint task force did 

good work, and we will look forward to how we implement the 

recommendations that came out of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re a government that’s not afraid to set targets. 

I agree with the member opposite only to the extent that we 

have an unacceptably low graduation rate from people that 

attend high school within the Aboriginal community. We’ve set 

targets to reduce the difference in graduation rates between 

Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal students by 50 per cent by the 

year 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a resolution calling for equal funding for 

on-reserves, which was defeated at the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] convention this last March. At that time, and I want to 

quote, MBC [Missinipi Broadcasting Corporation] said, 

“Broten . . . [was] noncommittal as to whether the province 

should fund on-reserve education but says the government 

should be lobbying the federal government more vigorously to 

equalize funding.” That was March 15th of 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re a government that believes not just in 

lobbying the federal government, but doing things ourselves. 

We’ve provided $3 million for seed money for the task force, 

$4.3 million for First Nations- and Métis-specific initiatives in 

school divisions, $500,000 for summer literacy camps targeted 

primarily at remote northern communities, $500,000 for the 

community . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on the matter of First 

Nations and Métis outcomes and how important this is to our 

province, that that minister would get up and play nonsensical 

political games instead of addressing the real matter is really 

disappointing. 

 

You know, economists in this province have recognized how 

important and how vital closing this education and employment 

gap is to our province. Eric Howe says we’re missing out on a 

$90 billion opportunity. And we know what it means. We know 

what it means in the life of a young child. 

 

There are, you know, there’s a few words in the growth plan 

about some follow-up as far as graduation rates, but there’s no 

commitment to funding to deliver on this front. But again we’re 

told to wait and see how this plan will work out. Yet a year later 

in the one-year progress report, the update is disappointing. 

Clearly this government has failed to deliver meaningful action 

to support the education of First Nation and Métis students. 

 

My question to the minister: when will we finally see some real 

action? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we are a government that’s 

not afraid to set targets and not afraid to set aggressive targets. 

We’ve indicated that we wish to reduce the gap between 

Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal by 50 per cent by the year 2020. 

And I’m going to tell you some of the things specifically that 

we’re going to do with that. 

 

I’ve indicated $4.3 million for First Nations- and Métis-specific 

initiatives and school divisions, $500,000 for summer literacy 

camps targeted primarily at remote northern communities, 

$500,000 for the community literacy funds which will benefit 

organizations such as North Central Family Centre, $1.6 million 

for 15 new pre-K [pre-kindergarten] kindergarten spaces 

targeted at our most vulnerable three- and four-year-olds, and 

$268 million for supports for learning which goes to support 

our most vulnerable students, which include First Nations and 

Métis. We are not afraid to set targets and not afraid to be 

accountable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Long-Term Care Conditions 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the rotunda the 

Health minister was asked what he thinks about family 

members having to spend the whole day in care facilities to 

ensure their loved ones are properly cared for. He said it’s great 

to see family members engaged. 

 

We agree, Mr. Speaker, but these aren’t cases of family 

members just wanting to spend time with their loved ones. 

These are cases of family members feeling that they absolutely 

must be there in order to ensure their loved ones receive basic 

care. We heard about this yesterday with the case of John and 

Marjorie Paul at the convalescent home. To the minister: does 

he understand the difference between families that want to be 

engaged and families that feel that there is simply no other 

option but to provide the basic care needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, absolutely, this government understands the 

importance of providing a quality life for people that are in 

long-term care facilities across our province — those seniors 

who are our residents, who are in our care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we enacted a whole number of 

initiatives earlier this year, including the first CEO [chief 

executive officer] tour of long-term care facilities in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, on top of the work that we’ve already 

been doing, Mr. Speaker — adding full-time equivalent 

positions to long-term care facilities all across this province as 

well as adding additional budget allocation to the regional 

health authorities to make those decisions, Mr. Speaker, to 

invest more heavily within long-term care as well as the 

renewal that we need to do. And we know that we need to do 

more of that, Mr. Speaker, so we absolutely know the concerns 

of families, Mr. Speaker. We want to hear directly from them, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we enacted a whole host of 

initiatives this spring which are just merely a starting point to 

improve long-term care for seniors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a big difference between 



3998 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2013 

families that want to be engaged and families that feel there is 

simply no other option but to provide that basic care 

themselves. In fact the family members that often feel they have 

to provide the basic care are spouses who are elderly 

themselves. Here’s what the family resident council minutes 

from the convalescent home say: “Family members are 

assisting their loved ones with transfers and toileting because 

they have to wait too long for assistance, putting both 

themselves and residents at risk of injury.” 

 

To the minister: will he admit that it is both unfair and unsafe 

for elderly spouses to have to provide the basic care for their 

loved ones who are in a care facility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we look to, as I said 

before, look to provide the quality of life that our residents 

should expect and do expect within long-term care facilities, 

Mr. Speaker. In this particular case at Saskatoon Convalescent 

Home, I can indicate to the members that through the work that 

we’ve done this spring, asking regions to bring forward 

business proposals for how they would access the $10 million 

Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. Speaker, they have indicated 

that they would like to see an investment into a WanderGuard 

system, a type of call bell system, Mr. Speaker, in that facility. 

And then they have indicated that staffing levels are a concern 

at this facility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will note and I will point out, Mr. Speaker, at this facility 

alone — knowing that the number of beds have not changed in 

six years from when the members opposite were the 

government to today, Mr. Speaker, 60 beds in that facility — 

the level of staffing has increased 13 per cent in those six years, 

Mr. Speaker. So I think it shows that we are working hard to 

address these issues. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s great when family members 

want to be engaged, but it is not acceptable for family members, 

especially elderly spouses, to feel there is no other option but to 

provide care themselves. It’s unfair and it’s unsafe, but it’s 

increasingly common, Mr. Speaker. The minutes from the 

convalescent home say, “Most weekends, family members are 

staying up to eight hours each day to ensure loved ones are 

receiving care needed.” 

 

That begs the question: what about those who don’t have a 

spouse or family nearby? We saw this with Sylvia Phillips a 

couple of weeks ago. Her family had to pay $1,000 a week for a 

private care aid to go into the hospital to look after her while 

she waited for a long-term care placement. To the minister: 

what option do these seniors have? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what these seniors, what 

options they do have that they didn’t have under the NDP was a 

commitment by a government that says that the senior leaders 

and the CEOs of our health regions, on an annual basis, need to 

go out and actually spend some time in the long-term care 

facilities and report back to the government — something that 

never happened under the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what those reports would have 

shown had they chosen to do them seven and eight and nine 

years ago when there were 700 less full-time workers working 

in long-term care, Mr. Speaker. There’s no wonder they didn’t 

want to do CEO tours at that time, Mr. Speaker, for what they 

would’ve shown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are embarking on a process to improve 

long-term care for all of our residents within our facilities, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve announced the Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll be flowing those dollars out in December to the 

health regions to invest in those issues that they did raise, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re also going to bring together stakeholders in 

December to look to plan what the future of long-term care 

needs to look like, Mr. Speaker, because we know that we need 

to do a better job for our residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Combatting Bullying 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I understand we’re 

going to hear something from this government on anti-bullying 

today finally. We debated in this House the wisdom of the 

government’s decision to wait until Anti-Bullying Week to 

unveil its report so it could be part of a larger PR [public 

relations] exercise. Now the government obviously agreed to 

move up the release date of the report compiled by the 

Legislative Secretary by one whole business day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are kids who are afraid to go to school today, Mr. 

Speaker, and there are kids in Saskatchewan right now being 

devastated by cyberbullying. So acknowledging the urgency of 

this situation and setting aside this afternoon’s photo op, will 

the minister please tell this Assembly what actions will be taken 

immediately as a result of the work by the Legislative Secretary 

for anti-bullying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

raises an important issue. I think bullying is a significant issue 

in our province, and we want to address it as quickly as we can. 

I can advise the House that the government will not be doing a 

formal response to the Legislative Secretary’s report but will be 

accepting the recommendations and indicating that we’re going 

to be moving ahead as quickly as we can on the 

recommendations. Some will come out virtually immediately; 

some will take a period of time to implement and develop 

protocols and that type of thing. We think it’s something that 

we want to do as quickly and appropriate and effectively as we 

can. We also want to treat this as being an ongoing process as 

best practices are developed, and learn from things as they are 

taking place. But we appreciate the point that he’s making. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps we can get 



November 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3999 

some specifics. In April the official opposition asked this 

government to ensure that students, parents, and teachers could 

easily access information on forming gay-straight alliances. 

Although an external link was put up on the ministry’s website, 

which we appreciate as a small first step, the Premier was clear 

that further action to protect gay students from devastating 

bullying would just have to wait. On April 10th, responding to 

questions about GSAs [gay-straight alliance], the Premier told 

this House, and I quote: 

 

With respect to resources that can come from this 

government or any other source related to government, 

funded by government, this is going to be part of what is 

going to be considered in terms of the work of the member 

for Fairview, the Legislative Secretary for the anti-bullying 

initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister now confirm, will the 

government take more specific action to protect gay and 

transgendered students from bullying and ensure that they have 

a safe place in our Saskatchewan schools? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

raises the issue of gay-straight alliances and that is certainly 

part of the recommendations. We are going to ensure that the 

availability will be made by website to any members anywhere 

across the province. It is a commitment that we have made and 

it’s on the website now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat disappointed though that the 

members opposite chose not to make a formal submission. They 

had every opportunity to do that. The Leader of the Opposition 

said, I hear about it when I sit down with young people; I hear 

about it when I sit down with teachers; I hear about it when I sit 

down with parents; I hear about it from school boards. He’s not 

sharing anything that he heard with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Rosemont, virtually 

identical things: I hear about it when I sit down with young 

people, I hear about it with . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, if 

they wanted to show some leadership, they were out touring 

across the province during the summer months. They went to 

eight different places. And they have made absolutely no 

submissions, no input, Mr. Speaker. I’m frankly disappointed 

with the positions that they’ve taken, or lack of positions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Altering Length of Seventy-Five Minute Debate  

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s been 

discussion between the parties and I believe, if you seek it, you 

will find unanimous consent for the following motion: 

 

That notwithstanding the length of debate specified under 

rule 25(3)(a), on session day 13, being Thursday, 

November 14th, 2013, the period of debate under the said 

rule shall be 45 minutes, with the mover of the motion 

having a maximum of 15 minutes to speak and each 

subsequent member having no more than 10 minutes in 

which to speak to the motion; and further, that the 

provisions of the rule for the 10-minute period for 

questions and comments shall remain unaffected. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to move a motion. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I will read the motion by the Government 

House Leader: 

 

That notwithstanding the length of debate specified under 

rule 25(3)(a), on session day 13, being Thursday, 

November 14th, 2013, the period of debate under the said 

rule shall be 45 minutes, with the mover of the motion 

having a maximum of 15 minutes to speak and each 

subsequent member having no more than 10 minutes in 

which to speak on the motion; and further, that the 

provisions of the rule for the 10-minute period for 

questions and comments shall remain unaffected. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Implementation of Traffic Safety Committee 

Recommendations 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 

remarks, I will be moving this particular motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 

failure to implement a three-day vehicle impoundment the 

first time a driver is caught with a .05 and over blood 

alcohol concentration, a measure that helped cut the 

number of alcohol-involved traffic deaths by half in 

Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the reason we’re having this debate here today 

is because of our absolutely abysmal impaired driving death 

rate here in Saskatchewan. I would like to tell you a little bit 

about some of that dubious record that we hold. According to 

SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] statistics, between 

2000 and 2012 alcohol was responsible for 41 per cent of the 

fatalities and 12 per cent of the crashes here in Saskatchewan. 

From SGI we heard during a presentation to the Traffic Safety 

Committee this summer that Saskatchewan has “stagnated” 

when it comes to reducing impaired driving. And compared to 

other jurisdictions, “Saskatchewan is over the top in deaths and 

injuries.” 

 

A little bit more in terms of the context here in Saskatchewan. 



4000 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2013 

Mothers Against Drunk Driving estimates that Saskatchewan 

has the highest per capita rate of alcohol-related road-crash 

deaths among the provinces. An estimated 9.76 of every 

100,000 people die because of impaired driving here in 

Saskatchewan. We can compare that to the national average, in 

Saskatchewan, of 3.17 people per 100,000, Mr. Speaker. So we 

have managed to maintain this dubious record for more than a 

decade. 

 

Another thing to take a look at, Mr. Speaker, is that impaired 

driving death rates happen to be going down across Canada and 

up here in Saskatchewan. I have a slide here from a presentation 

that MADD [Mothers Against Drunk Driving] Canada did here 

in January that shows between 2000 and 2009 our 

impairment-related crash deaths have gone up by almost 23 per 

cent, while Canada’s have gone down by 17 per cent. So we 

went up by 23 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and Canada dropped by 

17 per cent in that period. 

 

So clearly here in Saskatchewan we are doing something wrong 

and something has to change. Something absolutely must 

change. This is not the time for incrementalism. We’ve heard 

both the Chair of the Traffic Safety Committee and the minister 

say that this is a starting point, that we’ll start here with both the 

recommendations that the committee made excluding the 

minority report and then the minister’s remarks last week when 

she came forward with the changes she’s going to implement 

following the recommendations. 

 

Starting here is not good enough. As legislators, we have the 

opportunity to create policies that will save people’s lives, and 

this government is squandering that opportunity. Hence the 

reason we had put forward a minority opinion supporting a 

policy change that has worked incredibly well in two Western 

provinces — in Alberta and BC [British Columbia]. 

 

We had the opportunity during the Traffic Safety Committee 

hearings to hear from a wide variety of people who supported 

short-term vehicle impoundments in the warning range, in that 

period before legal impairment, but that you’re still recognized 

. . . that every province has recognized you’re still impaired, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some of the people include Doug Beirness from the Canadian 

Centre on Substance Abuse. He’s been involved in road safety 

research, mainly focused on impaired driving, for more than 30 

years. We heard from the CEO of MADD Canada, Andy Murie. 

MADD Canada makes it their business to know about impaired 

driving statistics and policies that work, Mr. Speaker. We heard 

from someone here in Saskatchewan, Faye Rorke from North 

Battleford, from the Driving Without Impairment program. 

She’s been with this program since 1995. She works directly 

with people who have been caught driving either in the warning 

range or in the criminal range over the .08. So with some of the 

things she, Faye, had said in her recommendations, is that the 

goal around the three-day impoundment is to help people learn 

to separate drinking from driving. 

 

So these are just a few of the people we heard from, just some 

of the background. We had heard from other presenters too who 

also supported a three-day vehicle impoundment, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. I do this to you every time. 

 

So I need to talk a little bit about what happened in British 

Columbia and Alberta. In 2010, British Columbia implemented 

a whole suite of measures to curb impaired driving, both 

accidents and fatalities, which included immediate vehicle 

impoundments for both those caught in the warning range, so 

the lower blood alcohol concentrations, as well as those over 

.08. And last year Alberta decided to follow suit with a 

three-day vehicle impoundment also for those caught on first 

offence in the warning range. So those are the things that 

Alberta and BC have done. 

 

In those first two years in British Columbia, the fatality rate 

involving alcohol dropped by 50 per cent. In Alberta fatal 

crashes where alcohol was involved dropped by 46 per cent 

between July and December 2012 compared to the five-year 

average for those same months. These are early results but I 

know, having spoken to Mr. Beirness, he had said in his 30 

years in traffic safety, he had not seen such an incredible 

turnaround as they had in BC in two years, Mr. Speaker. To 

quote Mr. Beirness from his presentation to the Traffic Safety 

Committee, he said, “The world changed in British Columbia.” 

 

[10:45] 

 

These are incredible early results. Yet this government 

stubbornly refuses to listen to those who know this issue well. 

This makes absolutely no sense. Honestly, Mr. Speaker, I have 

no idea why the government has refused to follow policy that 

has proven to work in our two neighbouring jurisdictions. 

 

I think it’s important to talk a little bit about the minister’s 

comments last week as to why the government has chosen not 

to follow the minority opinion and also why they’ve chosen to 

go the direction that they have. Last week the minister 

responsible said, “We are doing the impoundment for your new 

drivers because there’s more new drivers involved in 

accidents.” The fact of the matter is that is true, that young 

people represent a higher proportion of accidents, and we 

absolutely need to do something about this. But if we look at 

evidence presented to the Traffic Safety Committee, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to read this. This is from again . . . or it’s 

actually Dr. Beirness, who has a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy]. 

He had said this during his presentation: 

 

When we talk about drinking and driving, we often want to 

focus on youth. And it’s always tragic when a young 

person dies in any kind of crash and the involvement of 

alcohol is substantial. It’s almost 40 per cent of 16- to 

19-year-olds test positive for alcohol, but it’s that 20 to 24 

and 25 to 34 age group that seems to be the biggest 

problem that we have in terms of impaired driving deaths 

on the road.  

 

And then he goes on to say . . . He’s got a slide here, Mr. 

Speaker, that illustrates that again those in the 20 to 24 and 25 

to 34 age category are the real problem when it comes to 

impaired driving. And this government has chosen to ignore 

that group, Mr. Speaker, with a policy that could have really 

changed behaviours in that group. So I think the minister’s 

comments there were missing the mark . . . [inaudible] . . . last 

week. 

 

One of the things that the minister had talked about is that the 



November 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4001 

minority opinion at having a three-day vehicle impoundment in 

the warning range is one or two glasses of wine over supper. 

That is not correct, Mr. Speaker. I need to point to, I need to 

point to . . . Well I want to talk a little bit about what exactly 

happens at .05, Mr. Speaker. At .05 — and this is again from 

Mothers Against Drunk Driving — drivers experience reduced 

coordination, reduced ability to track moving objects, difficulty 

steering, and a reduced response rate. And MADD goes on to 

say, a 210-pound man can have four standard drinks over a 

two-hour period and not go over .05. And MADD also points 

out that a 130-pound woman can have two standard drinks over 

a two-hour period and not go over .05. They have a nice little 

chart here that points to the same evidence over a three-hour 

period. 

 

So the reality, when the minister I think says that one or two 

drinks will put you in that range where you would lose your 

vehicle for three days, is not correct. From the evidence that we 

heard this summer with the Traffic Safety Committee, that is 

absolutely not the case, Mr. Speaker. And so I think it was 

wrong for the minister to leave the public with the impression 

that the opposition and these people who spoke to the Traffic 

Safety Committee wanted people to have their cars impounded 

if they had a drink of a glass of wine over dinner. That is 

patently false, Mr. Speaker, not the case at all. 

 

Actually it’s a bit disingenuous for her to talk about one or two 

drinks and the warning range because this government already 

has policies in place where there are actions taken for people in 

the warning range. So the minister made it seem like that the 

opposition was wanting to implement something new and 

absolutely radical, but the reality is there are already sanctions 

in place for those in the warning range, albeit incredibly 

ineffective as we see by the death rates here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it was a bit disingenuous for her to intimate that we don’t 

do anything for that warning range. Again, we do, but it’s 

incredibly ineffective. And we could have implemented a very 

effective policy as evidenced by Alberta and BC, a three-day 

vehicle impoundment for first-time offenders in the warning 

range. 

 

I think the one thing that the minister talked about too is 

enforcement is key. While we agree that enforcement is critical 

and having the right complement of police officers is absolutely 

critical, but we would argue that having effective deterrents that 

you can enforce should be the goal. The police need the tools to 

be able to enforce. So yes, enforcement is key, but enforcement 

is not particularly useful if you don’t have good policies to 

enforce, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we talk about . . . So why would we concentrate on this 

warning range group, Mr. Speaker? Well why would we choose 

to concentrate on it? We’ve learned, some of the evidence 

presented to the Traffic Safety Committee, if we just give those 

people in the warning range a licence suspension, which is what 

this government will continue to do, those people . . . We saw a 

study that shows that those people who are caught in the 

warning range who receive a licence suspension are almost 

eight times more likely than the average driver to be charged 

with a Criminal Code driving-while-impaired offence within 

two years. 

So contrary to what the minister said, these are in fact risky 

drivers, and it’s important to curb their behaviour before you 

get to the .08 criminally impaired charges. As Doug Beirness 

said — one of the presenters to the Traffic Safety Committee — 

you don’t start out drinking and driving and arriving at blowing 

a .16 blood alcohol concentration without practising numerous 

times. You don’t just go out and blow .08. The reality is people 

test and test and push the limits, Mr. Speaker. And the goal with 

a three-day vehicle impoundment is to keep people from 

pushing those limits and learning that you separate drinking 

from driving, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So why does an impoundment work versus licence suspension? 

Suspensions fail to address the reality that, while suspended, we 

heard that about 70 per cent of people drive. So 70 per cent of 

people who don’t have a licence for a limited period of time do 

not heed that, and they continue to drive. So it’s very easy to 

hide a suspension. It is not easy at all to hide a vehicle 

impoundment. 

 

If you lose your car on a Friday night, or if you lose your 

husband’s car or your mother’s car, there are very real 

consequences. Or if you lose your own car, that impacts your 

ability to go to work for a short period of time. But it has 

proven to be an incredibly good deterrent, Mr. Speaker, losing 

your car. People like their cars. And when that is a very real 

risk, that hey, if I overindulge and have more than those couple 

of glasses of wine at supper, I could be in real jeopardy of 

losing my car for a few days, it keeps you in line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the bottom line is this government is ignoring a key 

opportunity, squandering a key opportunity to save people’s 

lives. This is what people in Saskatchewan expect us to do as 

legislators, put in policies and laws that do our best to ensure 

that people are safe. And this government has missed that 

opportunity. It’s an absolute shame. So that is why I would like 

to make a motion, and it is: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 

failure to implement a three-day vehicle impoundment the 

first time a driver is caught with a .05 and over blood 

alcohol concentration, a measure that helped to cut the 

number of alcohol-involved traffic deaths by half in 

Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

With that, I move my motion. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 

failure to implement a three-day vehicle impoundment the 

first time a driver is caught with a .05 and over blood 

alcohol concentration, a measure that helped to cut the 

number of alcohol-involved traffic deaths by half in 

Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

 

 



4002 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2013 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 

opportunity to speak to this motion brought forth by the 

opposition. It’s an honour and a privilege to be able to speak to 

it. 

 

The Traffic Safety Committee that I was involved with — and 

on March 5th, 2013, the Legislative Assembly appointed a 

special committee to conduct an inquiry into traffic safety in 

Saskatchewan — I, along with the members from Cumberland, 

Saskatoon Riversdale, The Battlefords, Saskatoon Meewasin, 

Regina Walsh Acres, and Prince Albert Carlton were chosen to 

listen to the citizens of Saskatchewan. Under the guidance of 

our Chair from Prince Albert Carlton, we met with several 

communities in this vast province. 

 

We also received recommendations from the public on 

improving traffic safety and reducing fatalities caused by things 

such as impaired driving, excessive speed, wildlife collisions. 

Our committee also found that the public wanted education and 

public awareness for traffic safety. The meetings were held in 

Regina, Estevan, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Pelican Narrows, 

and La Ronge. There was a total of 27 presentations, Mr. 

Speaker: 10 in Regina, two in Estevan, 10 in Saskatoon, two in 

Prince Albert, and one in Pelican Narrows, and two in La 

Ronge, I believe. 

 

Public participation and input, we found, will help give us a lot 

of recommendations. While we were in Lac La Ronge, Chief 

Tammy Cook-Searson — whom I consider a friend; we go to a 

lot of events together and chat about different issues 

surrounding Saskatchewan people — she gave us a presentation 

on her thoughts, suggesting more awareness about driving 

without a licence, specifically the implications if one is in an 

accident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was deeply moved by the presentation from 

Time To Twin when we were in Estevan. When elected 

officials listen to other people’s tragedies and face them 

head-on, it becomes very real as we share their pain. 

 

We all have lost families and friends due to traffic accidents. 

None of us are immune, as all of us MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and our families are on the road driving, 

driving on the highways, driving on municipal roads. We’re 

constantly travelling across Saskatchewan so we are aware of 

the road, the travel, the weather conditions. I myself actually 

know where that pair of deer like to graze on the side of the 

highway or that particular moose was sighted. So it’s an 

awareness of our surroundings, Mr. Speaker, as we do drive. 

 

But it’s also the business of responsibility. Driving, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe, is a privilege not a right, and we have to 

continue to remind the citizens of Saskatchewan and our 

younger people about the privilege of driving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Traffic Safety Committee also had many 

written submissions. The public was truly interested in giving 

information and gave the Traffic Safety Committee many 

recommendations. Some of the presenters were very emotional 

during their presentations, and we felt empathetic, as we’ve all 

experienced frustration and sorrow when we see accidents or 

fatalities. Whether it was an accident victim themselves or 

Mothers Against Drunk Driving, Mr. Speaker, our committee 

listened as a whole. We listened together and all drew on past 

experiences to assist us in our evaluations. 

 

The documents tabled were varied, from village and RM [rural 

municipality] councils to Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation and 

youth councils, Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police. 

We had many, many people come and give us 

recommendations. Saskatchewan citizens volunteered their 

information and recommendations to help reduce fatalities. 

 

[11:00] 

 

All were given serious consideration by our committee as a 

whole. Some recommendations were debated at great lengths. 

Some were given even greater focus and passion, but the 

recommendations provide a starting point to move towards a 

collaborative approach to reduce traffic fatalities. Our 

committee as a whole agreed we ultimately want, as a result of 

this special traffic committee, a reduction of traffic accidents in 

the province of Saskatchewan. We as a whole made 

recommendations based on a desire to change behaviours that 

have contributed to accidents of our friends, neighbours, and 

our families in Saskatchewan. 

 

Stakeholders wanted more enforcement. We recognized the 

review was long overdue. And as we move to national accepted 

standards and generally accepted norms, our committee was 

moving forward. And I beg to differ from the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. Our government is listening, and this is a 

policy change. Our government is bringing forward a number of 

drinking and driving countermeasures which will give 

Saskatchewan one of the toughest packages of impaired driving 

legislation in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The legislation focuses on inexperienced drivers, repeat 

offenders, and drivers with high blood alcohol levels — drivers 

who are overly represented in fatal crashes involving alcohol. 

Mr. Speaker, although the vehicles of experienced drivers with 

a low blood alcohol content won’t be impounded on a first 

offence, there are increased penalties for these drivers, 

including a three-day immediate roadside licence suspension 

which is an increase from the current 24-hour suspension. Mr. 

Speaker, they’ll also be required to complete a driving while 

impaired course within 90 days, which isn’t a requirement 

under the current legislation. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, earlier this year, government 

strengthened section 280 of The Traffic Safety Act so that law 

enforcement can impound a vehicle if they determine a driver is 

impaired, including drivers with a blood alcohol level of .04 

and there is no other sober driver to move the vehicle. This 

gives the police the ability to impound a vehicle when it is in 

the best interest of public safety to do so. 

 

Again I beg to differ with the member across the way. Mr. 

Speaker, the reduction in traffic deaths due to impaired driving 

in BC and Alberta cannot be attributed solely to vehicle 

impoundments, as those provinces implemented a suite of 

legislative changes increasing enforcement, which our 

government is also looking at. And as announced last week, 

government is taking immediate action on more than half of the 

recommendations from the Special Committee on Traffic Safety 

as part of a comprehensive approach to addressing fatalities on 



November 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4003 

our roads. 

 

These changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, include numerous 

measures that strengthen Saskatchewan’s impaired driving 

legislation, implementing zero drug and alcohol tolerance for 

drivers under the 19 years of age and for all drivers in the 

graduated driver’s licensing program and motorcycle GDL 

[graduated driver’s licensing] program. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

currently there is a zero alcohol tolerance for drivers in the 

graduated driver’s licensing program only. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see my time is going to close pretty 

soon. But I do believe our Traffic Safety Committee 

recommended a lot of recommendations from the public. As 

you’ve heard, we went across the province to see a lot of 

different people, a lot of different groups, whether it be Mothers 

Against Drunk Driving or the Association of the Chiefs of 

Police. I believe that this Traffic Safety Committee listened to 

the people. So therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be 

supporting their motion. 

 

But I am very proud to say that I have been on the Traffic 

Safety Committee, and I’m looking forward to the questions 

across the way to help supplement what our government and 

our committee was doing. Thank you very much for listening to 

me. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m really pleased to be able to rise in the legislature today to 

enter into this debate. I think this is a very serious matter that’s 

been . . . The subject of the motion is a very, very serious 

matter. And certainly traffic deaths related to alcohol use are 

nothing short of tragedies in this day and age and certainly have 

impacted a number of lives, as the member from Saskatchewan 

River indicated in her comments. It’s impacted . . . We have all 

been touched by it. And so it’s a very serious matter for debate. 

And I’m glad to see the use of this time in legislature being put 

to a debate such as this, and I’d like to see more of these types 

of debates, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When I think about growing up in the 1970s when I was a 

teenager and the type of shenanigans that me and my age group 

got up to, I often wonder how my mother could sleep at all. And 

there were six kids in our family. We lived on a farm that was 

10 miles south of town, so obviously vehicles were important to 

us as teenagers. And getting your licence was probably the 

single most important thing in your teenage life. It gave you the 

freedom, well, as a farm kid, to be able to go to town and visit 

with our friends and be social. 

 

And certainly I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that alcohol 

was a large part of my teenage years growing up. And really I 

shudder to think now of some of the situations that I put myself 

in when I was a teenager. And one particular incident I’ll never 

forget, I was at a party at a farm north of Gravelbourg. And it 

was getting late, and for some reason, the person I had came 

with had left. I needed a ride, and I got into a car with a young 

man from my hometown who was, I knew, very, very drunk. 

And when we got into the car, I sat in the back seat, and he 

drove 120 miles an hour all the way back to my hometown. And 

I sat in the back corner, and all I did . . . I was raised Catholic, 

so the Hail Marys came very quick and furious that night, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I consider myself very lucky in that night. 

 

But certainly growing up, every year there were stories at each 

grad party. We had these notorious grad parties. Alcohol was a 

huge factor and someone . . . invariably there was a story of a 

fatal accident where someone would get killed. And it wasn’t 

just the grad parties. It was so much part of our culture. 

 

And now I just want to fast-forward a little bit to being a parent 

now and having two teenage boys — well my eldest son is 21 

now — and I have to say I think there is a change in culture. 

And maybe it’s a city/country thing, because growing up in the 

country, that’s what we did. But my sons are city boys, and they 

are very, very aware of the sanctions of driving and, not only 

that, of the dangers of drinking and driving. I think there has 

been a lot of gains over the years in terms of awareness and 

certainly, you know, the idea of a designated driver. I didn’t 

even know what that was in my teen years, but that’s something 

that my son tells me that is very important, and so I have to trust 

him. And I do worry though as a parent because I know what 

can happen when teenagers, and even young adults or even 

older adults, get involved in driving and then getting behind the 

wheel of a car. 

 

So one of the things I remember from my teen years, and it’s 

something that my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale talks 

about, is the idea of practice makes perfect. When you start 

embarking upon drinking and then drinking and driving, it is 

something I think that a lot of teenagers experiment with. And 

it’s that reason I think that this motion is so important, because 

it speaks to that time when young people or new drivers or new 

drinkers are experimenting and seeing where their limits are. 

And if there are serious sanctions that are imposed — and that’s 

the whole essence of this motion is that if there are serious 

sanctions that are imposed upon those drivers — and they are 

aware of them, they may think twice about doing what they are 

thinking about doing. 

 

So just moving forward a little bit then, I do want to take some 

time to acknowledge the work of the committee. I think this 

was very important work. And I understand that the committee 

worked well together and that there were some serious 

discussions and good presentations by members of the public, 

and that the travels of the committee really helped them reach 

out to a lot of people, even though we understand some people 

still are coming forward that hadn’t heard about it. But in 

general I think the information that was provided was helpful. 

 

Now we know, based on the comments from my colleague from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, that the numbers are still alarming. Even 

though my son’s generation appears to know a little bit more 

about drinking and driving and designated drivers, we see that 

Saskatchewan still has the worst record. And I think that’s the 

essence of this motion as well — why do we want to be the 

worst in Canada, Mr. Speaker? And these kinds of motions, or 

these kinds of suggestions, I’m not sure why the government is 

so opposed to them. Because if it saves one life, isn’t that 

enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Isn’t it important, even if we 

saved one life, to give this a whirl? 

 

And I know the member from Saskatchewan Rivers suggested 



4004 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2013 

. . . she dismissed the motion by saying, well there’s no 

conclusive evidence that this particular initiative in other 

provinces has saved lives because they introduce other 

initiatives. Why not try it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What if it 

does? What if we actually saved lives by imposing sanctions on 

young or drinking drivers that would cause them to think twice? 

To me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, saving one life is the most 

important thing. And if we saved many lives . . . And I think 

some of the information that was presented by the Mothers 

Against Drunk Driving demonstrate the impact of these kinds of 

sanctions. 

 

So it just seems to me to be a real shame that this government 

would just dismiss it outright without even trying it and seeing 

how it works. What’s wrong with trying it for a year? If the 

numbers aren’t different, well then it’s nothing ventured, 

nothing gained. So if they . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There 

are lots of numbers. The member opposite suggests there are no 

numbers. He’s refuting the evidence that Mothers Against 

Drunk Driving have presented to the committee. 

 

So the speaker doesn’t even seem to want to acknowledge . . . 

sorry, not the Speaker, the member opposite who is shouting 

from across the way obviously doesn’t believe in Mothers 

Against Drunk Driving and the numbers that they presented to 

the committee. And it’s shameful, Mr. Speaker, that that 

member isn’t taking this more seriously. Because even if we 

save one life, that that, I think, is worth trying, and that this 

government should have the courage to implement these types 

of sanctions. 

 

Another member’s suggesting that I’m making stuff up, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t think that’s acceptable commentary in this 

legislature, particularly when the evidence has been presented 

by reputable groups such as a Mothers Against Drunk Driving. 

And I think that’s something that should be addressed, Mr. 

Speaker, those kinds of comments. 

 

Right now we know the time is ripe. This committee has met. 

This government is making changes to the legislation. This type 

of sanction is one that has worked in Alberta. It’s worked in 

BC. It may not be 100 per cent conclusive in terms of cutting 

the numbers in half, but what if it cuts the numbers by 10 per 

cent? The government seems to think that’s not worth it, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think that’s unacceptable. 

 

This is something that should be taken seriously. And we know 

that we’re the worst in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and that drastic 

measures may be appropriate — if this is even considered 

drastic. We could look at zero tolerance, Mr. Speaker. Mothers 

Against Drunk Driving are advocating that. And the committee, 

although they heard that, they didn’t put that forward. The 

minority comments could have gone that far and maybe should 

have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the reasonable approach, I 

think, that the minority report addresses, is using this type of 

sanction to save lives. 

 

And it could be my son’s life. It could be my grandchildren’s 

life when they’re born — unborn yet. It could be my parents as 

they’re driving down the highway to get their groceries in town. 

 

So this is something I think that provided a wonderful 

opportunity. I think the work of the committee was excellent 

and that this type of sanction is one that’s been tried. It appears 

to have had good results. We are the worst in Canada. And my 

colleague from Riversdale pointed it out very amply in the 

statistics that she provided in her comments. 

 

We have the member from Saskatchewan Rivers that gave us a 

description of what the committee did. She dismissed the 

motion. In fact she only acknowledged it once, saying that they 

aren’t doing it. And then she went on to argue that because the 

other legislatures had introduced other measures, that somehow 

this type of measure was irrelevant. I think that’s irresponsible, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that’s something that the 

committee seriously overlooked and would argue strongly that 

there’s still time. There’s still a whole legislative session ahead 

of us where this Assembly and this government could take this 

seriously and most importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, could 

actually save some lives. 

 

And I think that it’s worth trying. If it doesn’t work and you 

have a bunch of people that are losing their car for three days 

and the numbers don’t change, well maybe then it would be 

worth taking another look. But to dismiss it out of hand and to 

suggest these types of sanctions and measures are ones that are 

irrelevant or not conclusive, especially with the way our record 

and our statistics are in Saskatchewan, I think is shameful and 

disappointing, and I think this government is capable of much, 

much better. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am definitely supporting this motion 

and look forward to the vote on it. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to start this off, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, by quoting what the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale said when she was on her feet that 

between 2000 and 2009 we have had an abysmal record for 

impaired driving. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, between 2000 and 

2007 they were the government. They refused to change 

anything when they were government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The member from Riversdale says that that is not correct. Well 

I’ll tell the member something, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She 

forgets that I was a patrol officer through those years, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I was also an intoxilyzer operator. I was a 

member of the Prince Albert Police Association on the 

executive as well as on the executive of the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Police Officers. So let’s give a little history lesson 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In the years when I was on patrol as a member of Prince Albert 

Police Service we asked numerous times to have the laws 

changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We asked for the impaired 

driving laws to change because we as officers wanted to see the 

roadways safer in this province. You know what the members 

opposite did when they were in government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? After a person was charged for being over .08, they 

passed a law that allowed for a temporary licence so a person 

who’s been charged by the police could drive for seven days 

still, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a charged person. It was ludicrous. 



November 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4005 

We in the law enforcement community thought that was just 

plain ludicrous, poor policy. 

 

So you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We said to the then 

government, you know what we need? We need more police 

officers on our streets to help to enforce laws. So over two 

consecutive elections, two times the then leader of the NDP, the 

premier at the time, promised the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Police Officers, of which I was a member of the board of 

directors, that he would in fact — and the first time promised 

200 more police officers. We thought, great. Let’s see the 

promise kept. He did not do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So then he said to us again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the next 

election, we’re going to promise the same 200 police officers, 

the same thing. He did not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, keep that 

promise. And I know this because I was a member of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers’ board of directors 

who compiled a list of vacancies that were managed at the time 

only because they were short because the NDP failed to provide 

that commitment of 200 more police officers fully. 

 

So the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, and I acknowledge 

her good work on the committee as my Deputy Chair, 

acknowledged today that more enforcement is required. Well 

during their time in government, we asked for that many times. 

We asked for law changes to be tougher on impaired driving. 

They refused to listen. 

 

So now I want to talk about what’s happening now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We heard from presenters during the work on the 

committee that there are things different provinces do. The 

member opposite’s motion talks about what’s happening in 

Alberta and BC. But she also fails to recognize that it’s part of a 

major comprehensive legislative change against road racing, 

stunting, speeding laws changed. More enforcement came into 

play, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well because they added more 

officers. 

 

Had we had more officers during my tenure on patrol, I could 

have said we could attack drinking and driving better. We could 

have. During their tenure in government as well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we started to see selective traffic enforcement 

programs augmented, augmenting the actual enforcement 

efforts across this province. But you know what, now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, since we’ve formed government and under the 

tenure of our Minister Responsible for SGI, we saw the STEP 

[selective traffic enforcement program] programs increased to 

allow for more augmentation of actual traffic enforcement, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So we had to do that to manage what was left 

by the NDP at the time. So we’re seeing changes happening. 

 

So you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The work of the 

committee, insomuch as that we had this one particular section 

that we didn’t agree on, the rest of the report and 

recommendations are being addressed by this government. And 

I want to just look at the headline in the news release from 

November 7th, 2013: “Government taking immediate action on 

traffic safety initiatives.” That tells you something, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That tells you that this minister, this government, is 

taking our recommendations to heart. They aren’t going to sit 

back like they did from 1995 when the NDP were in 

government, when the last comprehensive all-party traffic 

safety committee sat, and sat on recommendations for years, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I know that because, as a police officer, I saw the change 

from .06 warning range to .04 during my tenure years after the 

recommendation came through. So that’s not immediate action. 

I wish we would have seen that when I was on patrol. We didn’t 

see that. So I want to thank the minister of SGI for taking this 

step forward to look at the recommendations. Cabinet decided. 

The government’s moving forward on recommendations 

immediately. 

 

Now on the impaired driving issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

looked at the graduated driver’s licensing program. We heard 

from stakeholders that, to change behaviour in the future, you 

have to change behaviour now. We augmented the old program 

with a new recommendation. We are going to see the graduated 

driver’s licence program, the new drivers, who can’t have . . . 

It’s a zero tolerance level up to the age of 19 from seventeen 

and a half which was the benchmark at the time. That will 

impact future behaviour for the category groups. We’re seeing, 

we heard the member from Riversdale, the 20-, 24- to 

35-year-old age, if we don’t do something now, the young 

people to change their behaviour, we will not see the behaviour 

change when they become that targeted age. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one more thing that we have to do 

and the government will do is a very extensive public 

awareness campaign. Now that’s critical, because if you don’t 

inform the public of the new changes, how will they actually 

make conscious decisions not to drink and drive? So we’re 

going to make those efforts to go forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that’s critical. 

 

Now I remember on patrol issuing numerous 24-hour licence 

suspensions And I’ll tell you what, the people I stopped were 

predominately males. And when I had them in the back of my 

patrol car, issuing them the paperwork, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

numerous times, they would say, oh my God, what’s going to 

happen when I get home? When I go home and my wife knows 

that I haven’t got a licence, I don’t come home with the car that 

night, what’s she going to say? Well one thing we saw as police 

officers also was a 24-hour suspension didn’t have a major 

impact on those drivers because the next day they could go and 

just tell their wives sometimes, I believe, I got a drive home 

from my buddies. So the car is still sitting on the side of the 

road. They go pick it up the next day and they were able to 

drive it home. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the committee looked at various 

recommendations from stakeholders. What I can say is that we 

now fall into what would be the average across Canada: a 

licence suspension of three days for the first offence, but we 

made the subsequent offenses much, much more tougher on the 

actual repeat offenders, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The best practice model recommended by the Canadian Council 

of Motor Transport Administrators asked for a sweep, sweeping 

kind of change to administrative sanctions for warning range 

and suspended drivers. We’ve asked now to go to three days, 

72-hours licence suspension, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We believe 

that we’ve also gone further than other jurisdictions. And other 

parts of the law changes, which are going to come in the future. 



4006 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2013 

The committee also listened to Mr. Doug Beirness that the 

member for Riversdale quoted. And Mr. Beirness in his 

PowerPoint presentation very clearly identified that higher 

enforcement, more visibility of police officers was the purpose 

of deterrents. It creates a real actual probability of detection. It 

wasn’t the law that was critical, it was more officers in the 

street. We as a committee looked at that, and we looked at these 

many, many times and took these into consideration, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So moving forward, we took the advice of all the different 

presenters. And I think, Mr. Speaker, this suite of sanctions, of 

change, will address the needs in this province. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . period for debate has 

expired. Questions. I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 

strengthening sanctions for drinking and driving for new 

drivers, experienced drivers, and repeat offenders. This includes 

a 60-day immediate roadside licence suspension for new 

drivers, which is double the current 30-day suspension; and a 

three-day immediate roadside licence suspension for 

experienced drivers, which is an increase from the current 

24-hour suspension. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: rather than working 

with the government to ensure more progress is made, why are 

you focusing on the point which isn’t universally accepted 

across Canada? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 

the highest impaired driving death rate of all the provinces here 

in Canada. We have a key opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to look at 

jurisdictions that have had incredible success: Alberta and 

British Columbia who have, we heard from presenters who 

have said that the three-day vehicle impoundment in the 

warning range has been a big part of why they’ve been able to 

reduce death rates by 50 per cent. It is absolutely unacceptable 

that this government would not even consider that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I listened 

with interest to the debate here, and I want to draw some 

comments from the member from Saskatchewan Rivers when 

she said that this is indeed a serious matter. And we 

acknowledge that Saskatchewan has the worst record when it 

comes to drinking and driving. And she talked about listening to 

the people, and she really seemed to emphasize that this 

committee listened to the people. And I sat in on that, and they 

seemed to be doing that. 

 

So I want to ask her, I want to ask her, who specifically, what 

person said the sanctions of impounding vehicles would not 

work? What person said that? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I’m at a 

loss for words. Your record was dismal, and how many police 

officers did you promise and not keep the promise? 

 

Our government is bringing forward a number of drinking and 

driving measures which will give Saskatchewan one of the 

toughest packages of impaired driving legislation in Canada. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, both 

sides of the House came together to work on the Special 

Committee on Traffic Safety, which is an example of bipartisan 

co-operation. This committee met with many stakeholders and 

looked at various other jurisdictions to devise its 

recommendations, many of which that this government has 

already put into action, included numerous measures that 

strengthen Saskatchewan impaired driving legislation. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: will you commit 

that your caucus will work with this government to ensure that 

these measures are passed unanimously? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we worked incredibly 

well as a committee. And the reason there is a . . . And we 

supported with great consensus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on all the 

recommendations with the exception of one, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. One key recommendation that the evidence was clear 

— a three-day, a short-term vehicle impoundment save lives. 

This government refuses, dismisses out of hand that that does 

not work. 

 

We have two provinces where it clearly works, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Why would we not take a policy that works if it’s 

going to save lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

heard a lot of hot air over there from the member from P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Carlton, and he was going on about the past. 

What I want to know is, is he concerned about the future? Is he 

concerned about people’s lives? And why is it he’s not willing 

to support a motion to help save lives when Saskatchewan has 

the worst record right now for impaired driving deaths? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The audacity 

of the member opposite to ask me that question while I’m a 

serving police officer to the worst record in this province’s 

history, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I still am a police officer, 

very proud to support the brothers and sisters who work every 



November 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4007 

day and every night trying to make our roadways safer, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

This committee, in whole, supported these recommendations to 

strengthen the laws that the members opposite didn’t do 

anything for for years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is a spot; this 

is a starting point for us. This will make our traffic, roadways, 

our roadways much safer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In this totality 

of everything, the members opposite just don’t get it again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, in 1996 the then NDP 

government aimed to make Saskatchewan the toughest 

jurisdiction in Canada for impaired driving by implementing 

penalties for drivers at the lowest blood alcohol contents. We 

are still the only province with sanctions at .04, with other 

jurisdictions only going as low as .05.  

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: why is your party 

advocating to go back on their decision and move the 

Saskatchewan blood alcohol contents sanctions from .04 to .05, 

thereby putting more Saskatchewan drivers at risk? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re 

advocating them . . . We were advocating putting in a policy 

that works, that at .05 you would have your vehicle impounded 

upon a first offence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is not softening 

any regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is strengthening 

them. Putting in a three-day vehicle impoundment at .05 is not 

softening recommendations, and I cannot even believe the 

member from Eastview would suggest that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government does not have a policy on 

a three-day vehicle impoundment on a first offence, so how 

could that be possibly softening recommendations, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing an example this 

morning again of a government that ignores the evidence. The 

evidence shows that Saskatchewan has the worst record in 

Canada for deaths from impaired driving. And we know in 

British Columbia and Alberta, Manitoba, other places, that they 

are working and using a method which reduces those deaths.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why — I’m asking the member from P.A. 

Carlton — why do you not listen to the evidence that comes 

from other jurisdictions in Canada to provide something that 

will save lives of Saskatchewan people? Mr. Speaker, we’re 

talking about 2013 and as we go forward. And, Mr. Speaker, 

why is this member being so dismissive of the evidence that’s 

available right across Canada? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Dismissive? Really? Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers asked for years and 

years for changes to the policy that that government had at the 

time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They did nothing to help out the law 

enforcement officers with more members on the street. They 

did nothing to augment the law to make it more tougher on 

drinking and driving. 

 

This government has listened to the people of this province and 

the recommendations provided. This government or this 

minister is making changes, and the officials of SGI equally are 

responsible for that. They want to see changes. They want to 

make sure that our daughters and sons are safe, our parents are 

safe, every day on the roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from the 

Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this year 

our government strengthened section 280 of The Traffic Safety 

Act so that law enforcement can impound a vehicle if they 

determine the driver is impaired, including drivers with a blood 

alcohol level of .04 and there is no other sober driver to move 

the vehicle. This gives police the ability to impound a vehicle 

when it is in the interest of public safety to do so. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: do you agree that 

the strengthening of section 280 of The Traffic Safety Act by our 

government was a good decision? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What is a 

good decision is implementing policies that have been shown to 

work in other jurisdictions, like a vehicle impoundment, a 

short-term vehicle impoundment for those who have a blood 

alcohol concentration of .05 or over. That is a good policy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a really 

dismissive attitude from the members opposite who’ve been 

participating in this debate. And I’ve asked the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers once, and I’ll ask her again, who was 

against impounding vehicles to cause them to reject this 

common sense approach that is working both in British 

Columbia and Alberta? We know it works, but this government 

will not tell us who said no to that really good recommendation. 

Who said no, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Well thank you for that question . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Pursuant to an order made this day, 

time for this debate has expired. 



4008 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2013 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Motion No. 1 — Plans for New Schools 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed an honour and my pleasure to rise and speak to this 

motion. Mr. Speaker, this motion calls for this Assembly to 

support our government’s plan to build nine new joint-use 

schools to help meet the challenges of our growing province. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, nine new joint schools for our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is growing. That’s not a secret, Mr. 

Speaker. Every corner of our country and friends and 

neighbours are celebrating Saskatchewan’s successes and are 

applauding us at every chance they get, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, they said that this couldn’t be done. We’ve heard the 

terms, Mr. Speaker, 100,000 more people — farcical, not 

possible, wishful thinking, flies in the face of reality, doomed to 

fail, a shaky business for an economic plan, reality says that that 

plan will fail, Mr. Speaker. Well we all know the facts. 

Saskatchewan surpassed 1.1 million people and, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re well on our way to 1.2 million people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth, and especially growth like ours, is terribly 

exciting. First place now, Mr. Speaker, is the norm, not 

something that we strive for, Mr. Speaker. It’s becoming the 

norm in our province and we’re succeeding at that. Mr. 

Speaker, to quote our Premier, and I quote: 

 

It’s the kind of growth we haven’t seen since the earliest 

days of our province but it’s about more than the numbers 

in the statistics, Mr. Speaker. What’s more important is 

how growth is allowing Saskatchewan people to enjoy a 

better quality of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this kind of growth record, this kind of growth 

indeed, has challenges. Mr. Speaker, we have developed a plan 

to meet those challenges and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve shared that 

plan. The plan is not a secret. Mr. Speaker, we’ve also set some 

goals and we’ve articulated those goals, Mr. Speaker. They too 

are not secrets. We have goals for education. We want to lead 

the nation in graduation rates. We want to increase the number 

of grade 3 students reading at grade level, and we want to close 

the gap in achievement between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 

students. 

 

Now in order to do that, Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that we 

need to invest, and we will invest in both education operating 

and in education infrastructure. Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

articulated a plan. We’ve set some goals. We’ve articulated 

those publicly and, Mr. Speaker, we will be accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my years in education, I’ve seen the impact of 

rising student enrolments. I’ve seen the impact of declining 

student enrolments, Mr. Speaker. And again now we’re seeing 

the impact of rising enrolments. Mr. Speaker, let’s talk a little 

bit about that. 

 

From 2003 to 2007, Saskatchewan saw a decline in student 

enrolment of, well it was 9.2 per cent, Mr. Speaker, a little bit 

more than 16,300 students, an average of over 3,000 students a 

year. Mr. Speaker, that has a tremendous impact on schools, on 

school divisions, and on students, and those impacts are really 

quite dramatic. 

 

For example at the elementary level, Mr. Speaker, it may have 

meant split grades, split grades all the way through from 

kindergarten to grade 8. And in some cases, Mr. Speaker, 

multiple split grades, three and four grades split, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s just not acceptable. At the upper levels, Mr. Speaker, it 

impacted whether or not a school or school division might even 

be able to field a volleyball team, have a choir or a band, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about student success. We all know that 

success is all about student engagement. How do you engage 

students in those kinds of activities when you don’t have 

enough of them to offer that kind of program, Mr. Speaker? So 

we know the impacts of declining enrolment. 

 

At the high school level, significant student decline can affect 

choices a high school student can make in terms of their 

timetable, because if you don’t have enough students for a 

section, obviously the school can’t offer that program. And 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, that limits or certainly has a great 

impact on student engagement and therefore their success, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Since forming government in 2007, Mr. Speaker, our student 

population has risen by almost 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And so 

now obviously we have the opposite dynamic. We have the 

opposite dynamic in some particular areas of the province. And 

I’d like to deal with a little bit of those or the impact in some of 

those provinces and where we’ve made some investment. And 

I’m speaking in particular of Regina, Saskatoon, Martensville, 

and Warman. 

 

In terms of capital investment in those high-growth areas, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll begin with Saskatoon and area capital. In that area 

alone, Mr. Speaker, this government has invested $146,019,000, 

Mr. Speaker. That includes 10 major capital projects including: 

Willowgrove, Nutana Collegiate, Holy Family, Georges Vanier, 

Holy Cross, St. Matthew, E.D. Feehan, St. Mary’s, Martensville 

High School, Warman middle years, includes 21 relocatable 

classrooms, 180 renovation projects, 14 early years projects, 

and now, Mr. Speaker, six new joint-use P3 [public–private 

partnership] schools, Mr. Speaker. We said we needed to invest. 

We will invest, Mr. Speaker. There’s demonstration of that 

commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the Regina area our capital investment totals $131,025,000, 

Mr. Speaker, including 10 major capital projects: École 

Monseigneur de Laval, Balcarres, Lumsden Elementary, 

Emerald Ridge, Campbell, Arcola, Douglas Park, Seven Stones, 

and École St. Andrew, 11 relocatable classrooms, Mr. Speaker, 

121 renovation projects, seven early years projects, and now, 

Mr. Speaker, three new joint-use schools. 

 

And so now, Mr. Speaker, we are asking this Assembly to 

support our plan to build nine new P3 schools, Mr. Speaker, 

using a bundling approach. Mr. Speaker, we need to play 

catch-up. Under the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, 176 

schools were closed, enrolment declined, and we inherited a 



November 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4009 

$1.2 billion infrastructure deficit. Mr. Speaker, over 70 per cent 

of our schools are 40 years old. Mr. Speaker, support for this 

motion is support for all of our children. It’s a most significant 

investment for our kindergarten to grade 8 students, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all this chatter coming from the other 

side about communities not having access, quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, well I’d call that farcical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, schools will remain the centre of the community. 

Schools will meet the education purposes and it will meet 

community purposes. Our student-first plan, Mr. Speaker, will 

see to that. You see under this model, this model builds schools 

quicker. The model will produce cost savings. And this model, 

Mr. Speaker, will meet the needs of students and communities 

as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone it seems is excited about this initiative. 

Everyone that is, Mr. Speaker, except the opposition. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, their leader has stood in this House on 54 

occasions calling for a new school in Hampton Village. Mr. 

Speaker, he didn’t show up for the announcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they say it will cost more in the long run. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, here are the facts. Ontario, Quebec, Alberta, 

British Columbia, New Brunswick all have P3 programs, Mr. 

Speaker. There are over 204 projects built or under way in 

Canada since the early 1990s. From 2009 to 2011, 39 P3 deals 

worth $21.7 billion were finalized in Canada. There are 

municipal P3 projects in Calgary, Winnipeg, Saskatoon, 

Regina, that are being planned or are under way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal P3 Canada fund oversees $1.2 billion 

and will contribute up to 25 per cent of a project. The 

Conference Board of Canada analyzed 19 P3 projects and found 

that Canadian P3s have so far delivered savings ranging from a 

few million dollars to $750 million when compared to 

traditional procurement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we know, the city of Saskatoon’s new Civic 

Operations Centre is a P3 and the city of Regina’s new waste 

water treatment facility will be a P3, approved through a 

referendum as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on, but I know that the constraints of 

the Assembly today prevent me from doing that. There is so 

much more to say and I’d like to have the opportunity to do 

that, Mr. Speaker, but at this point in time I need to move the 

motion, and it reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s plan to 

build nine new schools in order to help meet the challenges 

of a growing province. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Douglas Park: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s plan to 

build nine new schools in order to help meet the challenges 

of a growing province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move adjournment 

of the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:46.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3993 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3993 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3993 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3993 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3993 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Holodomor 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3994 

 Regina Thunder Wins Canadian Championship 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3994 

 Peacock Tornadoes Win High School Championship 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3994 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Child Protection System 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3994 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3995 

 Education and Employment for First Nations and Métis 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3996 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3996 

 Long-Term Care Conditions 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3997 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3997 

 Combatting Bullying 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3998 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3998 

MOTIONS 

 Altering Length of Seventy-Five Minute Debate  

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3999 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Implementation of Traffic Safety Committee Recommendations 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3999, 4006 

  Wilson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4002, 4006 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4003, 4006 

  Hickie ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4004, 4006 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4006 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4006 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4006 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4007 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4007 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4007 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Plans for New Schools 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4008 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4009 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


