




















































Hansard: March 18, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 34B  MONDAY, MARCH 18, 2013, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2759 

 March 18, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I’ll call the 

Assembly to order and invite the Clerk to call the next item. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 71 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 

boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

on commenting on Bill 74, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

There’s quite a bit of, I guess, changes that the government’s 

introducing. But one area, and I mean, we didn’t go on, but I 

think before a person even gets into the changes, I want to talk 

about some of the challenges that people are being faced with 

alcohol. And we see some of the changes that the government’s 

introducing and with those changes . . . And if you’re making 

alcohol more easily accessible to our young people or to, I 

guess, community members, then you may have some of those 

challenges. And I know they talk about a review. Now if there 

was a review, they might have talked with industry. I don’t 

know who all they discussed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Who was a 

part of that committee? Was it just business, was there MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly]? Was it individuals from 

the ministry? 

 

But having said that, they’ve come up with some changes that 

they’re going to propose, and I believe that there’s about 

70-some changes in regulations that this government is 

introducing and I know the minister announced. 

 

Now I just want to talk a little bit about, I guess, the concern 

from individuals who would face challenges when it comes to 

alcohol. And we talk about our young people. And we’re going 

to have time to discuss this one because I think this warrants 

some serious conversation, some time, and put some time into 

some of the challenges that I think people are facing, whether 

it’s our young people with addictions, whether community 

members are struggling with addiction when you make alcohol 

more easily accessible to individuals. 

 

Now having said that, I know there was a group and I believe it 

was the Saskatchewan Prevention Institute in the province is the 

name. They came here and did a presentation. And we had a 

meeting with them downstairs in the MLA’s dining area, and I 

remember the minister was there from Social Services, the 

minister. There was a number of MLAs who joined the youth 

and talked to them and tried to see some of the videos and the 

pictures they showed. And they did a presentation about fetal 

alcohol syndrome. They talked about youth and binge drinking 

and the damage that it’s doing. And they showed some pictures 

that were pretty, pretty scary, and I think some hard facts that 

they go around and share at schools, and they show them what 

can happen when you’re binge drinking or individuals decide to 

try drinking. And some of them, whatever. 

 

If you look at the videos and I guess some of the pictures and 

the information and just the conversations we had that day with 

them, you know, you reach out to young people. And it’s good 

to see, not only from a staff point that work for the institute, 

Saskatchewan Prevention Institute, and what they’re trying to 

teach young people about alcohol and, I guess, the damage that 

it can do. 

 

There’s social drinking. No one’s opposed to that. Some people 

can social drink and no big deal. They don’t end up with an 

addiction. It doesn’t cause them any grief in their life, and they 

. . . Very well, and that’s great. 

 

Unfortunately, I know from my own family the challenges 

alcohol has done and the damage it has done. It is not . . . It’s 

tough sometimes to deal with because you see the damage it 

does to people that you love, you respect, and you see the 

damage that it does. Truly, it takes a toll on families and 

communities. And there are some very special people out there. 

They are. You don’t give them alcohol and you couldn’t ask, 

and I mean, for better individuals. But sometimes you add 

alcohol and the two just don’t go together for some people. It’s 

almost like there’s an allergic reaction to it. And that’s the sad 

reality of it and, I mean, the damage. 

 

We talk about incarceration and how many people, and I’m 

going to go over some of the numbers from Prince Albert and 

we’re going to get a chance . . . But there is a story here about 

the damage that alcohol does, and sometimes we forget about 

that. 

 

And sometimes when government wants to, maybe there’s 

regulations they want to change, amendments they want to do to 

legislation like they’re proposing, you have to also be prepared 

to deal with the damages that it will cause and the changes you 

are making, proposed making, to understand. Could there be? I 

don’t know. 

 

But I’m hoping that . . . I don’t have all the answers, and I don’t 

think the government does. And I don’t think the committee 

would have all the answers, but I know there are many 

challenges when it comes to dealing with alcohol, and whether 

you’re running a restaurant, a licensed restaurant or a sports 

lounge, whatever, a hotel that has an off-sale or that it has an 

area where you can have a few drinks, and that’s great and 

wonderful, and sometimes it’s managed well. Some individuals 

are trained when to cut somebody off, to say that’s enough. And 

there is training. 

 

And I want to talk about that too because that’s important, that 



2760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

there is training. And I know it’s voluntary, and some hotels 

and some of the business people, they do an excellent job of 

making sure that their employees are trained. I know that. They 

make sure that they have the training and how to deal and how 

to learn to handle the cutting individuals off — when to. And 

that’s great. And for those businesses that establish that on a 

voluntary basis, I commend them and say, you are being 

responsible, and you’re doing your best. And we can’t expect 

more from them in that way. But that’s voluntarily. 

 

But also there are some, to be honest, out there that I’m sure 

that people don’t get training. They’re just doing a job. They get 

paid. And they’re going to go out to the business where they 

work, and they’re going to apply, and they get a job. They just 

serve the liquor, and that’s their job there whether they’re a 

waitress, a waiter. There’s bartenders. The man that owns the 

business or a family owns a family-run business, they operate it. 

They’re just trying to make a living. And I understand, and no 

one’s against that. We understand that, but there has to be also 

balances. 

 

And I guess the liability on somebody operating a facility like 

that and your staff, you are responsible at the end of the day. 

And we see that more and more being challenged when we see 

impaired driving and individuals that get in the vehicle after 

they’ve left a facility, and they’ve been served too much alcohol 

— we know that — and for whatever reason. The investigations 

prove that, and it comes back. So there’s this liability. 

 

But here, you know, whether it’s training . . . So there’s going 

to be a lot of different things to look at, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the challenges. 

 

Sometimes we look at the violence and the alcohol that’s 

causing in some of our communities. And it’s not just in 

Aboriginal communities. It’s not just in northern communities. 

It’s not in rural communities. It’s not in just the big urban 

centres. Alcohol affects a lot of different communities. And we 

see it’s not just First Nations communities, not Métis 

communities. It’s throughout in the province. And I think the 

numbers will show that there are issues. And these are serious 

issues we’re dealing with, and we see the violence and you see 

the violence. 

 

And you know, to talk to somebody, and I have, to talk to 

somebody who has gone out and actually killed somebody 

while they were drunk, blacked out. They had no idea what they 

did. And you know, this guy’s telling me what he did and, you 

know, he has no clue. He got arrested. He woke up in the 

morning, they told him, well. He thought he was going to be let 

out of cells because he got arrested for drinking. And he 

thought, oh well I just drank too much. And they said, well no, 

you’re not getting out. And he said, what do you mean? I’m 

sober now, I’m ready to go. No, no, no — you actually 

murdered somebody. 

 

So there are the sad realities. The man didn’t even know. So 

that’s sometimes the side effect of the alcohol. And I say this, 

it’s truly, what do you say to somebody in tough times that go 

through that? So having said stories like that, and there are 

individuals who truly . . . whether they’re driving, there are so 

many challenges that are affecting our Saskatchewan people. 

And you look at the numbers in Saskatchewan and you look at 

the comparisons to the rest of the province, you know, in 

Canada and some of the communities, and you look at the other 

provinces and Saskatchewan has the worst record of drinking 

and driving fatalities. And we know that, and we’re looking at 

some of the stats. I’m going to talk about some of those stats 

because I think it warrants some serious looking at this. 

 

And we can change regulations. The government can say, well 

yes we’re going to, you know, change certain regulations. And 

some of these might be housekeeping, and I’m not saying that 

they aren’t and you don’t need to review them. But I hope at the 

end of the day when you’re gone through those reviews and you 

think you’ve done what’s best, I hope that at the end of the day 

we’re providing the addictions treatment and the resources that 

the government has an obligation. You’re making alcohol more 

easily accessible. I hope you will make the addictions treatment 

just as easy and accessible to individuals when they’re ready to 

look for help. 

 

And I know individuals that have tried to get help, and the 

front-line workers do their best. And they do, they do an 

excellent job trying to help individuals. When someone says, 

I’m at the end and I need help and I can’t do it anymore, we 

have to be there as a government. And we have to make sure 

there’s the proper treatment centre, that they are there. Whether 

you live in a small community and in rural Saskatchewan, 

whether you live in a big city that’s urban or the North, whether 

you live in a First Nations community or a Métis community, to 

me it doesn’t matter. If you live in the North, the South, 

wherever, when it comes to that point and you’re asking for 

help, we’ve got to make sure the doors are there and we’re 

willing to help those individuals who are saying they need some 

help. 

 

And unfortunately sometimes addiction treatment centres, 

they’re full to the capacity. There isn’t that opportunity when 

you have somebody who’s coming in and saying they need 

help. And I think the government has to do definitely a better 

job of the treatment. 

 

And we know, we’re going to talk about, I am going to talk 

about different groups. We look at our young people. And you 

know, where government does something that’s good, whether 

it’s a treatment centre for youth, I commend that. I do. I’m not 

here to play politics with it. I think it’s a serious matter, and it 

warrants a serious look. And it deserves the attention of all 58 

members in this House to make sure that we’re providing the 

best service, addictions treatment service for individuals when 

they get to that point. 

 

I’ve said earlier, there is social drinking and some people 

handle it fine. They’re not addicted to it. They handle it fine and 

that’s fine. And some people and some of the regulations that 

are talking about in here . . . And I’ll just go a little further into 

that. You see some of the stats in Prince Albert of the public 

drunkenness that individuals . . . You know, you’re in a public 

place and you’re drunk and you’re arrested and you’re put into 

cells. The numbers are alarming for Prince Albert. They’re 

talking about it and some of the stats in here are truly alarming. 

They are. They’re worse than anything. I think they’re 40 per 

cent worse. So when you’re looking at some of the numbers 

that we’re talking about, there is a problem. 

 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2761 

Now having said all this, government has the power and 

government has the budgets for treatments. Government has the 

power. And I mean they’re changing the provisions right now, 

their mandate. And this is their mandate; they’re making 

provisions. 

 

What I find really frustrating to me is . . . We had this group 

that come to the legislature, and I want to talk about that 

because I think it’s important. We had a group come here and a 

lot of MLAs went downstairs, and I give credit. We showed our 

support to hear issues about, you know, binge drinking on our 

young people in the schools. And this institute, Saskatchewan 

Prevention Institute, they go to the schools and they’re going up 

North. And I commend the young staff that they have with 

them, the volunteers, the youth that came with them. Again I 

want to talk about the . . . Because I think that’s so important. 

 

Here they are. They’re meeting with us. They’re telling us the 

struggles and what they see and how they’re reaching out to the 

communities, whether it’s in Pelican Narrows, I believe they 

were going up in some of the northern communities. I commend 

that group. They were going to be in the South. They’re going 

all over to talk about the addictions and binge drinking and 

what it does to young people. And if you look at some of the 

information they shared with us, some of the stories, it was 

amazing the challenges that are facing our young people. We 

know that there’s a lot of challenges. 

 

But when I also see that they’re here on the morning — and, 

you know, this is alarming — and we meet with them and it’s 

all great and all sides . . . And no sooner than we get them out 

of this building and they’re on their way out, we’re announcing 

changes to the legislation and regulations, 70-some changes. 

 

To me the timing, I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was just 

about all I could take. It’s like I just was so frustrated. I could 

not believe that you would meet with a group of individuals 

who are sharing tragedy, you know, and life — loss of life — 

and stories that impact so many people in our province and the 

challenges. And just listening to it, it was so frustrating to me to 

announce later, here we have the minister announcing all these 

changes after these young people and an organization working 

hard to deal with fetal alcohol syndrome and all the different 

things that are going on with our young people and addictions 

and just trying to bring awareness, that we would be 

announcing all these changes within an hour of them leaving 

here. 

 

I just found it totally . . . I have to be honest with you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I found it totally disrespectful. I thought it 

was, what timing — like come on, couldn’t you wait a day or 

two? We’re talking about the week and prevention and, you 

know, Addictions Awareness Week. The timing of it was 

terrible. It was just, I don’t know who decided, but to me it was 

wrong. It was the wrong message to send. 

 

And I looked at those volunteers and I looked at those people 

working hard to bring that awareness. It’s almost like, you 

know, for me I felt almost insulted for them. But how you 

would do that after they just leave here? We met with them and 

you go and announce these things. Give it some time. Like give 

it a week. You could’ve waited till, you know, the week was 

over, to roll this all out. Was it that important to roll it out hours 

after they leave here? Like to me it just didn’t, it just didn’t look 

right. It didn’t feel right for me as a member, you know, in a 

58-member sitting in this Legislative Assembly. I truly am glad 

I had time to think about it because had I of spoke to this bill at 

that time, honestly I think I’d of been more frustrated and angry 

about it and more insulted. 

 

[19:15] 

 

But having said that, I want to commend that institute and the 

good work that the young people are doing. They’ve asked me, 

they want — I’m going to be contacting them — they would 

like to talk a little further for some of the things they’re doing, 

the challenges. And I’m going to work with them as much as I 

can to try to help individuals, and if there’s anything I can do 

with them to understand and educate myself on the issues. 

 

But having said that, government is going to go ahead with the 

changes, and they’re going to introduce them and they’re going 

to go ahead with that. I understand that. They have the members 

and they’ll vote this thing and it’ll go through. But I say this 

and that’s a caution: I caution, the changes that are coming here, 

I realize some of them might be simple housekeeping items but 

some of these might impact people’s lives. And you know 

what? It might impact some of your grandchildren or 

community members or your family members. This may have 

harsh consequences. I don’t know that, but I just know what 

alcohol can do, the damage it can do and it has done to many 

communities and to many individuals’ lives. This has totally 

taken some communities away. 

 

And to watch some of the tragedy that has happened to 

individuals and families and people in our province and all over 

. . . Alcohol, you know, if it’s accepted in a social way, it’s fine. 

Some people can handle that. I’ve said that. But we have to 

make sure that we have laws that protect individuals. And it’s 

about safety. 

 

And I know, I realize we have an all-members committee that 

are going to get together and, you know, for safety, to look at 

numbers and a committee that will go around having hearings 

to deal with. And I’m going to be a part of that. And it is an 

honour when I heard that: you know, would I accept it? But 

having to say that, we’ll see where it’s going to go. We have to 

work some of the details out. I realize that. Are we going to 

always agree on everything? Maybe not, but I sure hope at the 

end of the day we do what’s right for Saskatchewan people, not 

just in the South, not just in the North. We make sure this is 

right throughout — not just the urban. We make sure it’s rural. 

We make sure First Nations communities get a chance to have 

hearings in their communities. This thing has to go out. 

 

So I mean, I look at this as a committee that will do some 

hearings and make recommendations by the end of August. So 

there are some challenges, and I realize we’re not going to 

always agree on this. But talking about many of these changes 

that are in here, and it’s challenging and I think it will be 

challenging to many families.  

 

And when you sit . . . And probably most, I hope most people 

have realized and seen situations where the alcohol, and 

whether it’s a function, a dance, whether it’s, you know, gone to 

a social and you see not everyone handles the alcohol the way 



2762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

we say is acceptable. Some people may be a little bit too 

boisterous when they’re drinking. Some people get too 

physical. Some people, they assault people. It’s the nature of 

that alcohol sometimes. It just takes over. And you feel for 

those individuals. But unfortunately the law is the law, and you 

can’t . . . just because you’re drinking doesn’t mean you can 

physically harm someone or do damage and not pay 

consequences for that. 

 

But having said that, we better make sure that we are putting in 

provisions — and I’m making this very clear — that are 

protecting individuals. And I am saying this to all members of 

this House: you have to make sure that if you’re going to make 

alcohol more easy, accessible to people in different ways . . . 

And I mean they’re talking about bringing your own wine in. 

Some of those things might be fine, you know, bring your own 

wine in. Maybe that’s what the restaurant owners want and the 

industry wants. That’s fine. You bring your alcohol in. You 

bring it. If you have some left over, well they’ll cork it for you, 

recork it, and you can take it home. I assume that’s what’s 

going to happen, or if it stays there. I’m not sure of those 

details. I mean nobody has shared that, and maybe that’s going 

to be worked out in the fine details. 

 

And sometimes when we pass legislation, the regulations do 

come out later in the details and, you know, it’s worked out. We 

don’t always have, you know, all that information shared with 

us, and sometimes we need to find that out. So that’s just one 

area I want to talk about because I’ve heard some people talking 

about that. Some said that doesn’t make any sense, and some 

people are saying, well there’s nothing wrong with that, if they 

want to. So those are some of the details that have to be worked 

out. 

 

But having said that, I think some are talking about mandatory 

training for people who serve alcohol to the public. And maybe 

it’s time to do that. And you know, anyone who’s lost a loved 

one, and we talk about people who are serving alcohol to 

underage. I mean those challenges come up, you know. It’s a 

sad situation to see a young person, somebody has supplied 

alcohol to them and, you know, a loss of life because of that, 

whether it’s alcohol poisoning or the young person ends up 

choking on their own vomit because, you know, they’re on their 

back, whatever. I’ve seen that. I know that for a fact. 

 

It hit families and it does hit families. And it’s when you see a 

family that lost a loved one because of that — a person so 

young, sometimes 15 years old — it is, it’s amazing. Because 

you thought, man, they were just going to go out and have a 

little fun. And that’s what the thinking is, and that’s how 

dangerous sometimes this can be. So I say this with caution, any 

time we’re going to change regulation that it’s going to impact, 

and it can be safety. 

 

And we look at, you know, the fatalities with drinking and 

driving in this province. It’s the worst of any province. It’s the 

worst. There should be alarm bells ringing. And maybe that’s 

why we’re coming together with a committee to look at whether 

it’s impaired driving, whether it’s speeding. And I know we’re 

going to look at things and, you know, we’re going to have a 

chance. But we’re going to be looking at the safety side of it 

and the alcohol. And those might be some of the information 

community members share with the committee in the hearings. 

We might find out about, well here’s some of the challenges 

with the drinking. Here’s some of the challenges with an 

impaired driver that maybe killed a loved one of someone. And 

they’re going to come to the hearings and they want to be heard 

as parents. And that’s going to be hard to hear some of the stuff 

and go through some of those challenges, and sometimes it 

needs to happen. 

 

But those are the sad realities and those are the harsh things that 

happen with alcohol. And I think we have an obligation as a 

government to set the rules, but also to make sure that we’ve 

done all we can. And at the end of the day, the people ask us to 

do the best thing we can, the best we can for them to protect 

them, to protect the public from impaired drivers. And we know 

that we have, you know, you can dial a number and you can 

turn in impaired drivers. If you suspect somebody of drinking 

and driving, turn them in. Call. Don’t let them go out there and 

operate a vehicle. I know sometimes we feel, well we shouldn’t 

get involved and maybe some people feel that way. 

 

But these are changes that are coming. And I mean there are so 

many of them, and you look at them and there’s different ones. 

And I realize the minister was interviewed quite a bit on these 

and, you know, she talked to some media about the handling. 

And I guess we’re talking about going into and having a 

striptease now as well. And the minister talked about that. And 

if that’s covered in these regulations that . . . And I mean she 

handled that as best she can. But then you also hear some 

people saying they’re concerned about when you have this type 

of, I guess, dancing going on in a club you might bring in some 

attention from, whether it’s a gang. And I think some people 

think, is it drugs? There’s different things. So you’re hearing 

different discussions about that. And I don’t know if it has a 

chance to do worse, make things better. 

 

But anyway having said that, the government is changing some 

regulations to allow certain things. And some people will 

question, you know, I guess the motives behind that. Why now? 

And maybe there’s a reason why. That’s up to the government 

to answer and the ministry to discuss what their reasons are. 

Here we’re going to be talking about some serious matters and 

things that will impact Saskatchewan people. And we have an 

obligation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make sure that we’re asking 

some tough questions in committee and we’re going to have to 

go through this. But for now, this is quite a bit of regulations 

that we’re seeing and changes that are coming forward. 

 

But I want to go back to the seriousness of how families are 

impacted and to watch individuals have to go through the 

challenges that they go through and, you know, when you have 

families and communities that are impacted by impaired driving 

and a family being wiped out by an impaired driver and just to 

see what that family goes through. And whether it’s a young 

child left and their parents have both been killed in a car 

accident because somebody decided to get into a vehicle and 

drive and whether they were blacked out or whatever, they got 

in that vehicle and operated that vehicle. 

 

And I know our police try to the best job they can do, and I 

know some people, we encourage them to turn those individuals 

in if you suspect somebody driving. And there are people who 

get away with driving and they get away too many times. And 

there are situations where you hear stories about individuals, 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

you know, who get away. And that is a sad thing. Some get 

charged and some have, I guess, dealings with it. And some, I 

don’t know for whatever reason, get off and it doesn’t make 

sense to me sometimes. We don’t understand the whole story. 

 

But there is different ways it’s being dealt with, and whether 

it’s 24-hour suspensions. Some probably don’t get anything and 

some get a lot. You’re hearing different things. I know 

individuals that have gone through the courts and they’re losing 

their driver’s. I mean there is talks about, do we seize their 

vehicles? You know, if you’re suspected at a certain level, 

we’re going to seize your vehicle. Like these are all things that 

might come out, and we’ll have to see. Those are opportunities 

that we have, and I think the work of a committee and the safety 

committee can look at those things. Like who knows what’s 

going to all come out of this? And I guess the ministry can 

come out working with highways, with enforcement and finding 

out what are the best ways to curb . . . And what are other 

provinces doing in Canada to deal with this issue? It’s a serious 

issue. 

 

What are other provinces doing? What are they doing what 

we’re not doing because our record is terrible. When it comes to 

impaired driving and fatalities, our record clearly, when you 

look at the numbers, if you look at it, what’s causing such a 

high number in Prince Albert with public intoxication? To see 

the challenges and addictions all over — whether it’s in urban, 

whether it’s in rural, whether it’s in the North — if the numbers 

are so much higher and if that numbers are telling us that we 

have a problem, then I think government has an obligation to 

make sure that we have the facilities to deal with the addictions 

when individuals are saying, that’s it, I’ve had enough. I need 

help. I want help. And when you see individuals turned away 

and they have no facility to go to because they’re, for whatever 

reason, they don’t have any beds available or the treatment 

centre is not available because it’s full to capacity. Then what 

are we doing? Are we looking at out-of-province? Are we 

looking at that? Are we going to provide more services? 

 

So if you’re going to make alcohol more easily accessible to 

everyone in this province, and that is clear. And I’m glad that 

the government, you know, I was really concerned when the 

SaskParty at their convention . . . And you know, I talked to a 

lot of people about the SaskParty’s convention when they 

looked at lowering the age to 18. It wasn’t that the idea came up 

— and that’s fine. Some people said to me, it happens. People 

talk about that, and that’s fine. What was really alarming to 

individuals and people that have shared this with me — and 

even to myself, I have to say — the Sask Party’s convention, 

was that they actually passed that resolution. That was the scary 

part. 

 

It wasn’t that it came up as a discussion item, and somebody 

brought it forward and said, I’d like to move a resolution. The 

sad reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker: it passed. It passed. They 

passed that. That was really alarming to a lot of people. And I 

know the government said, oh we’re never . . . We’re not 

interested in changing. But to me the point is it passed at their 

convention. Their members said it was okay. It should be 

lowered. 

 

Well that’s within their party, and that’s their area. I’ll leave 

that with them. I know I would not support that, not seeing what 

it has done to community members, as far as I’m concerned. So 

that’s another area and, you know, we’ll leave that alone. 

 

But having said this, and I’m going to because I think it’s so 

important, I want to say this last bit about this bill. I mean there 

is more I could say, and I know we will in committee. We’re 

going to ask a lot of questions, and I know we’ll all be in there 

because I’m prepared to make sure that we take the time that 

warrants the seriousness of alcohol and the damage it’s done to 

so many communities. 

 

And I look at northern Saskatchewan. When I visit some of the 

communities, I do outreach. And you hear some of the stories 

that I have to be shared to me. It’s sad to listen to some of them 

— the mushom, the kohkom, and the mom and dad. And the 

tragedy, you know, somebody’s being charged with an offence. 

They don’t even know what they did. That to me is a tragedy. 

And that to me, it touches your heart to see a family deal with 

that and those that . . . You know, the loss of a loved one to 

violence because somebody was drinking, and it took over. And 

they’re at a party and somebody gets . . . you know, the 

violence. And we realize that. And when you have alcohol and 

some people lose control, you have so much more chance of the 

violence and of something going wrong than you do with just 

out there socializing and everything else. 

 

So we have to be careful what we’re doing, and we have to 

make sure we’re doing it with cautions to public safety, with 

cautions to individuals for treatment to make sure that we have 

that. And that’s the seriousness of this topic and, I guess, a bill 

like this and alcohol in general. 

 

I’m not opposed to social drinking. I’m not opposed. That’s 

fine. I mean that’s okay if it’s handled the right way. To me it’s 

making sure that if an individual is not a social drinker and they 

have a problem, if they say they have a problem, then we better 

make sure and this government better make sure that if you’re 

going to change and make it easier accessible, you had better 

make darn sure that there’s treatment centres available. Because 

when those treatment centres aren’t there for those individuals, 

then I hope we come forward and let this government know 

clearly with those individuals, and as an opposition and 

members on that side that maybe see it as some challenges. And 

they’re facing it in some of their communities to say, no this is 

wrong. And it doesn’t matter if you’re a minister, if you’re a 

backbencher in the Sask Party. If those are issues facing your 

communities, you will fight and bring those concerns forward 

too as well, should we have to. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So I’m hoping with this bill that at the end of the day we will 

make sure . . . Yes we’re changing; some of them are 

housekeeping. But we will make sure that we’re providing the 

services that are going to need it to people that are saying, these 

changes have impacted me in a negative way. Is there 

provisions to make sure that I have a place to go for treatment 

or supports, whatever I need? Will I have that? And I hope 

these provisions will provide that. So I remind the government, 

yes this is your legislation. 

 

These are challenging times for some communities, some 

families and, you know, at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 



2764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

Speaker, we know clearly that there will be challenges from 

what’s being proposed here in these changes. I don’t know all 

of them, but for those, you know, individuals that are going to 

suffer some of the negative consequences of these changes 

coming in . . . Because we don’t all know. We don’t all know 

what we’re doing. We’re thinking these are good housekeeping. 

We think these are good changes, but after the fact when 

somebody, whether it’s loss of life or something happens 

serious to a family or to whoever in this province, then this lies 

back on the government because it’s their legislation. It’s their 

changes that they’re bringing forward and they are responsible 

to take care of the safety of the public. And I leave that on their 

shoulders, and like I said, I think there’s going to be definitely 

more questions in committee, but at this point I’m prepared to 

adjourn debate on Bill 71. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 72 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 72 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Good evening, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 

deal of interest that I rise to participate in the debate this 

evening on Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 

2012. 

 

Of course this piece of legislation came forward in the wake of 

a tragedy that occurred in our province in the South, a work 

zone collision that cost a young flag person, Ashley Dawn 

Richards, her life. And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you 

can’t bring forward decent legislation or take steps to improve 

the situation or to ameliorate the danger in the wake of 

something as tragic as that, then, you know, what are we here 

for? And I haven’t been around this legislature as long as some 

or perhaps yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I have been here 

long enough to see both sides of the House work together when 

something very much like this comes to the attention of the 

Assembly. 

 

I think of the work that had been done by the then member for 

Coronation Park, Kim Trew. The Minister for Highways at the 

time was the member from Cypress Hills. And the way that 

work was able to be done in an expedited fashion to correct a 

shortcoming in the safety regime for, in that case, highways 

workers that were out on the road doing that work and with the 

heightened risk that comes with that; and the way that this 

Assembly was able to work together to get the legislation 

changed and to get the appropriate safeguards in place as was 

highlighted by a tragic circumstance that occurred northwest of 

this city, Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I guess those are things that give you some hope in terms 

of our ability to recognize issues of great importance for what 

they are and to give them the seriousness that is their due, and 

to make those changes. And it was certainly that circumstance 

that was on my mind when I heard about this legislation coming 

forward. And certainly I think this is very much the right thing 

to do in terms of this piece of legislation. 

 

And that the survey that had gone into trying to improve the 

safety of workers out on the road and improve the traffic safety 

on our highways, you know, Saskatchewan being what it is, 

there’s a lot a of road for our million-plus people and everybody 

has some experience with the orange zone or perhaps has family 

that have worked on highway crews. I know myself my father, 

when he was quite a bit younger, used to work on a road crew 

and they had the circumstance where they’d be working at night 

and after — as my dad recounts the story — they had, you 

know, the cars come whipping into the work zone, they’d 

finally gone to the foreman and said, you know, look, you’ve 

got to at least give me a flashlight or some reflective gear or 

some darn thing. And so because he had spoken up, he got the 

flashlight. But the next night they’re out on the job and at the 

other end of the work zone, because the other worker hadn’t 

spoken up about it, no flashlight for that worker. So then, you 

know, it took him another day to get that sorted out. 

 

But there are some things that are very common sense in terms 

of people doing some very, what can be very dangerous work 

on our highways, and it shouldn’t be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

as the circumstances come to light, as common sense is unable 

to dictate to people, if you’re approaching a work zone, slow 

down, and if those things can’t be done by common sense, then 

we as the state or we as government, the people need to step in. 

 

So put me on record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as being glad to see 

this legislation coming forward. And again it will be given its 

due debate in this Chamber, but then we’ll certainly have 

questions in the committee stage of this. But from where I sit I 

think there’s some fairly practical, helpful measures in this 

legislation, and if they can save one more life, Mr. Speaker, or 

spare one more family the kind of agony that this young woman 

actually, Dawn Richards, her family went through, then that’s a 

good piece of work. That’s something that we should be doing 

as legislators in responding to those issues that arise. 

 

As going through the suite of measures proposed in the 

legislation — the better use of rumble strips, gates to narrow the 

approach to work zones, making sure that that 60 kilometres per 

hour is better enforced — you know, those would seem to be 

practical suggestions. In terms of the increasing of fines, 

tripling the base fine, again on the face of it that seems to be a 

helpful and appropriate measure. To make sure that the, you 

know, possibility of photo radar in the work zones, again you’d 

hope that common sense would preclude some of these 

measures being adopted. But if that’s not the case and the 

incidents pile up on the other hand, then I think that it is high 

time that something like photo radar was given a try in these 

regards. 

 

In terms of the changes that need to be made to section 280, 

wherein referencing the minister’s second reading speech: 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

Section 280 currently gives law enforcement the ability to 

seize any vehicle if the officer believes it is being driven 

unlawfully or poses a danger to other drivers . . . [wherein] 

the intent was for this section to be used only in rare or 

extenuating circumstances when offences are urgent or 

dangerous or when the owner of the vehicle is not 

available and the vehicle poses a threat to other drivers. 

However, vehicle seizures under the section of this Act 

have increased significantly since 2005. Often these 

seizures are related to impaired or distracted driving 

offences. 

 

Well you know, it’s . . . I hear the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone speaking from his seat and again, you know, 

you’ll have plenty of opportunity to participate in these debates. 

And I think he’d be interested to note and maybe he was too 

busy talking to his colleagues, but earlier in my remarks, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I was actually talking about work that he was 

directly involved in and the worth of it in terms of improving 

the legislation of this province. 

 

But you know, with reasonable people you can reason, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And if members on that side want to pick 

fights or something like that when we’re talking about 

something like we’re talking about here today, you know, I 

don’t understand how you respond to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But back to the bill. This is on the face of it a pretty decent 

piece of legislation and something that we’ll have more 

questions to ask about in committee. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Traffic Safety Committee that is yet to 

come, again we’re very interested in how that does, how the 

work of that committee is conducted. We’re interested in the 

scope of that committee. We’re interested in making sure that if 

we’re going to use that committee vehicle, that it gets out across 

the province, that it talks to communities where traffic safety 

issues are a huge concern. And you don’t have to take my word 

for it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You can go to those communities 

and you can see the crosses by the side of the road and know 

the importance of traffic safety to those communities. 

 

And if there are measures that can come forward there or if 

there are measures that should be expedited, that should occur 

to us as legislators in need of expedited action, I would hope 

that the good sense would prevail in terms of being able to 

move quickly but thoughtfully but to make sure that those steps 

that can be taken are taken. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again it’s Bill No. 72, The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act. It’s a bill worthy of consideration in this 

Chamber. I’ll go again on record saying I am glad to see this 

piece of legislation coming forward. I think that it’s got a lot of 

merit to it, and we’ve got . . . You know, it raises more 

questions for us that we’ll certainly ask, to do our job of 

scrutiny in this stage of the bill’s life and in committee. But 

again I’m glad to see it come forward. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 72, the highway traffic safety amendment 

Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 72, The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 73 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to weigh into the discussion tonight on The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

I think the one thing that I’d like to start out by saying is 

municipalities are . . . You look at the different levels of 

governance: municipalities, provincial government, and federal 

government. But with respect to municipalities, that really is 

where the rubber hits the road, where politicians of the local 

variety are hearing day in and day out about the things that 

impact people on a daily basis, whether it’s the potholes, 

garbage collection, recycling, bike lanes in Saskatoon, all kinds 

of things. 

 

And I know often I’ll get calls into my office, or door knocking 

you’ll hear from people who don’t distinguish between the 

various levels of government. But they know when they have a 

concern that impacts them, they need to talk to someone. But 

often concerns at the municipal level really are the ones that are 

impacting you. You really feel it in your day-to-day life. My 

neighbour is a former city councillor, and it’s interesting having 

discussions with her. I like to think that I’m fairly accessible 

and open as a provincial politician and I’m always happy to 

chat, but I know it’s interesting as a municipal politician. The 

things that impact people in a day-to-day life, really you get 

questions about everything as a city councillor in Saskatoon. I 

know that that’s the case. It’s your first point of contact with an 

order of government. 

 

[19:45] 

 

With respect to Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

I think my point about the earlier discussion, I think when we’re 

setting up a legislative framework, with respect to setting up a 

legislative framework, it’s very important to ensure that we get 

it right. This is about making sure we get it right for 

municipalities and for ultimately our constituents. There’s only 

one constituent of all, basically of all of us. We represent 

different orders of government but setting up a legislative 

framework that works is absolutely imperative. So it’s 

important that we get it right. 

 

The minister here, just going to his second reading remarks, 

some of the things that this bill, Bill No. 73, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, the minister says or is proposing, one of them 



2766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

is around improving processes related to the boundary 

alterations or annexations for municipalities involved for the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board. So what often, as 

Saskatchewan has grown or populations have shifted, I know 

annexation is an issue. And one of the things the minister has 

said here is that the legislation is setting a new time limit on 

how long a municipality must wait for a response to a proposed 

annexation application from the other affected municipality 

before the process is considered disputed. So I suppose what 

could happen in a case like this is with a longer time limit or no 

time limit, a way to scuttle an application perhaps is to delay 

and delay and delay. So this is putting in the framework or the 

parameters in terms of a time limit. 

 

I know that it also is requiring mediation before the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board hears and decides an 

application for annexation. Which I think, whether it’s in your 

personal life or in professional life or dealings with people, I 

think mediation is always a good and reasonable way to go 

prior to pursuing more vigorous and sometimes less helpful 

ways of dealing with disputes. I’m a big believer actually in 

mediation, as I said, whether it’s around marriage breakups . . . 

We saw that in a piece of legislation last year actually, or in 

relationships between various councils, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This Bill also, the minister has said, responds to specific 

requests from SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association, and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. And these are the bodies that deal with 

municipalities and it’s always good to hear where the people are 

closest to, where the elected representatives are closest to the 

people, what they have to say. 

 

And the minister in his second reading speech talks about, with 

respect to SARM, the request is “. . . the authority for RMs to 

establish additional service areas.” As we know, “Many rural 

municipalities are seeing the development of areas that require 

more urban-type services which are different than the typical 

agricultural areas.” 

 

So residential developments are more common now throughout 

RMs. Many people want to relocate to acreages or little parcels 

of developed lots. There’s a desire to not necessarily be in a 

large urban centre for many people. 

 

The minister pointed out that “. . . ratepayers throughout the 

RM may be paying for services in these residential 

developments that most of the RM ratepayers do not access or 

require.” So this legislation will be providing areas to be taxed 

and serviced at different levels. But the one thing the minister 

points out, which I think is good that there are some safeguards 

in here, the minister says: 

 

I’d like to point out that the proposed provisions related to 

additional service areas also establish important 

safeguards within the legislation. For example, additional 

service areas cannot be established to specifically target an 

individual, residential, commercial, industrial, or 

agricultural property or be specific to a business or 

business activity. 

 

The second piece of this change is SUMA and involving “. . . 

greater flexibility to address issues related to municipal debt 

limits.” We always have a . . . This is a request from SUMA, 

and the minister goes on the say that “The ministry is aware of 

the discussions that SUMA has initiated within the sector as to 

what constitutes own-source revenue as it relates to determining 

a municipality’s debt limit.” So these amendments, the minister 

says, “. . . are proposed to ensure authority to define own-source 

revenues and regulation for municipal debt limit purposes and 

establish alternate procedures for determining a municipality’s 

debt limit.” 

 

So those are a few of the things. There’s another piece here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, around trade agreements actually, the New 

West Partnership Agreement and the Agreement on Internal 

Trade. And we’ve had some debate here in this legislature on 

some of those agreements, but the reality is we are in those 

partnership agreements. And what will happen here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the amendments enable municipalities to 

establish and enter into the voluntary intermunicipal business 

licensing arrangements and the common issuance of overweight 

vehicle permits with other municipalities. So it enables 

intermunicipal business licensing and provides municipalities 

with discretionary authority to recognize business licences, 

permits, and approvals issued by other municipalities, including 

those in other jurisdictions. 

 

And the last main area of this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is by 

and large housekeeping and administrative matters such as the 

signing of council meeting minutes, consistent terminology 

regarding service or filing of assessment appeal notices, and 

adding contact information for appellant agents to assessment 

appeal notices. 

 

Apparently the minister has said that these were first proposed 

amendments to The Cities Act but to ensure consistency among 

the municipal Acts, these amendments are also included in this 

Bill and The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act which we 

are also debating in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But again I just want to emphasize that when it comes to our 

municipalities, the place where it really is the first contact for 

our constituents, that we make sure that we get a legislative 

framework right that works both for the municipalities that 

administer services but also ultimately for the people who we 

represent at all levels of government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that I do know I have colleagues who will wade in the 

debate, and I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has adjourned debate on Bill No. 73, The Municipal 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 74 — The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2767 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise and speak to Bill No. 74, An Act to amend The 

Cities Act, 2012. And as we know, this Act is amended on a 

regular basis so that we can deal with issues that arise during 

the year. Usually they’re brought forward to the legislature by 

the minister on behalf of municipalities or the cities that have 

specific concerns. And my perception here is that that’s how the 

types of amendments that we have in this particular bill do 

relate to particular problems that have arisen that are now to be 

corrected by the legislation. 

 

And so one of the first items raised relates to the whole issue of 

boundary alterations or annexations that are made by cities. 

And this is quite an interesting topic because it relates to the 

nature of a city. Cities normally will grow and they can’t very 

easily grow within the boundaries that they have. Now we have 

some cities in the world that are limited by their natural 

boundaries. I’m thinking about Vancouver and mountains and 

Burrard Inlet, or Hong Kong where they’re on an island and 

little piece of land on the shore. But in Saskatchewan all of our 

cities have relatively easy expansion into their neighbours’ 

territory. But the question becomes, how do you do that 

expansion? How are decisions made about that? 

 

Now what we know is that in the city of Regina they have to 

work with the rural municipality of Sherwood to identify land 

which they may require 10, 20, 30 . . . I think they actually have 

a 50-year plan. Most of the cities in the province have at least 

50-year plans about possible annexation of land from their 

neighbours, and this causes some interesting questions around 

regional planning and around how our laws should be organized 

to deal with planning on a broader basis. Unfortunately our 

rules are not maybe as far developed as they should be because 

we still have issues that arise. 

 

And we know that another piece of legislation that we have in 

this session relating to the Global Transportation Hub takes 

kind of a sledgehammer approach to the issues around disputes 

between cities and rural municipalities by imposing a provincial 

land base or piece right on top of the city and the rural 

municipality, then basically saying that the rules will be such as 

designed by the provincial government in that area that’s the 

Global Transportation Hub. This legislation is the place where 

maybe the solution should have been found rather than this 

overriding of The Cities Act and the other municipal legislation. 

So we have the issues around Regina, and they relate to who 

gets to develop the land, who gets the taxation, how is the 

infrastructure developed. In the case around Regina, it’s to 

accommodate trucks and trains and vehicles because it’s going 

to be an important commercial activity in that area. 

 

But on a smaller scale, they have the same issue in Yorkton 

where there is development of industrial land and residential 

land, all of those things that relate to building. The same thing 

in Weyburn and Saskatoon. And so what we have in this 

legislation is an ability to make some alterations and have the 

matters be dealt with by the appropriate boards within the 

whole situation, but it doesn’t necessarily deal with all of the 

issues around these kinds of things that happen. 

 

Now what I’m specifically talking about now is the addition in 

the new section 43.1, and this is a new procedure. And 

effectively what the legislation will do is add mediation into the 

process so that before a matter goes for an adjudicative or 

judicial kind of decision from the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board, there has to be a discussion between the parties to see if 

the matter can be resolved. And that’s normally a good process 

to put in place, and so I don’t necessarily have any problem 

with it, but what it does require is that the parties have an 

ongoing relationship. 

 

Now it’s not dissimilar to the use of mediation in many other 

circumstances. Some of the first community mediation, the term 

that was developed out of Denver, Colorado actually, related to 

the putting of power lines through ranching areas where there 

was a lot of concern around the benefit of getting the power to 

some communities that didn’t have power and then not causing 

major disruption for the ranching industry. And also in 

Colorado there were many environmental issues and tourism 

issues that impacted that. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And out of the Denver school — I guess if you’d call it that — 

of mediation, there developed quite a few techniques of 

community meetings that were public. Community meetings are 

then very organized mediation meetings to deal with specific 

groups, whether it was groups of ranchers or groups from the 

state or groups from some of the environmental groups or some 

of the environmental organizations. And so as a result, they 

developed some techniques that they then were able to teach 

right across North America. 

 

And so many of the earliest mediators in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan were trained in the Denver school, not 

necessarily always in Denver, but in places like Vancouver or 

Toronto or other places. And so what we now, 30 years later, 

have this legislation being brought forward, which in a way 

assumes that everybody knows what mediation is and how you 

can resolve some of these kinds of issues through the process of 

mediation. 

 

Now what happens when a city decides that it wants to annex 

territory to expand the city is that it does change the relationship 

with the rural municipality. And when there are disputes that 

have been ongoing between a rural municipality and a city, it 

can be quite difficult to come to reasonable solutions to allow 

the city to expand. I know that this legislation, the wording of 

the legislation is designed to facilitate that type of meeting, but 

I think that we all recognize that this may not be the panacea 

that it appears in the legislation. 

 

So what we have — and it’s not just in The Cities Act; it’s also 

in all three of the municipal Acts and The Municipal Board Act 

— is to have this mediation process put into the legislation. 

And, on the face of it, it’s a good thing but I don’t think it’ll 

solve all of the problems. There still will be cases where the city 

and the rural municipality will not agree and it will have to go 

to the Municipal Board for a decision. 

 

Often the decisions are resolved by a fair allocation of 

resources, in other words sufficient money to the rural 

municipality to help them deal with other issues. That, you 



2768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

know, obviously isn’t in the legislation but it is part of a 

process. And other times both the city and a rural municipality 

can benefit by a solution that they work out, and sometimes it’s 

the sharing of city water or city services like libraries or schools 

or other things like that that can make for a broader regional 

situation. 

 

Now one of the issues we still have in Saskatchewan, which is a 

challenge for businesses that come to our province and for 

businesses that are here and also for people who want to 

develop parts of our province, is that we don’t necessarily have 

very good regional planning or a bigger perspective on how 

planning should be done. 

 

I know one of the issues for Saskatchewan right now is the 

planning from, well, effectively where the North Saskatchewan 

and the South Saskatchewan River join all the way down the 

South Saskatchewan River to the Alberta border because this 

has become prime residential area or recreational residential 

area. And there aren’t necessarily clear rules as you go through 

the various rural municipalities and cities and towns all the way 

along that stretch that will protect the water and the habitat, but 

also deal with these kinds of particular issues. And so this 

legislation goes . . . I mean it has some solutions for some of 

those issues that are going to rise, but it doesn’t get at the bigger 

issue of regional planning in Saskatchewan. 

 

In Alberta we know that they’ve had a major attempt to actually 

have regional planning cover the whole province. There are a 

lot of start-up difficulties with that, but they have done the 

initial steps about having regional planning for the whole 

province. I think that Saskatchewan is in need of that, and it’s 

something that should be looked at in a more formal way. When 

that type of a perspective comes forward, some of the kinds of 

changes around boundary alterations and annexations might not 

be as difficult as they are presently with the different pieces of 

legislation. 

 

Now another issue that’s in this legislation that’s, I guess, been 

requested relates to some of the fees and licences. And I 

thought it was quite interesting that the wording has allowed for 

some cities to basically charge for permits an amount that 

would be beyond what’s available for licences. So this is going 

to be corrected or stopped, and that’s not necessarily a bad thing 

because it’s better to have clear rules and have it the same for 

everybody across the province. 

 

Another area that’s interesting, and it’s part of the result of the 

Premier’s decision and leadership to go into the New West 

Partnership, relates to — and also then the subsequent, or not 

subsequent, but simultaneous, I guess, Agreement on Internal 

Trade — is that business licensing and municipal procurement 

rules need to be harmonized across the three western provinces. 

And this is something that I think will come as a surprise in 

some communities, especially around the advertising of 

contracts and who has the ability to bid on these contracts. And 

I’m not sure whether some of our cities are as keen on this as 

maybe others within the province are, so we’ll have to watch 

that one as well. 

 

So it’s basically the procurement process being changed by 

provincial legislation in a way that, you know, the idea 

obviously is to get more reasonable contracts, contracts that are 

cheaper for the taxpayer. But we’ll have to see whether that’s 

the actual result of what happens. 

 

So now the other areas that are in this legislation are 

administrative really, and I don’t think they necessarily are ones 

that we need to spend a lot of time talking about because 

practically they have been brought forward by the cities, or 

actually by cities or towns or the rural municipalities because 

usually changes that are made in The Cities Act are also 

matched by changes in the other pieces of legislation. So I think 

that after looking at those major items, I am not sure that it is 

necessary that I would spend a lot of time looking through a lot 

of the other provisions that are in this legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there’s a couple other of 

my colleagues that would like to speak to this bill, so I will 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 75 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I’m sorry. I just sneezed here so I’m trying to get 

myself together. 

 

This bill was introduced on November 27th, and the minister 

indicated in his opening comments a number of items that 

they’re attempting to accomplish with this Act. As I go through 

the amendments, there is actually a significant number of 

amendments in this Act to amend the northern municipalities 

Act, and it’s quite an extensive change to a fairly new bill. It 

was passed originally in 2010 and it looks like there’s a 

wholesale change, a whole lot of changes that are being made to 

this bill. It’s a long bill to begin with, with over 450 sections. 

And if you go through the proposed amending Act, there are a 

large number of changes that have been proposed, many of 

them clerical, many of them administrative, and none that are 

hugely substantive, although the minister did point out in his 

comments some of the things that he feels the government is 

attempting to achieve here with this amendment Act. 

 

As he indicated, The Northern Municipalities Act, 2010 

provided a legal framework for governance and administration 

of northern municipalities, and so what this Act is trying to do 

is tune it up a little bit and make a few changes that are going to 

enhance the municipalities’ ability to do business and to carry 

out their legislative requirements. 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2769 

So he indicated that the bill serves a number of purposes. First 

of all, it’s to support the government’s competitiveness and 

growth strategy related to business licensing, overweight 

vehicle permitting, boundary alteration, and municipal 

procurement. So there is a number of changes within the 

amending Act that are attempting to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then the second change he highlighted was to provide northern 

councils with greater ability to deal with inactive municipal 

development corporations, so I’ll have a look at that. Also 

clarifying provisions regarding northern hamlet incorporation 

and northern settlement dissolution and make terms of office for 

members appointed to the Northern Municipal Trust Account 

Management Board consistent with those for municipal 

councillors. So just a number of items that are being cleaned up 

and looked after. 

 

And then finally . . . or third, he says he wants to make changes 

to address other requests from across the sector to clarify 

wording and improve consistency. So first he said to support 

growth and enhance competitiveness, amendments to the 

business-licensing provisions will help municipalities to 

establish and enter intermunicipal agreements and arrangements 

that reconcile business-licensing requirements. He said the 

intent of these is also to help reflect agreements such as the 

New West Partnership Agreement and the Agreement on 

Internal Trade to encourage municipalities to reconcile their 

licensing regimes similar to what Saskatchewan has done in 

partnership with Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

Again, well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that that’s something 

that needed to be foisted on northern municipalities at this point 

because there is probably no legislative need to do that, but the 

changes are there and I’ll highlight some of them as we go 

along. 

 

So he said there’s also amendments to overweight vehicle 

permitting provisions, and we’ll look at some of those, and then 

amendments to the boundary alteration provisions to expedite 

annexation . . .” 

 

So I don’t know how many northern municipalities there are 

and if there is annexation actually happening at this point in 

time, but the provisions are there and the minister’s indicated 

the goal is to improve economic growth and remove barriers to 

impede economic growth. All right, so if we want to get into the 

changes in the bill, I won’t do them all, but I’ll highlight a few 

of them. 

 

[20:15] 

 

There’s a new clause after subsection 18(1) where it talks about 

vehicle weights. So if we look at the original section 18 . . . 

Actually I want to grab one other piece of paper here, if I can 

find it. So the existing 18, what the changes are trying to do 

there is clarifying that if the council intends to establish or 

adopt a system related to vehicle weights or route designation, it 

must be done by way of bylaw. So the new section just provides 

for the council to pass a bylaw to establish this new system for 

vehicle weights. 

 

The next one is a new section 21.1, reciprocal agreements. One 

moment please. And this one here, the new section provides 

municipalities with explicit authority to enter into an agreement 

that would allow for an overweight permit issued by one of the 

municipalities that is part of the agreement to be recognized in 

the other municipalities that are part of the agreement. It says 

current legislation doesn’t prohibit these kinds of systems but 

the amendment is required since these are regulatory powers 

and they should help encourage municipalities to reconcile their 

respective permitting regimes. 

 

So I don’t know a whole lot about overweight permits but it 

sounds like this is going to help out and encourage them to be 

reconciled across from one municipality to the next. And the 

comments here indicate that this new provision is to respond to 

efforts of government to remove barriers impeding economic 

growth. And we know that that’s something that will be helpful 

in other municipalities. 

 

There’s a lot of chatting going on. It’s kind of sounding 

interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I’ll keep trying to focus on 

what’s going on here in the bill. 

 

The next new provision that we could look at is found in . . . 

Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Oh there’s section 18, 21. It’s a big 

bill and there’s lots of changes. 22(4.1) is new. The indication 

there is the amendments to section 22 allow the municipality to 

apply to a court to get a stop order preventing they haven’t 

entered into a road maintenance agreement with the 

municipality and yet continues to haul. So we see now there’s a 

new (4.1) and that reads: 

 

“If a person contravenes subsection (4), or the terms and 

conditions of an agreement mentioned in subsection (1), 

the council may apply to a judge of the court for all or any 

of the following: 

 

(a) an order compelling the person to comply with 

subsection (4) or the terms and conditions of the 

agreement; 

 

(b) an order enjoining the person from proceeding contrary 

to subsection (4) or the terms and conditions of the 

agreement. 

 

And then there’s a number of other subclauses that follow that. 

That’s the changes there in section 22. 

 

Now there’s a new subclause being added in section 23(9) and 

this section 23 is regarding road maintenance and the 

determination of issues in road maintenance. The new subclause 

is (iii.1) and here it directs either party to provide any 

compensation that the board considers appropriate in the 

circumstances. 

 

And if we’re looking at the comments here, the amendment was 

requested here by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. What it 

does is it clarifies their authority to direct either party to a road 

maintenance agreement dispute to provide compensation that 

the board considers necessary and reasonable. So this is being 

made both to this northern municipalities Act and The 

Municipalities Act. So that’s just more consistency amongst all 

the clauses. 

 

Now again this Act is too long — 34, 35. Here we go. There’s 



2770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

an interesting change to section 32(1), Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

I’m not sure how this would work at law but the amendment is 

being by adding the words “or a tenant” after the word “owner.” 

So what we see now is that, if the person to whom a public 

utility service is supplied is the owner or a tenant of the land or 

building to which a public utility service is supplied, it goes on 

to say the sum payable is a lien against the land and the 

building. I’m not sure you can put a lien on land if it’s a tenant, 

so the explanation that we have here is that the amendment was 

made for consistency with the provisions of section 389 and 

was being made to all three municipal Acts. And the 

explanation goes on to say that if a tenant has utility charges 

they can be added to the tax roll of the owner of the property. 

Now that makes sense, but this seems to suggest that it’s also 

something that you can register a lien against, so that would be 

something I would want to look into a little bit more if I were 

the minister in this particular situation. 

 

And in the interests of moving this along, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there’s page after page of comments that probably should be 

looked at more closely in committee. Certainly I could take a 

lot of time to go through them all and highlight them here, but I 

would encourage the public to take a close look at these, and if 

there are any questions — again, there’s a number of changes 

that are being proposed — to take a good look at them and 

perhaps provide comment if there’s any concerns that are 

highlighted on their part. As far as I can tell, the majority of 

them are clerical in nature. I would think when this bill was 

passed initially it may have been done in a hurry and that 

there’s a number of corrections that are now needed, because it 

was passed in 2010 and it’s already back before the Legislative 

Assembly in 2013. So I think as it got developed we could see 

that there were a few changes that were needed. 

 

I guess one of the ones I did want to talk about a little bit was 

the changes to dissolution of northern boards, and I think that’s 

found in section 73(2). So what’s happened here is that there is 

a new subsection there, (2.1), and in that one the minister now 

can declare a northern settlement be dissolved without an 

initiative on the part of the northern settlement itself. And prior 

to that, under subsection (2), the minister could, on his own 

initiative or her own initiative, dissolve the northern settlement 

if the population was less than 30 or if there was a failure to 

elect a local advisory committee. This just goes a little bit 

further now and says that if those conditions exist, the minister 

can just declare it to be dissolved. There was no provision for 

that previously. 

 

And I know there’s another Act that probably has the same kind 

of situation, and that’s the conservation and development 

authority Act, and I remember working on that a few years ago. 

And one of the problems with that is the same situation where 

you had a conservation and development authority established 

and then for whatever reasons they didn’t elect a new board. It 

could be that the new municipal council just didn’t get around 

to it. But there’s no way to dissolve a conservation and 

development authority. So perhaps the minister — I think 

would be the same minister responsible for that Act — might 

want to take a look at that and see if there’s ways to dissolve 

some of those defunct conservation and development authorities 

as well. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know other of my colleagues will 

want to provide some comment on this bill and at this point in 

time I propose that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 75. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved adjourned debate on Bill No. 75, 

The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 76 — The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — [Inaudible] . . . debate on Bill No. 76, The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 gives some I guess 

comments about the role of the Municipal Board and what they 

do and provisions that are in here in legislation. And currently 

from what I can see, you have an order in council and the 

Lieutenant Governor that goes through their order in council to 

appoint permanent board members. 

 

They’re asking for provision in here to allow the minister, I 

don’t know if it’s to continue or if it will be a new provision in 

there, but what it’ll do part-time and appoint part-time board 

members. And it talks about some of the roles and outlines 

provisions when they’re appointed as a part-time board and 

whether it’s referring to some of the pension and different 

things, some of the coverage. So you look at this one here. 

Clearly they’ve asked for some provisions to allow the minister 

some flexibility I guess to appoint part-time board members and 

whether that was something that was already happening or if 

it’s new provisions, if it’s housekeeping or if it’s clarification 

on some of the . . . But in that section that’s where it was 

asking, giving some power. There’s two areas where they refer 

to that. 

 

But having talking about that, just looking through some of the 

I guess the wording that they’re using and some of the role of 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board and the powers that they 

had, whether they were hearing appeals, there’s about four 

different areas where they used to, and this was established 

many years ago, and this board actually replaced, I guess, they 

brought it to under one umbrella a number of different powers 

that legislation allows this board to operate. And they have 

some tools and they have some regulations and some legislation 

that gives them the power to deal with some of the . . . whether 

it’s disputes, whether it’s some of the challenges municipalities 

are having. 

 

If you look at some of I guess the areas that they look at, and if 

you look at your tax notice, municipalities send out a tax notice 

whether you live in an urban, rural. And you disagree with your 

tax notice assessment — for some reason you’re not feeling that 

it’s right. And when I sat on council, there was a number of 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2771 

times where those provisions were used by residents who 

disagreed and there was a process to handle that. And they 

would come into your community and there were certain times, 

and they would provide I guess the expertise and provide that 

service to municipalities to hear an appeal from individuals. 

And whether it was a reassessment or whatever, they would 

determine whether or not you were truly . . . your property was 

assessed at the proper value. You had that option to have it 

appealed if you disagreed. 

 

So there’s a number of different areas where these provisions 

provided, I guess, and they talk about some of the jurisdictional 

stuff that they deal with, whether administration stuff. And they 

go through and I guess in some details and there’s quite a few 

different areas where they are proposing some changes, whether 

they’re totally changing or what they’re asking for provisions in 

legislation to be changed to give more power to give, I guess, to 

operate on a day-to-day that the Municipal Board deals with 

certain issues and claims. 

 

And truly you will see in here . . . And I guess one of the areas 

where they’re asking for . . . and I had said this about the 

qualifications of part-time individuals who would apply, and 

there’s different strengths and provisions that you have. And 

you want a balance, and I guess this is what this opportunity 

provides for the minister to appoint part-time board members 

with certain strengths and abilities. And there are some 

provisions here with the skills that individuals have, whether 

those individuals come into their expertise in different ways. 

And there would be many areas, whether it’s through 

university, whether they’re life-long learners, there’s different 

challenges like that where they’re experienced dealing with I 

guess situations where, whether it’s accounting, whether it’s 

legal, you might have some board members who bring that 

expertise to the table. You might have some individuals that 

have sat on council, you know, whether they’re mayor and 

council. So they had some experience, and they could bring that 

strength to the table. 

 

And it might be individuals, whether they have I guess 

guidance, wisdom, and sometimes we have individuals who 

have been in our province a long time and have seen a lot of 

things and have learned. And maybe they haven’t learned in a 

classroom, but they have learned lifelong learning from just 

living and coping in this world, so they have some skills and 

strengths to bring forward. And I know they try to find a 

balance, you know, that there is that balance in these 

individuals. So you’ll want to try to see, as they bring their 

skills that they have, their expertise, but also you might have 

individuals from different, I guess . . . You want to make sure 

that we have a balance of women versus men with different 

skills. 

 

So there are those provisions in there to make sure. And we 

hope that the government uses those skills and provisions to 

allow that so that it’s not all one-sided. We have to make sure 

that there is a balance here. So I’m hoping that, you know, this 

board has a balance, and not only when they look at skills 

versus female to male that it’s balanced. And I think that’s 

really crucial and needs to happen more and more. That 

apparently needs to happen. 

 

So having said that, with some of the other provisions that are 

in here they’re asking about, they might be just, like I said, 

simple housekeeping items that they want to clear up. And I 

know that there’s a lot of this stuff needs to be asked in 

committee, and I know we’ll work through that when we go to 

committee to ask certain details. But because there is a lot of 

areas here where we’re just not sure whether those were 

existing, if they’re expanding, and they’re just trying to give 

some explanation to some of those items, I know we will work 

through those details in committee point by point as we go 

through. 

 

Here’s an opportunity to share just some opening comments 

about what legislation is coming forward. And I know 

colleagues before me have spoke. I will speak on, to this one. 

So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn 

on Bill No. 76. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Cumberland has moved adjourned on Bill No. 76, The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion?  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 77 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The Horse 

Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to weigh into the discussion on Bill No. 77, The Horse Racing 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

I have to say the thing that I love about this job is the 

opportunity to learn about things about which you perhaps 

didn’t know, you weren’t an expert in prior to this job. The 

reality is you have to know a little bit about everything. I know 

we all come to this place with some expertise and certain skills 

in certain areas, but the reality is you do have to learn and know 

a little bit about everything. So I would confess that I am not an 

expert in horse racing and horse racing regulations. 

 

My personal and professional experience goes back to being 

about a nine-year-old going to Marquis Downs with my mother 

and her best friend. Actually the one pivotal moment in my 

childhood is when I placed a $2 bet on a horse called Danny’s 

Luck, and I came home with $14, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was a 

proud moment, and I still remember that day with my mother. It 

was a fun evening out. 

 

And I actually, I have to chuckle too that I have a nephew and 

his partner are big fans of thoroughbred racing in Saskatoon, 

and that’s a regular outing for them. They make small or 

minimal bets, but they have a lot of fun going out and cheering 

on their picks. And it can be quite a fun Friday evening 

entertainment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



2772 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

But what we’re talking about here, what we’re talking about 

here, I think that there’s some context that we need here. So this 

particular bill . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There’s some 

interesting, there are always interesting evening comments that 

happen in this place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But one thing — 

context, context here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

What this Bill proposes doing is it will be removing, getting rid 

of the 10 per cent parimutuel tax from each wager placed on 

horse racing in the province. So this tax applies to wagers made 

in Saskatchewan teletheatres on horse races conducted outside 

of the province. But from my understanding, this will only have 

an impact on thoroughbred racing — so Marquis Downs. 

 

I know that the standardbred, the Saskatchewan Standardbred 

Horsemen’s Association has some huge concerns about this bill 

and about changes that have taken place in their history, 100 

years of history in standardbred racing. I’m just looking at a 

news release from 2009 that this current government issued and 

were very proud to tout their support for standardbred racing in 

Saskatchewan, providing grants for standardbred or harness 

racing to horse racing tracks in Yorkton and Saskatoon. 

 

But the one thing that happened this past . . . a year ago, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is that funding was cut to the standardbred 

organizations, which has a huge impact. So although this cut to 

the parimutuel tax will help thoroughbred racing, it does 

nothing to support standardbred racing. In fact I have a letter 

from Glenn LeDrew, the President of the Saskatchewan 

Standardbred Horsemen’s Association, who actually has some 

. . . It’s not that this amendment is a bad thing in and of itself, 

but I think the government is ignoring the role that the 

standardbred racing has played here in this province. And 

Glenn LeDrew points out that the new Act, I’d like to quote: 

 

As it stands today, the new Act will be of most benefit to 

Prairieland Park, Marquis Downs race track, the 

thoroughbred horse racing program in Saskatoon. They 

currently hold the home market area licence for the entire 

province, which expires March 31st, 2013. For 2013 three 

race tracks — including Prairieland Park, West Meadows 

Raceway standardbred track in Regina, and Yorkton 

Exhibition, which is also a standardbred track — have all 

applied for a home market area licence for 2013. As far as 

I know, the two standardbred tracks have not yet been 

advised if they will be granted a home market area as 

applied for. 

 

So what the home market area is, it was created by the 

Canadian Pari-Mutuel Agency so that race tracks with a licence 

to operate a minimum of 10 live race days could generate 

much-needed other industry-related revenue or off-track betting 

in their assigned area to support live racing at the track in that 

home market area. But if there’s no home market area license 

granted to these other two tracks, West Meadows in Regina and 

the Yorkton Exhibition, the standardbred industry will be shut 

down after more than 100 years of existence in Saskatchewan. 

 

So the removal of the parimutuel tax, the 10 per cent, is good 

for the thoroughbred industry, but I think the Saskatchewan 

Standardbred Horsemen’s Association is expressing some 

concerns or lack of support for their industry, of which they’re 

incredibly proud of the 100-years-plus history here in this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So they’re hoping that aside 

from the grant that was cut last year in last budget, that the 

government will see fit to restore home market areas to enable 

standardbred racing or harness racing to be able to survive here 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I do know I have colleagues who would like to weigh in on 

this discussion as well, and to that end, I would like to move to 

adjourn debate.  

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale has moved adjournment on Bill No. 77, 

The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 78 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 78 — The Social 

Workers Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I am pleased to rise this evening to speak to Bill No. 78, An 

Act to amend The Social Workers Act. This is a fairly 

straightforward piece of legislation, and I think I understand the 

intent of the minister on this one, although I’m not entirely 

familiar with the workings of social workers, although my 

colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale certainly is and would be 

our expert on that. So again, we find ourselves speaking to 

things that we don’t have a lot of familiarity with, but we 

certainly have resources within our caucus and within the party 

to provide adequate comment to these bills as they come 

through the House. 

 

This particular bill is one that is putting something back that 

was in the Act a few years ago, and changes came about to 

where it was removed, and now it’s being reinstated. And in 

particular, it’s an endorsement to the licence authorizing a 

practicing member of the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers to engage in the practice of diagnosis. And as I 

understand, this is at the request of the Association of Social 

Workers to replace something that was taken away back in 

2002. 

 

The diagnosis provision is something that the minister is 

indicating is necessary, mainly because of a capacity of services 

in the area of diagnosis from other professionals. And as she 

indicated in her opening comments that only 78 psychologists 

and 36 psychiatrists work throughout the province, so that’s just 

over 100 of those physicians, psychologists and psychiatrists, 

that are working in mental health outpatient services. And the 

Association of Social Workers indicated that there are about 50 

within their organization who qualify to perform these 

diagnoses and so that will allow increasing capacity of the 

system. And apparently this is a practice that’s working in 

Alberta and British Columbia as well and Ontario to a certain 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

degree. 

 

So there’s many advantages from the minister’s perspective in 

terms of these amendments. It may mean earlier access to 

treatment and greater flexibility in how providers can be used to 

diagnose treatment in mental health orders. 

 

Of course the idea of diagnosing is only the first step along the 

path of treatment, and if the treatment services aren’t available 

it really won’t progress the needs of the patients any further, but 

at least a diagnosis can be obtained and that’s one step along the 

path of improving the system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I guess 

the main impetus behind this is because of the lack of mental 

health services in smaller health regions and rural and remote 

areas of the province. 

 

So that’s the intent of the bill. As the minister indicated, there’s 

just over 100 people who are working in the mental health 

sector right now. It’s not enough to meet the growing demand 

for diagnostic services. So the idea is to add this capacity within 

The Social Workers Act and it may add another 50 or so 

qualified social workers to increase the capacity. 

 

So if we want to look at the bill itself, there’s just a few changes 

that have been made. First of all the idea of endorsement is a 

new definition being added as (d.1), and what that clause reads 

is “‘endorsement’ means an endorsement to a licence 

authorizing a practising member to engage in the practice of 

diagnosis.” So I’m assuming that would be something that 

would just be added to the licence of the particular social 

worker and that the association would determine who is in fact 

qualified to do that kind of diagnosis. 

 

And then the other definition that’s being added in section 2 is 

the definition of practice of diagnosis, which means “. . . the 

communication of a diagnosis identifying, as the cause of a 

person’s symptoms, a neuropsychological disorder or a 

psychologically-based psychotic, neurotic, or personality 

disorder.” So we’re talking about some fairly complicated and 

serious mental illnesses, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this practice 

of diagnosis that’s being defined is something that the 

association will determine who’s qualified to do. 

 

The next change that’s being added is in clause 16(1). And in 

that case, that’s the bylaw making section. So the Association 

of Social Workers has extensive bylaw authorities made under 

section 15 and 16, and section 15 is the procedure for passing 

the bylaws. They all have to be gazetted and there’s a number 

of the provisions. And then section 16 deals with the types of 

bylaws that can be made and there’s a very extensive list of 

those types of bylaws. 

 

[20:45] 

 

So what we’re doing in clause 16(1)(l) is adding “endorsement” 

after “licensing” so that would be the fees payable for having 

that diagnosis or having the ability to make the diagnosis or the 

practice of diagnosis. And then clause 16(2) is also being 

amended slightly by adding the granting endorsements in 

subsection 16(2)(a). So not only will the bylaws prescribe the 

qualifications, standards, and tests of competency for the 

registration of persons or any category of persons as members, 

or the issuing of licences, but also now will be extended to the 

granting of endorsements. 

 

The same with clause 16(2)(g), there’s a new (g.1) that’s being 

added. And this is: 

 

prescribing the requirements that must be met and criteria 

that must be satisfied to obtain and continue to hold an 

endorsement, including standards of training and 

education and additional and continuing training and 

education requirements. 

 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the key clause to this 

entire bill because the public needs to be assured that the social 

worker has the proper training and education in order to make 

these kinds of diagnoses which are for serious mental illnesses, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that the Association of Social Workers 

is responsible for setting out the requirements that have to met 

and the criteria that the social worker has to obtain to get this 

endorsement on their licence. 

 

So that’s, I think, the nub of this particular bill is that ability to 

pass bylaws to determine who will be able to make those 

endorsements. As a professional association, they best know the 

skills that are required for these types of activities, and it’s up to 

this independent body to make that determination and be 

responsible to its clientele. 

 

Section 18 is also amended, 18(2), and this is just the section of 

the Act dealing with memberships and licences and registration. 

So there’s an additional clause now. 18(1) says the council can 

admit persons, (2) says they can issue licences, and now there’s 

a third subclause that says the council “. . . may grant an 

endorsement to a practising member’s licence.” So that’s 

another change. 

 

Section 21 is also a fairly detailed change, and this is where the 

Act will now list the requirements for endorsement. So section 

21 is talking about who would be registered. They will register 

and get an annual licence to someone who has paid the 

prescribed fees. They have to be of good character and they 

have to comply with the bylaws with respect to registration. 

They have to meet the membership criteria prescribed in the 

bylaws, and they have to have a certificate or a bachelor’s, 

master’s, or doctoral degree in social work from a university 

that’s approved in the bylaws, and they have to apply within 

three years of the coming into force of this section. 

 

So the new subsection is 21.1, and this goes on to say that it’s 

called requirements for endorsements. So you are registered but 

now there’s also a requirement to be endorsed. And that reads 

that the council can grant an endorsement to a practising 

member authorizing that member to engage in the practice of 

diagnosis if they produce evidence satisfactory to the council 

that he or she has paid the prescribed fees, is a practising 

member. And then the third subclause ties us back to the one 

where the bylaws are passed, and so they have to comply “. . . 

with the bylaws with respect to the requirements that must be 

met and criteria that must be satisfied for the granting of an 

endorsement.” So that kind of ties it all together. 

 

The final change in the Bill is prohibited practice, and section 

24 is being repealed entirely. And the way it reads right now is 

that “No person other than a member shall engage in the 



2774 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

practice of social work by using the title ‘social worker’.” So 

that’s very clear in the Act. If you hang up your shingle without 

being endorsed by the association, it’s illegal and it’s 

prohibited. 

 

And I know that’s something that’s important to all professional 

bodies, is having the ability to determine who can and who 

cannot practise with that designation. I was approached earlier 

this year by members of the Saskatchewan professional music 

teachers’ association, and they were very concerned because 

they had been informed by their relevant ministry that their 

entire Act was about to be repealed. And I have to say it was a 

relief to see that that was not on the legislative agenda this fall 

because, again, they are the ones who are self-determining. 

They’re the ones who decide who will be people entitled to 

have RMT, which is registered music teacher, after their name. 

And what the suggestion was from the ministry is that they just 

form a non-profit corporation. But as you can imagine, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that’s not really something that would be 

suitable for that, and obviously it’s not the case for social 

workers as well. 

 

So section 24 now reads that “No person other than a member 

shall engage in the practice of social work by using the title 

‘social worker.’” So that remains, but then there’s also the 

additional clause where: 

 

[no one] . . . shall engage in the practice of diagnosis 

unless the person: 

 

(a) is a practising member who has been granted an 

endorsement by the council; or 

 

(b) is authorized pursuant to another Act to engage in 

the practice of diagnosis. 

 

So two conditions there for doing the diagnosis. One is through 

the process set out here, and then if there are other Acts which 

allow the practice of diagnosis and they’re authorized under that 

Act, they could also do that in the same way. 

 

And then there’s a new subsection following that called: 

 

“Practice of diagnosis 

 

24.01 Notwithstanding any other Act, if a member has 

been granted an endorsement pursuant to this Act and the 

bylaws, the member may engage in the practice of 

diagnosis”. 

 

So that’s the extent of the changes that were proposed under 

this bill. Now we do have some feedback and concerns that 

have been raised, and the view from some of the people that we 

received comments from is it’s all fine and dandy to allow the 

diagnosis to be made, but unless there’s provision for treatment 

in the rural areas, it really isn’t going to address the problem at 

all. So the services are very important and diagnosis is only one 

step towards treatment. So there’s various things that are 

required in order to make this work properly, and this is really 

only the beginning of the changes that are required. 

 

So without resources and all the attendant medical supports that 

would be needed, this bill is really only the beginning of this, 

the problem. And indeed a complete and comprehensive mental 

health strategy would be what’s required here in order to make 

this as effective as possible. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know other of my 

colleagues are going to want to comment on this bill, and I’m 

prepared at this point to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78, An Act 

to amend The Social Workers Act. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved the adjourned debate on Bill No. 

78, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 79 — The 

Representation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in on debate on 

Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 2012, I guess there’s some 

provisions in here with boundaries. And let’s get right into, I 

guess, the meat and potatoes of this bill. You’ve proposed some 

changes in boundaries but also the way we use a formula to 

develop the boundaries. And we used to use all citizens in 

Saskatchewan, whether you were a newborn to 18 years old, 

right through. There was no difference. 

 

But now we have a government proposing and making changes, 

and people have asked, why these changes? Why take out 

anyone under the age of 18 out of the formula to have 

representation to figure out your boundaries? And it’s 

interesting, especially at a time when you have such a growing 

Aboriginal population. There’s some questions behind this and I 

know people are asking questions. I know we need to ask these 

questions and that is the concern. 

 

Why would that be? Would you, at this time, try to take a 

certain age group out of the formulas that would actually impact 

some of the rural areas? Because the First Nations communities, 

the Métis communities, the Aboriginal population is growing. 

We know that. And if you look at the ages of 19 and under, 

myself I have 17 that are under 19 and under — grandchildren. 

So I really . . . very concerning when you look at the Aboriginal 

population with individuals that are Métis, First Nations. So 

there are some real concerns with that. Why? Why that change 

and the way they are doing it? Who requested this? Who asked 

them? 

 

It’s just like we’re going to get into this, the bill. And we’ll 

discuss more politicians, three more MLAs. And I mean we’re 

going have a time to really, tonight, go through this thing and 

show exactly what it is, what the government was trying to do 

and how they are trying to manipulate a situation for their 

benefit. And we’re going to show some of the numbers. And I 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

think this bill clearly shows that the lack of consultation the 

government is willing to do when it has its agenda, and what it 

wants to do and how it wants to manipulate with three more 

politicians and the way they are going to manoeuvre. 

 

It’s pretty sad at the end of the day to see a government 

heavy-handed pushing ahead on their agenda. And we see that, 

and we’ll go through that. And I think the numbers talk about 

that very clearly. When we use other provinces and the number 

of constituents versus MLA, it’ll be very clear what’s going on. 

And you know, I’m going to use I guess some of the, some 

areas. 

 

And maybe some will say, well we want to, because of the size 

of some of the boundaries in the rural communities, we want to 

. . . And I mean some of the members opposite have talked 

about that, I think, in the press and different things, comment 

and saying how, you know, they are an hour and a half, some of 

them two hours to travel to some of the constituents to deal with 

serious issues. And I agree. They are serious issues. And to 

have three hours, you know, I understand that. But they have to 

travel in their constituency to go out and do outreach to try to 

deal with some of the rural areas, some of the communities, 

municipalities to have meetings. 

 

But let’s be honest. I think, clearly there are some issues 

because if you look at half of our province, and we’ll talk about 

the land base, half our province clearly has two MLAs 

representing the North — Athabasca and Cumberland. Two 

MLAs that represent. Yes, we look at the population. We 

realize its a small population when you look at the size. It’s 

spread out, our population. We have some bigger 

municipalities. We have some large First Nations communities. 

We have smaller municipalities. But the point is, you look at the 

land and the travel. For myself, sometimes to travel it’s eight 

and a half hours to travel to one of my constituents at 

Cumberland House, for instance, from La Ronge. You look at 

the time.  

 

So when I hear the concerns of two to three hours or an hour 

travel time — well, hello, some of us have to deal with that on 

an everyday basis, dealing with outreach and when we’re out in 

our communities trying to make sure constituents have that 

contact. 

 

And I try my best to represent the community that I represent. 

Whether they’re First Nations, Métis, whether they’re 

municipal communities. I try to represent everyone. And 

whether they’re young children in the school or the high school, 

whether they’re in daycare, I represent them all if there’s an 

issue you have. So I don’t see where all of a sudden we want to 

take out anyone under the age of 18 out of the formula because 

we don’t want to use them. 

 

So we know that there’s manipulating of those numbers because 

of course you might have some First Nations communities or 

Métis communities with a large young population. We know 

that. The numbers are just unreal. But we see this government’s 

lack of support to First Nations and Métis when it comes to 

education, when we see the supports for a growing young 

population for training. We don’t see the commitment when 

you look at the unemployment rate. So we see that our numbers 

are coming up as Aboriginal people. We don’t see the 

government’s commitment to working with us to have a better 

quality of life for young Aboriginal people, young Aboriginal 

families coming into the age to work and to have training. They 

want that. They don’t want to sit and be on assistance or 

whether it’s band welfare, whether it’s provincial welfare. They 

want to have an opportunity, a fair opportunity. They want an 

opportunity to train. They want to have more support to 

graduate so that they can graduate grade 12. 

 

We look at the numbers, and it’s alarming and shocking and it’s 

pretty sad under this current administration. You see the 

programs that they have cut from the Aboriginal population 

where you look at the employment development program, 

Aboriginal employment development program, you look at that 

program alone that was cut. We had so many people, industry, 

commenting on how good it was. 

 

[21:00] 

 

So here again we see what the government has done with 

Aboriginal communities and Aboriginal people in this province. 

And one day, one day they’re going to pay a price for that. 

Trust me on that one — one day. And you know, when we talk 

about a movement . . . And I’m going to go back to this because 

I think this is important. I want to show examples of Aboriginal 

population. 

 

The Idle No More movement, some people may not pay 

attention. They might not take it serious. I do. I give a lot of 

respect. When I see the families working hard and interesting, 

you know, some of the communities that are bringing 

awareness about roles of conservative governments, what 

they’re doing — Harper’s government — what the conservative 

government here in Saskatchewan is doing. Well they call them 

the Sask Party, but like I’ve said before, so many of them are 

card-carrying Conservative members we don’t know the 

difference. It’s hard to figure them out. 

 

But having said that, having said that, we’ll soon have the 

numbers for 2012 here how many were card-carrying 

Conservatives. We’ll find that out. We’ll know that shortly. 

Stay tuned and I’ll tell people. Hopefully by the time the 

session’s done we’ll have those numbers. 

 

Now having said that, I know previously in 2011 there was just 

about, before the election, there was just about half of them 

were card-carrying Conservative members, so I look at that very 

closely. Very closely I look at that . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Isn’t it amazing? You talk about Conservatives and you get, 

you know, you get some voice coming back from them. They 

either don’t like it or they do like it. I don’t know. But if that’s 

what you are, that’s what you are. You have a choice whether 

you’re a card-carrying member, but they can yell out the way 

they want. That’s their decision. 

 

But having said that, going back to this bill and being . . . Very 

clearly it’s about the boundaries. It’s about taking groups of 

people, Aboriginal people, young population out of the formula. 

For what reason would that be? And people are asking 

questions, and they want us to ask these questions. And they 

want us to share that. And that’s why today we’re going to 

debate this bill and we’re going to have some discussions about 

the items, and whether we go through this item by item or that 



2776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

we have discussions that we want to talk about and get 

clarification. And I know there’s going to be lots of work in 

committee because this has to continue. 

 

And I know my colleagues before me have expressed this very 

clearly, but very concerned about the way the manipulation is 

going on with the boundaries. And at the end of the day, let’s be 

clear. When you start taking out such a large population, people 

are wondering, why would take those individuals that are under 

18 out now? I think because you get to manoeuvre on how your 

boundaries will look because if you’re supposed to be based on 

the numbers and you take the 18, the boom of the young 

Aboriginal population, you get to take them out, you don’t get 

the same boundaries. They’re going to change. So they might 

. . . There is something going on there and we need to work this 

out, and I think the people want us to work this out. They want 

to ask clarification — why is that? So if you look at the 

boundaries and clearly, the way they’re manipulating them, and 

that’s why they’re manipulating them. But having said that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, very clearly, very clearly, it shows where the 

government is going to take this out. 

 

Now we’ll get into . . . They want three more politicians. They 

want three more MLAs, you know, at millions of dollars to this 

province, the cost. And some people are asking, you know, and 

I know some of the members have heckled and they’ll say 

whatever. When they were campaigning in the 2011 election, 

did they say to the people on the door? Not one, and we’ve 

asked that. Not one did you talk about that you were going to do 

this. Surprise. Well, guess what? Surprise, surprise. Here you 

go. 

 

We’ve got millions for more politicians, but we’re going to cut 

other areas and this . . . We’re going to have a budget coming 

here on Wednesday and let’s see exactly who gets to decide. 

What was the priority of that government? Is it more politicians, 

millions for that, versus what the issues are with our seniors 

with drug costs? And we see what’s happened to our seniors 

with more, $5 more per prescription. We see some of the cuts to 

education. We see some of the cuts to organizations. We see 

some of the organizations — Aboriginal, First Nations, Métis 

— the programs that have been cut when you should be 

improving quality of life for Saskatchewan people. Whether 

you’re saying affordability, you look at the rents in this 

province. They’re out of balance and there is no way. People 

cannot afford it. You have working families that are middle 

class trying to make ends meet and they’re struggling; and then 

you have a government who’s prepared to say, but we have 

millions for more politicians. 

 

You know what’s really interesting? Their priorities. They have 

more money for hardwood floor in the Premier’s office than 

they do to helping our seniors. What does that say? That’s their 

priority? That’s a government who has talked about a growth 

plan. The problem is they can’t manage the growth plan, they 

can’t manage the province, the growth plan. Truly, they cannot. 

They can spin it the way they want and they can try, but clearly 

the people will talk about this. And at the end of the day, it’s 

individuals that are suffering. 

 

So when you see a government coming out with this type of 

legislation for boundaries and they want more politicians — 

that’s their priority — people are asking, who asked for more 

politicians? And if you look clearly, if you look at the numbers, 

and I’m going to go over the numbers because I think it’s 

important we talk about the numbers from other provinces to 

the numbers in Saskatchewan versus constituents versus MLA, 

the representation that’s there. 

 

Let’s talk about that and let’s make sure we look at the numbers 

because I think that’s important. But this government’s priority 

says, well no, no, we want to focus on more MLAs. We want to 

focus on more millions for those issues that we want, but we 

don’t want to focus on some of the challenges that working 

families . . . Working families are struggling out there. And you 

know, you have a government who talks about being humble. 

They have no clue what that means. And I’ve talked about this. 

They better hope that their Premier stays a long time, because if 

he should decide to leave them I think that you’re going to see a 

lot of those backbenchers are going to be feeling pretty sad 

because the people will send the message because of the way 

. . . your priorities. 

 

You’re prioritizing more MLAs. You’re taking out the 

Aboriginal population. You’re trying to get rid of it. That today 

is what we’re talking about. Those are some of the challenges. 

And when I say this, you look clearly, how is it that a 

government that’s supposed to have so much . . . And you 

know, the budget’s coming out and we’ll see on Wednesday. 

What will be this government’s priority? It’s going to be 

interesting to see, really going to be interesting to see what this 

government’s priority is. More politicians. It’s about hardwood 

floor. It’s about everyone else getting prepared to tighten your 

belts. The government’s asking . . . and they run advertising, 

$92,000 worth of advertising is the number we’re being told to 

tell people to get ready. 

 

Now either it’s not going to be as bad as they think or the public 

is oh, it’s going to be bad and then it’s not as bad so they’ll say, 

the government can spin it saying, oh see, it wasn’t that bad. Or 

truly the government has lost its priorities. And then we look at 

the waste of money that government has wasted. And we’re 

talking about some of those challenges. The public is 

wondering, how about our tax dollars? Are you doing right with 

the tax dollars? The government . . . You’ve been handed an 

opportunity again to look after, and people want their tax 

dollars looked after. They want to make it very clear. They want 

to make it very clear. They do not want their dollars . . . And 

people want to share in this boom in the economy. That’s the 

unfortunate thing that’s going on right now. So many people are 

not. They’re not insiders with the Sask Party. They’re not 

friends of the Sask Party. And if you’re not there, you don’t get 

the benefits that so many are not feeling right now. There’s a lot 

of working men and women in this province, middle class, that 

are struggling to make ends meet. Do they think that 

government cares about them? Not with the cost of living the 

way it’s going up, to provide for their families. No. They do not 

feel that from that government. And you know, you can have so 

many members . . . And I guess like I’ve said, a little humble 

pie? No way, not them. Can they ever admit they’re wrong? No, 

it’s always somebody else’s fault. So who are they going to 

blame for this boundaries? Is it going to blame somebody else 

that they chose to prioritize three more MLAs versus our 

seniors, versus education? So when you see a government doing 

that, who are they going to blame for that? It’s going to be 

interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see who do they blame, 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

who do they say, it’s their fault why we had to do this. 

 

But I want to get into the numbers now and a little bit about the 

bill. And clearly, let’s look at some of the numbers because I 

think this is worth for the record. We’ve got to make sure this is 

for the record. You look at the following, you know, 

population. And Ontario, 13.373 million residents, constituents; 

107 MLAs. They represent per MLA and constituent 124,981 

per MLA. Wow, that’s amazing. Now Quebec, 7.9 million 

constituency; 125 MLAs. Well 63,838 constituents per MLA. 

Wow, if you look at those numbers. Now British Columbia, 

4,773,300 and they have 85 MLAs; 53,804 constituents per 

MLA for British Columbia. Now Alberta, 3,779,400 

constituents, 87 MLAs; 43,441 constituents versus MLA. 

That’s amazing if you look at Alberta. Manitoba, 1,250,600; 57 

MLAs. Wow, 57 MLAs; 21,940 constituents per MLA. That in 

itself . . . Now you look at Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

look at Saskatchewan: 1,057,900; 58 MLAs. You have 18,240, 

the lowest. The numbers that I talked about are the lowest. So 

there’s some questions about this. There’s some questions and 

some concerns. 

 

What and where has anyone shared with the government that 

they wanted more politicians, more MLAs in this province 

when you look at these numbers? Is the Sask Party going to 

share that? Are they going to share those numbers with 

constituency? I don’t think so. They don’t want the public to 

know this stuff. But we’re trying to share this with the public so 

the public sees what’s going on, what this government is doing 

and what they’re trying to get through. And it’s pretty sad to say 

that the government that talks about its having the finances 

coming in so good and all the money to spend and everybody’s 

going to do well, to see that they’re prioritizing three more 

MLAs, more politicians which will cost millions to the 

province, to the taxpayers. And that’s the kind of questions that 

are going on. So that’s a little surprising to the people. 

 

So having said that, you know, we look at the numbers. And 

how can a government have that as its priority versus over 

everything else that’s going on, whether it’s K to 12 education, 

whether it’s daycares, whether it’s seniors, whether it’s . . . You 

know, you look at the middle class just trying to make ends 

meet. You know, they’re trying their darndest to keep things 

going. They’re trying to make sure they cover the bills: they 

cover the rent; they cover the mortgage; they cover the vehicles. 

The activities they want their kids involved — let’s face it, kids 

today, it’s expensive to be involved in activities whether it’s 

sports, after-school stuff. And some of the schools do a great 

job. We know that. But you know what? That’s a sad reality 

that this government doesn’t have that as its priority. It doesn’t. 

It doesn’t have that as a priority. It doesn’t. It has more MLAs. 

That’s where they want to go with millions. 

 

I don’t know how you guys are going to sell this one because 

you’re going to have to answer to that and you’re going to get 

the public asking. And I think we’ve had a lot of people asking, 

how come? Why? And at the end of the day, you know, you 

look at the MLAs, and the backbenchers clearly have to be 

looking at this because I can’t see how at the end of the day 

they can support and say, yes this is our priority of our 

government. I realize that they’re not in the in and . . . 

[inaudible] . . . you know. Members that are in the backbenches, 

you know, they’re not in the in, and I realize that. But clearly, 

clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they should be because there’s 

certain things they can get. 

 

They can’t get P.A. a second bridge. We’ve seen that. That 

doesn’t help. So the backbenchers can’t do that so we’ll bring 

up, as certain issues are brought forward to us, as the opposition 

and different communities, we’ll bring clearly to this House 

how come the MLAs are not fighting for the constituency when 

they’re raising the . . . whether it’s Moose Jaw, whether it’s 

Prince Albert. We saw some of the challenge in Moose Jaw 

that’s coming forward. So how come this government isn’t 

dealing with those issues? That’s right. 

 

And at the end of the day we know the rural communities, the 

farms . . . and you know you talk about farms and 

representation, they want their MLAs to represent them. But I 

think if they look at the numbers, if they look at the numbers — 

and I don’t have all the facts on this, but I’ve heard some of the 

numbers — we’re losing a lot of farm families out there. If you 

look at the province, how many have we lost in the last five, six 

years, farm families that have left the farm? Where’s the 

numbers? And we need to talk about these challenges. They’re 

struggling out there. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Yes there is the big farm companies. We understand that the big 

farmers are doing well. We see that, and we’ve seen some of the 

numbers when we talk about that, the subsidies that are out 

there. And they’re doing quite well. There’s nothing wrong with 

that. And business needs to do well. 

 

But let’s be clear, let’s be clear: we need to be talking with 

individual farmers, the small-farm families. I don’t think 

they’re finding it as good. I think they’re struggling too. You 

know, maybe the mom and dad farm, and the mom’s working to 

try to keep things going. So they’re struggling. There’s a lot of 

challenges, and I can feel for what’s going on. So at the end of 

the day, I’m just saying we need to look at those communities, 

and we need to look at the farm community and see how 

small-farm families are doing on the farm. 

 

And have they been leaving? And we’ll get the numbers. We 

need to find that. So we’ll find out. I’m hearing some different 

numbers. It’s almost like somebody had said . . . I think at one 

time we heard a number — and I don’t know if this is the facts, 

but we need to look at it — but it’s just about 5,000 families 

have left the farm, the small farms. Where have they gone? 

 

So you know, you see less and less families on the farms, on the 

homestead, and stuff like that. So that’s interesting. As you see 

that happening, what happens to the rural communities? And 

it’s the small communities that rely on that, the small 

community who has the store, the grocery store who’s trying to 

make it, the restaurant. They’re trying to make ends meet within 

a small community. So there are those issues. 

 

So government’s priority is clearly more politicians because for 

whatever reason they want . . . Well because they have to travel 

sometimes an hour. And that’s the priority of the Sask Party 

with 49 members because they don’t have enough members; 

they’ve got to have three more. They hope they’re going to get 

them. We don’t know that they’ll elect them. They would like 



2778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

to get them. But you know, that’s fine. Humble yourselves as 

you usually do because you’re probably the . . . As we’ve heard, 

you’re such a humble government. And the people see that. The 

public sees it. 

 

But having said that, we go through the different numbers and 

where we’re going. So for now, this government and this bill, 

Bill 49 . . . or Bill 79 — sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker — clearly is 

asking the people of the province to spend, to trust us. Trust us; 

we’re the government. We know we need three more MLAs. 

Trust us. We want to take anyone under 18 out of the formula. 

Trust us. We’re prepared to spend millions for more politicians. 

Trust us with your dollars because we’re the government you 

can trust. Well that’s fine. Just keep saying that. Maybe if they 

say it enough and the PR [public relations] spin, that people, 

they think, will buy it. But I think the people are starting to ask 

questions. 

 

They are no longer a young government. Let me make it very 

clear. They are not a young government anymore. It’s time that 

they are going to have to start dealing with some of the damage 

for the years that they have served this House, and this is one of 

the bills that they’re going to have to deal with, one of the bills. 

They have a priority as three more politicians at millions. 

They’ve got $22,000 worth of hardwood floor in the Premier’s 

office as a priority. That’s what the people are being asked. So 

there’s the trusting. I think it’s going to be interesting when the 

public has this. 

 

And then you talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the trust. You 

look at what my colleagues have been raising about, I guess, 

situations at the universities, the way of handling. And it’s 

insiders and individuals who are getting some of the sweetheart 

deals, dealing with the government. Those are the challenges 

that people are frustrated with and wondering what’s going on. 

It’s about accountability and it’s about trust. And when you take 

that trust for advantage, we’ve seen . . . Who did they mentor 

under? Who did the Premier mentor under? What government? 

I think, you know, when you look at that in the ’80s, who did 

they mentor under? Clearly we see that. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very clearly at this 

point we have raised the concerns on behalf of the people. Why 

was your prioritizing three more politicians at millions? Some 

of the areas. So having said that, I’m prepared at this point to 

adjourn on Bill 79. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Cumberland has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 80 — The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 80, An Act to amend The Power 

Corporation Act. This legislation that’s being brought forward 

today has a whole number of provisions that relate to expanding 

the power of cabinet to deal with the power corporation, the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and I’m going to have to go 

through them I think in detail to explain all the different 

changes. 

 

But one of the most substantial changes will show up a little 

later, which is increasing, increasing the borrowing limit from 

$5 billion to $8 billion. In the explanatory notes and in the 

comments from the minister, it appears that the borrowing 

requirements for the corporation in the next seven or eight years 

are actually going to be $11 billion, so it’s not entirely clear 

why the request is only for 8 billion at this time. But it’s also 

interesting to note that the present limit of 5 billion was brought 

forward by the government into the legislature in 1987 and that 

that limit has worked for almost 30 years. 

 

So let’s go through the bill. I think it’s worth, if anybody at 

home wants to follow along, you can go and look into the 

government website and find the bill. But basically the 

amendments that start in this particular bill relate to a whole 

number of issues. The very first section amended is section 3 is 

amended. And what’s going on here is that the government is 

asking for some changes to the protections for the corporation 

and for the minister and for the board members and the 

employees. So they’re asking to put in a new section in this 

particular legislation that would effectively allow for a 

limitation of class action nuisance lawsuits brought against 

emitters. 

 

Now this must relate to the fact that in Saskatchewan we still 

have a great portion of our electricity produced by burning coal. 

We know that that’s changing because of the price of natural 

gas, so there are more opportunities to use natural gas to 

produce power. But what this particular legislation is doing is 

asking that the power be given to provide a limitation on the 

lawsuits that may be brought forward. And so this is an 

interesting protection. It basically says that if a whole group of 

people are damaged by activities by SaskPower, that the ability 

to sue them is not there in this particular legislation. So now it 

says effectively that there’s still a responsibility on the 

corporation to exercise reasonable care, but it does limit this 

ability of a group of people who may be injured or damaged by 

the emissions from a power plant or any other activity to 

recover legally in the courts. So those are damage claims that 

are causing problems. 

 

Now the rationale is that in British Columbia they have a 

similar clause for BC Hydro, which has been in place for a 

while. I think that may relate to the fact that they have more 

experience with class action lawsuits in BC [British Columbia]. 

But this is a change, and I think the public needs to know about 

it. And it is justified in the legislation or by the minister as 

being something that will protect SaskPower now. So that’s a 

new section added, 3(2.2). 

 

There’s another new section that’s being added which removes 

the personal liability of the minister, directors, and officers from 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

damage claims where they’ve been acting in good faith or under 

the authority of the Act. Now this is another protection that’s 

being added in place to deal with the fact that directors, 

ministers, CEOs [chief executive officer] of corporations have 

been held liable for damages to people as a result of the 

operations of power production. And it’s here. It does provide 

this protection of SaskPower as far as it goes here, but what we 

need to make sure is that the public understands that the right to 

sue has been limited. 

 

Now the next clause is an interesting clause because it relates 

. . . This is a change to clause 8, section 8 of the Act. And it 

only adds, you know, one or two words to this whole legislation 

but it adds the term reliability. Now what we know is that 

SaskPower over the years has had a very reliable system 

because it was effectively a closed system. It still is kind of a 

closed system in that we only have tie lines with our neighbours 

in a very small amount. Maybe 10 to 15 per cent of our power is 

tied in with our neighbours. 

 

But in North America there’s a . . . standards are set by the 

North American Electric Reliability Corporation which 

establishes these reliability standards. They’re especially crucial 

in the States because so many power corporations trade power 

back and forth between different agencies. The most dramatic 

example of what can happen is when there was a power 

shutdown in production on the southern side of the Great Lakes, 

which actually then came around both the US [United States] 

and the Canadian side of the Great Lakes and basically 

generated a great concern in Ontario and in Ontario Hydro 

about the reliability of their system. 

 

One of the results of that particular circuit breaker, kind of, 

sense of the power being shut down all around the Great Lakes 

was that the highest priority in Ontario Hydro became having 

many smaller sources of power so that there would be power 

available even if the main system shut down. And that’s one of 

the rationales in Ontario for the development of many of their 

small hydro projects, many of their wind projects, and they 

actually paid a huge premium on the electricity produced in 

those projects which then made them economically viable 

because reliability became the number one issue for them in 

setting up their power system. 

 

In Saskatchewan as more interconnection happens with our 

neighbours but also as there’s more wind power on the system, 

as there are more small power systems, as there’s less or rather 

as there are more private generators added into the system, 

reliability becomes a question. And so what this particular 

provision is doing is it allows for a standard for reliability to be 

added in to the provisions in the legislation. And this is 

important because it then allows for an independent auditor, this 

North American Electric Reliability Corporation, to assess how 

SaskPower is doing on its reliability. Now this is a whole new 

area for SaskPower because it hasn’t been required before, and 

one of the questions then becomes, how are these assessments 

made of SaskPower and its reliability? 

 

[21:30] 

 

Now many parts of the province have complaints different 

times in the year around the power outages that happen within 

SaskPower. This may actually be able to assist in dealing with 

some of those issues, although most of the power outages in 

Saskatchewan relate to weather-related incidents or sometimes 

animals and other things that deal with the power lines. 

 

The next provision in this legislation then relates to how we can 

set up the auditors to assess the compliance with the standards, 

and it’s the standards of basically the design and operation and 

reliability of the whole system. And this provision allows for 

that to be done independently or outside of SaskPower. That 

hasn’t been the way that they’ve done it for many, many years 

so this requires that there be some new provisions put in place. 

And once again, these will be contract auditors to do this kind 

of work. Now it also, in this same area in section 8, goes to 

effectively allow for other facilities to be brought into the 

system and to make sure that they’re complying with the 

reliability standards. And the subsection then allows for 

SaskPower to bill those institutions or other corporations to get 

the cost back to them. 

 

Now probably the biggest example of this would be the 

Northland Power project that’s at North Battleford. We still 

have not received full information as to how much that’s going 

to cost Saskatchewan taxpayers either in the short term or in the 

long term. And some of these provisions directly relate to trying 

to bring those type of private projects into the system and do it 

in a way where there can be an independent audit of it. So we 

should, we need to watch this pretty carefully and see what’s 

going on. 

 

Now the next section is clause 6 of the bill, and this section 

relates to market activities. And it indicates that this is a whole 

new section for the legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

something that I think all of us should be quite wary of and 

carefully examine what is happening here. 

 

Effectively what this legislation, this section 6 — which is a 

new section, 8.4, in The Power Corporation Act — it allows for 

market activities to take place. Now what happens is that 

SaskPower’s traditional role has been to provide power to 

Saskatchewan people and do it in an efficient way and in a way 

that makes sure that resources are being used appropriately. But 

what this particular section does, appears to authorize 

SaskPower to have a section of it or contract with somebody to 

be involved in buying and selling electrical energy, buying and 

selling natural gas and any other products — we know that from 

some of the plants they have the fly ash which is sold as a 

business transaction — but that these transactions and this 

marketing is being directly authorized in the legislation, and 

protection’s being put in place to do this particular activity. 

 

Now it states very clearly in the notes that are here that the 

purpose in doing this would be for SaskPower to get involved in 

these markets with the goal of making a profit. Well that’s 

always the goal when you’re going into a market. But what we 

also know is that this is the kind of difficult area where BC 

Hydro is still being sued by some of the southern California 

electrical companies over deals that they made in buying and 

selling power during some of the heights of power trading, and 

they’ve created some fairly substantial liabilities on BC Hydro. 

 

And so what . . . We don’t know for sure what is intended here 

in this provision, but it is taking SaskPower away from its core 

business of providing power for the people of Saskatchewan. 



2780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

And so what this legislation is specifically doing is giving 

SaskPower the capacity to enter into these contracts. 

 

I know that within the community of people who understand 

SaskPower and how it’s working, that this issue has actually 

been raised, that there has been a lot of gas trading, electricity 

trading, and other activities which are not fully able to be 

scrutinized by the public, and that there are some issues around 

that. Now this may be legislation here that’s going to attempt to 

create some of the legal basis to allow this to be an activity at 

SaskPower. But my advice, after many years following this file, 

is that this is an area where we need to be very careful because 

what can happen is that you can make some money but you also 

can lose much more money very quickly and this money will be 

at the expense of Saskatchewan people. And we need to have 

full disclosure on what the intention is as it relates to this 

particular part of this legislation. 

 

So SaskPower’s going into the marketing business. Who are 

they going to sell it to? What kinds of operations are they going 

to be involved with? Are they going to be buying power in 

other parts of the world and selling it to other areas or are they 

only going to be selling their own power? Are they going to be 

buying natural gas in places where they’re basically just trading 

in natural gas futures? Or what are they going to do? 

 

So I think there are quite a number of questions as it relates to 

this. We’ll obviously have a chance to ask more questions when 

we get into committee about this, but if it’s an attempt to 

legalize things that they’ve been doing outside of their mandate, 

we need to know that. If it’s an attempt to go into a whole new 

business because they think they can make a bunch of money, 

well then we need to know who are the people that are going to 

be running this or who is SaskPower going to contract with to 

do this type of activity because when you’re trading in this 

whole very volatile world of commodities — electricity, natural 

gas, and other things — and using public money to do that, we 

need to be very careful watching that. 

 

So now the next clause is a clause related to, and it’s a change, 

to section 10(3). And effectively what this says right now is if 

SaskPower is involved in buying or selling real property of a 

value of more than 150,000, it has to be approved by Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. And the importance of this is that that 

becomes a public record, and it’s a document that we can see on 

a regular basis. And we monitor the orders in council as it 

relates to buying and selling of property on a very regular basis. 

 

This legislation appears to want to change that amount of 

150,000 to an amount that . . . Well we’re not quite sure what 

it’ll be. It says, and I’ll read subsection 10(3): 

 

Where the purchase price or sale price of real property 

included in one transaction entered into by the corporation 

exceeds the amount fixed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, the corporation shall obtain the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council . . . 

 

Right now the limit is 150,000. It’s in the legislation. We know 

that that’s the rule, and we get full disclosure of the purchase 

and sale of land. What this does is gives the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council the ability to set the amounts from time to 

time and in effect hide transactions from the public. And so we 

would say that this is not a very smart or transparent way of 

amending this legislation, and it may be one that the Premier 

would want to check with the minister about changing that so 

that we’re not obscuring the buying and selling of real property 

in this Crown corporation. So it’s another example of where it 

appears they want to hide some things in this legislation. 

 

Now the next section relates to the power to expropriate. And 

the rationale here for this particular legislation is that they want 

to replace the present power to expropriate with something that 

more closely aligns with the present expropriation Act. And 

right now I don’t think there have been any major problems 

related to this, but maybe there are some issues that have 

generated this particular change. But practically, when land is 

being expropriated, it should be done in the most transparent 

way available. And I think that that’s one of the issues that’s 

here. So this is another one that we need to watch very carefully 

and understand exactly why this change is being made. It’s 

probably not possible to tell from the legislation itself, and so 

we may end up then having to ask questions about, what are the 

particular circumstances that generated this change? 

 

But I think practically that SaskPower needs power to 

expropriate in appropriate circumstances. So it is a traditional 

power that they’ve had to make sure that their power lines or 

pipelines or anything else are operating appropriately. I know 

that there are some issues with underground cables and other 

types of cables that they put in place where this may be a 

required change that we have. So expropriation is one of the 

things. 

 

Now the next section also relates to this whole issue of 

expropriation, and this one has been amended to effectively 

make it clearer by how it’s being drafted. And practically we 

can ask questions about this section 15 amendment when we are 

asking questions about section 14. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Now the next provision of this legislation is clause 10 of the bill 

and it relates to section 23 of the Act and it’s effectively a 

dictionary type change where they’re making sure pipelines, the 

word pipeline, is one word and it’s spelled the same everywhere 

in the Act. So I don’t really have too much difficulty with that 

particular provision there or in section 11 which relates to 

section 24 of the Act. 

 

Now the next section, clause 12 of the bill which is an 

amendment to the section 29, this one ends up clarifying that 

The Homesteads Act doesn’t apply. Now anybody who’s bought 

or sold property in Saskatchewan knows that there’s a 

declaration that you have to put on or swear if the non-owning 

spouse is involved with the disposition of a homestead property, 

and the corporation Act gives an exemption where these lands 

or easements are required for power lines or pipelines. This 

particular section here will add the words “poles, structures, 

wires, conduits or pipelines.” So it adds a whole number of 

other words that clarify how this applies. I suspect that this 

must have come out of a specific situation where they were 

having some difficulty getting the acquisition of land and there 

was a homestead involved. But we can get a chance to ask 

about that when we get into the committee. 

 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

Now the next change relates to the repeal of section 30.1 and I 

guess both . . . and 30.2. And both of these changes relate to a 

time not that long ago, I guess about 12 years ago when the land 

titles system was being changed and so there was a time when, 

during that transition where we had both the land titles 

automated network development project operating and the old 

land titles system, and this wanted to make sure that any 

SaskPower transactions during that time would be fully dealt 

with in an appropriate fashion. That’s no longer a requirement, 

and this will just remove those clauses from this bill. 

 

The next section in this bill once again is just a minor change 

around the change in the name of the Highways department. 

And so then we’re getting close to the end of the bill, which is I 

think a good sign. 

 

And what comes then in section 17 is once again adding the 

provisions around all of the related structures that go to 

transmission and distribution lines, so it’s related structures: 

wires, conduits, communications equipment, cable, or pipes. 

And so that’s all included in the bill, and also there are some 

changes around getting easements for that. 

 

Now the next section 18 or clause 18 of the bill relates to 

section 43 of the Act, and this is where the borrowing power is 

increased from $5 billion to $8 billion. This is an interesting 

change that’s being requested. And the difficult part is that we 

know that the Minister of Finance and the Premier have been 

taking money from the Crowns, including SaskPower, to apply 

those funds in other areas, and so we’re concerned that this may 

be another part of that. 

 

We do recognize that there are many capital projects that are 

under way at SaskPower over the next period of years. But 

unfortunately the way that the monies have been moved from 

SaskPower over the last few years raised concerns that were set 

out — it’s now over 20 years ago — with the Gass report when 

what he and his committee of people had to do was go in and 

try to figure out for the Crowns whether the debt that they 

actually had in the Crowns was related to the corporation or 

related to the operations of government. We sincerely hope that 

that’s not the track that we’ve been going down the last few 

years but unfortunately there are comments from the auditors, 

comments from other people, who are raising questions about 

this. And so this particular clause facilitates borrowing more 

money in the Crown, and we need to watch that. 

 

And as I stated at the outset of my comments, the last time this 

amount, this borrowing limit was increased was 1987 and we all 

know kind of what happened with the finances of the province 

just a couple of years thereafter. And so we’re concerned about 

that particular situation. 

 

Now then clause 19 of the bill is replacement of a relocation 

easement power, and also emergency powers about electricity 

or electrical energy. The provision around relocation looks like 

it’s pretty straightforward. But when we get to the other clause 

around the delivery of electrical energy, I think all of us should 

be watching this one carefully. This follows the discretionary 

power provisions in The Manitoba Hydro Act and it talks about 

what a power emergency is. And so when you look at — in this 

definition, this is going to be the new section 59.02 of the 

power Act — it talks about, and I’ll quote: 

In this section, ‘power emergency’ means an emergency 

by reason of: 

 

(a) damage to, or destruction, failure or breakdown of, 

any of the corporation’s transmission or distribution 

lines or apparatus, equipment or other facilities; 

 

(b) waste of electrical energy; 

 

(c) a demand for electrical energy in excess of the 

corporation’s electrical energy resources; or 

 

(d) any other matter that restricts or may restrict the 

delivery of electrical energy by the corporation. 

 

And so then in subsection (2) of that legislation, it goes on to 

say that: 

 

Notwithstanding any other Act or law, if, in the opinion of 

the corporation, there is a power emergency or a power 

emergency may reasonably be expected to occur, the 

corporation may do all or any of the following: 

 

(a) allocate and distribute electrical energy between 

different customers or classes of customers, and, for that 

purpose may establish preferences and priorities 

between different customers or classes of customers; 

[or] 

 

(b) interrupt or decrease delivery of electrical energy or 

cut off the supply of electrical energy to any customer or 

class of customers in order to effect the most 

economical, efficient and equitable use and distribution 

of electrical energy; [or] 

 

(c) regulate, restrict, prohibit and control the 

corporation’s generation, transmission, distribution, 

supply and use of electrical energy”. 

 

So these are powers that are new. This is a new provision that’s 

giving powers to SaskPower to make some very crucial 

decisions about how electricity is distributed in the province. 

 

Now what we see here is that it gives them the right to ration, to 

cut off power. How it’s done in other parts of the world is, 

when there are clauses or powers like this, it may be that — and 

I think we have it in some of the supply contracts with our 

largest users in Saskatchewan — is that if there’s a huge 

demand because of weather or whatever or a problem with 

some of the generation, generating capacity, you can reduce 

power to a particular industrial site to make sure that there’s 

power in people’s homes. Or I know in other countries they 

often will shut off the power in the middle of the night, and so 

you’ll have power off from, say — I don’t know — 2 a.m. to 6 

a.m. And everybody just knows that’s part of how the power 

system works. But this is a type of activity which we’re not 

used to in Saskatchewan because we have capacity to cover our 

power needs. 

 

But clearly there’s a concern within the Power Corporation that 

we’re pushing the limits of our ability to generate sufficient 

power for the province. And so here in this legislation, there’s a 

provision which will provide those emergency powers and 



2782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

make some, you know, have SaskPower make some very 

difficult choices. Now we don’t quite know how this is all laid 

out or what the process would be to deal with this, but those 

powers are given in this new section and it may be that we need 

to have much more detail on how this would happen. But we 

can clearly imagine that there are situations where the amount 

of power available would have to be rationed or curtailed, and 

that’s something that we should all keep in mind. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation is a whole series of 

amendments to The Power Corporation Act. They have quite 

significant effect on individuals, on corporations, on the ability 

to sue the corporation, to sue the minister, to sue people when 

there’s damages from some of the emissions. There’s a whole 

array of changes that we need to look at very carefully. I know 

that some of my other colleagues here would like to speak to 

this bill as well and so at this time I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 80, The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 81 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 81 — The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to talk tonight to Bill No. 81, The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act. This bill sets out to do a few 

things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The first thing it does is it changes the Global Transportation 

Hub from a treasury Crown, which was established as a treasury 

Crown in 2009, to a statutory corporation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And one of the other things it will be doing, it will be moving 

the Global Transportation Hub from municipal to provincial 

jurisdiction, so taking the jurisdiction from the city to the 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the Global Transportation 

Hub, I’d actually just like to read no. 19(1) into the record here: 

 

Notwithstanding The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act or 

The Planning and Development Act, 2007, the authority 

has the exclusive authority to grant all approvals required 

for a development within the transportation logistics hub, 

and neither the city nor any other municipality within 

which the transportation logistics hub is located shall 

restrict or in any way control development within the 

transportation logistics hub. 

 

(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the 

authority is hereby designated as an approving authority 

within the meaning of The Planning and Development Act, 

2007, and has the exclusive authority to exercise any 

power and grant any approval or make any decision that 

an approving authority or council can make pursuant to 

The Planning and Development Act, 2007, including 

approving the subdivision of or development of land 

located in the transportation logistics hub. 

 

[22:00] 

 

So that piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sets out how the Global 

Transportation Hub will become the regulatory body for its 

master land use plan, inclusive of all the Global Transportation 

Hub or GTH land planning, zoning and bylaws, infrastructure 

design and development standards, and subdivision approvals 

and building permits. 

 

And I know earlier in the fall here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 

were some issues around jurisdiction with the RM [rural 

municipality] of Sherwood and the city. And the province had 

some issues ironing some details out around Kal Tire coming to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I don’t know, is this the evolution? I know the minister said 

basically that this bill is the evolution of the Global 

Transportation Hub, but I think some of our questions on this 

side of the House and just people in general in Saskatchewan 

will ask the question: is this structure in fact better for the 

Global Transportation Hub and for the people of Saskatchewan 

with respect to the inland port operation? Will this help grow 

our warehousing and logistics sectors? 

 

And how . . . I think a question that needs to be asked is how 

will the GTH work with both the city of Regina and the RM as 

well? Those are important questions to ask, especially when 

we’re moving a body from one jurisdiction to the next. 

 

Obviously I think a question too: there’s been a great deal of 

public investment in the GTH and it shows great promise where 

we’ve got the road, railroad, the airport all lining up to support 

this inland port operation, and is it living up to its potential? 

 

I think we’ve seen some issues that have arisen. Actually just 

last week here in this House we saw an issue around land 

expropriation. Sue Ailsby and her family have taken this issue 

to the courts after they have alleged and believe that the 

government has misled them and made false promises and 

failed to consult. So we’ve seen this jurisdictional mess in the 

fall around Kal Tire coming. We’ve seen some of the issues 

around land expropriation and some difficulty with 

management. I know actually in June 2012 the president and 

CEO John Law was replaced by Chris Dekker, so there’s been 

some management issues. So I think the question here, is this 

the right structure to maximize use of this facility? 

 

It’s interesting, I’m a Saskatoon girl, born and bred. I live two 

blocks from my childhood home. But I haven’t had much 

opportunity to head sort of west of Regina but I have, just a few 

months ago, that was the first time I’ve been that direction and 

it is quite something to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know 

actually the first time I had opportunity to see an inland port 

basically was probably about 15 years ago driving to California 

to visit my in-laws, and I can’t remember if it was Utah or 

Idaho but seeing this huge, huge structure. It was quite amazing 

actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s great to see that kind of 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

development happening here. But you of course want to make 

sure that the structures that we put in place are going to support 

the continued growth and development of that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I think that there’s one other issue that I’d like to flag here, and 

I know the Information and Privacy Commissioner has raised 

this, that the opposition was cc’d [carbon copy] on a letter to the 

minister and the Information and Privacy Commissioner flags 

the concern and asks if it’s the government’s intention to add 

the Authority, the Global Transportation Hub Authority to the 

list of government institutions for the purposes of The Freedom 

of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. And he goes on 

to say that, because of the important role played by the 

Authority in the economic life of the province and the 

expenditure of public funds contemplated in this particular bill, 

the Information and Privacy Commissioner is submitting that 

the Authority should be as transparent and accountable as 

possible with all, as is the case of other ministries, Crowns, 

boards, commissions and agencies. So I think that question we 

need to ask is, will the Global Transportation Hub Authority fall 

under this Information and Privacy Commissioner’s purview, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So as an opposition and as residents here in Saskatchewan, we 

will be keeping an eye on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

continue to ask this question: is it the right structure to move the 

Global Transportation Hub forward? 

 

But I do know I have colleagues who will also be interested in 

discussing the Global Transportation Hub. And with that I 

would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 81, The 

Global Transportation Hub Authority Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 82 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 82 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with pleasure to 

speak to Bill No. 82, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Act. This legislation is relatively straightforward. 

When it was introduced in December, the Minister of Finance 

indicated that he was attempting to modernize or update this 

particular legislation to make sure that it served people well. I 

know that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has been of great 

benefit to people right across Saskatchewan for many years — I 

guess it’s getting close to 30 years right now. And what it does 

do is provide a way for people who have irregular income or 

have income that comes in different ways that they can 

participate in a pension plan savings arrangement. 

 

It has changed in the last couple of years. I think there were 

changes that this government brought forward in December of 

2010 which changed the Saskatchewan Pension Plan from 

being very unique in Canada. In other words, people could put 

their savings in there without having to deal with the federal 

Income Tax Act. But changes were made then in 2010 so it 

really is much the same as a registered retirement savings plan 

and, therefore, there have been some adjustments that have been 

made to it. 

 

This particular legislation just does a couple of pretty 

straightforward things. What it does is make sure that the rules 

around survivors’ benefits are the same as set out in The 

Pension Benefits Act, and so that’s important. 

 

It also will allow members to transfer funds from registered 

pension plans or locked-in retirement accounts into the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And so this is a good thing in the 

sense that people that have money in a few different places can 

bring it into this plan which has very reasonable charges and 

allows for perhaps a better investment policy to go. 

 

So another amendment that’s here relates to the fact that after 

30 years of operation, this particular plan has run into some 

situations where people who have contributed to the plan have 

disappeared and they don’t know where the people are. And so 

this is putting in a provision whereby those people who have 

money invested who can’t be located, that their share of the 

fund can be transferred to the General Revenue Fund in their 

name and kept there in case the person ever shows up again. 

This is similar to what happens with the dead accounts at banks 

and credit unions right now, and so this is just adding that 

provision to this particular legislation. 

 

So other than some small language changes, that’s the extent of 

this legislation. And it’s adding some special or extra provisions 

to legislation which I think is good legislation for Saskatchewan 

people. And so with that I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 83 — The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Glad to rise and join debate on Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker 

Recruitment and Immigration Services Act. 



2784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

Again referring to the minister’s second reading speech, 

wherein setting out in legislation “. . . to protect foreign workers 

and immigrants from exploitation by recruiters, immigration 

consultants, and employers while being recruited to 

Saskatchewan or are in the process of immigrating to our 

province.” Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, pretty reasonable intent 

on the face of it. 

 

And certainly there’s been a lot of exciting things happening in 

the past decade as regards immigration in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I think there’s some thanks due to people like 

then MLA Pat Lorjé from Saskatoon Southeast, who’d done a 

pretty interesting study on the importance of an immigration 

policy. That particular piece of work borrowed a lot from the 

example of Manitoba and the success that had been had with the 

immigrant nominee program in that province. And certainly the 

immigrant nominee program served as a real model for 

Saskatchewan up till this present day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where it gives us concern in terms of what has been a 

successful approach . . . And certainly the minister references in 

his second reading speech going from 200 nominations under 

the SINP [Saskatchewan immigration nominee program] in 

’05-06 to 4,000 annually now. Again it’s something that bears 

closer examination. But also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

importance of the family class to that success and again the way 

that we’ve seen the federal government taking, pulling the rug 

out from their federal cousins across the way and the way that 

the family class was rather arbitrarily shut down. 

 

Again, so broader sort of strokes we’re talking about in terms of 

the history of the program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But for the 

legislation in and of itself and the five basic principles that 

they’re seeking to build the legislation on, referring the second 

reading speech from the minister, first, to serve employees, the 

bill acknowledging that: 

 

. . . employers need the services of recruiters and 

immigration consultants to help with foreign workers to 

allow them to immigrate to our province. Second, it will 

ensure employers pay for the costs of recruiting their 

foreign workers. Third, this legislation will make the 

recruiting and immigration consulting market transparent 

and open. Fourth, it will require recruiters, immigration 

consultants, and employers to act ethically.  

 

 And the fifth and final principle, that “. . . the bill will inform 

and enforce by educating stakeholders on their obligations 

under the proposed legislation, and if they fail to comply, by 

establishing enforcement measures.” 

 

[22:15] 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, these seem to be pretty reasonable 

measures on the face of it but the proof, as is often the case with 

this government, will be in the pudding and how this actually 

plays out and is enforced and is enabled. Again we have 

questions certainly from this side of the House in terms of, what 

is the incidence of unscrupulous or dubious behaviour on the 

part of the recruiters or immigration consultants? What is the 

incidence of that kind of behaviour? And again what are the, 

you know, in the volume that the minister is able to reference in 

the second reading speech, if he can talk about the volume of 

immigration, certainly there must be some more precise 

understanding of what sort of abuses or wrongdoings have gone 

on. And again as with anything involving the service of fellow 

humans, there should be that regulation. There should be that 

oversight. And again we want to make sure that the oversight 

regime is commensurate with what’s happening in the field, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So serving employers — that’s fine and good. Certainly 

employers, as they set out to engage these services to bring 

workers to the province, there’s a reasonable expectation of, 

you know, you’ve paid the fee and you should get the service. 

And what sort of guarantees or assurances are there around 

quality of those services? And again when you’re dealing with 

people moving from literally around the globe to Saskatchewan, 

both in terms of the employers’ side of the equation but also for 

the employees, there’s a huge responsibility that comes with 

that kind of impact on people’s lives. So again it’s fair and good 

to serve the employers who have paid for these services, who 

have paid for these temporary foreign workers, but also, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to ensure that there’s some fairness and 

adequate oversight for the foreign workers themselves. 

 

And again you talk about people that are in vulnerable working 

conditions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for people coming from 

around the world to Saskatchewan and being very, very 

cautious about making sure that their rights are being upheld in 

the workplace. And this is where it’s incumbent not just on, you 

know, the oversight for the consultants or for the immigration 

representatives, but as this becomes a larger and more complex 

feature of the labour force in Saskatchewan, again that need for 

adequate oversight and enforcement is also increased, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So if you haven’t got that, then you’ve got people that can be in 

vulnerable circumstances and putting up with things that should 

ought not be going on. And if you don’t have again that 

education, that awareness on the part of temporary foreign 

workers as to what their rights are as people gaining a wage 

here in Saskatchewan and in Canada, then again there’s an 

education and an oversight job that is being done for the one 

part of the system, but you need to make sure that you’ve got 

that for the workers in the employment that they have landed 

here in Canada. 

 

So first principle being that it will serve employees, second that 

it will ensure employers pay for the cost of recruiting their 

foreign workers. Again it would be interesting to see how it 

works out in terms of how skills are assessed and how what 

constitutes adequate pay is ascertained. Again you hear 

different things anecdotally, but you’ve not had the factual 

analysis presented here, and perhaps that will come to 

committee. But what is the range in terms of fees that people 

are paying for these services? And again are there abuses that 

have gone on in this regard where inflated or exorbitant fees 

have been charged, and what indeed constitutes a fair cost for 

this service? 

 

The third principle of legislation, making “. . . recruiting and 

immigration consulting market transparent and open,” again 

sort of a motherhood and apple pie statement. It seems quite 

agreeable. But how that is played out and how the actual 

information that rises or falls upon is made available to the 



March 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2785 

public, made available to the legislature, will be the test of that 

particular measure. 

 

Fourth, requiring “. . . recruiters, immigration consultants, and 

employers to act ethically.” Again that’s pretty straight ahead, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, pretty straightforward. But again how 

these things are assured and secured will be the test of this. 

 

And again that fifth principle, “. . . the bill will inform and 

enforce by educating stakeholders on their obligations under the 

proposed legislation, and if they fail to comply, by establishing 

enforcement measures.” So what is that education program, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? What is that education program? What does it 

consist of? You know, you get the pamphlet together and hand 

that out and has the job been done? Or, you know, what does 

that consist of? And by developing enforcement measures, of 

course that is punted presumably to a future date. Well you 

know, you think that that would be brought forward at this time, 

but perhaps they’ve got more surprises for us yet to come. 

 

The second reading speech also talks about consultations that 

have gone on with stakeholders, one in 2011 and one earlier in 

the year. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you wonder about the 

consultation that had gone on with the community, and how 

genuine that consultation was. 

 

And again this is a government that passed along federal 

marching orders as regarded the family class of the immigrant 

nominee program. And again a way that that impacted a lot of 

people’s lives that moved literally from around the globe to 

here in Saskatchewan, made monumental decisions around 

business and family to set up a new life here in Saskatchewan 

based on an understanding that had been given to them by the 

province of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan government, 

and the way that that was arbitrarily reneged upon by the 

provincial government — again the provincial government 

points the finger at the federal government, but you wonder 

what kind of fight was put up. You wonder what kind of effort 

was put into making sure that the good name of Saskatchewan 

wasn’t drawn into question as it was in this case. And again you 

have people that moved from literally around the globe to 

Saskatchewan based on an understanding of what their 

possibilities for uniting family, bringing family to 

Saskatchewan under the then family class of the legislation, and 

the way that that was reneged upon. Again a black mark beside 

the good name of Saskatchewan out there in the world and 

again I would venture the kind of behaviour that is sort of 

anticipated in this legislature. 

 

In this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wherein if immigrant 

consultants or recruiters went and promoted one deal and then 

got people to Saskatchewan and then said, well you know, 

guess what, terms of the deal have changed, how would this 

very legislation reflect upon the behaviour of the Government 

of Saskatchewan when they arbitrarily change the family class 

albeit blaming the federal government? But the impact on 

people’s lives is there nonetheless. 

 

The minister in the second reading speech also states that the 

legislation will position Saskatchewan as having the: 

 

. . . most comprehensive protection for newcomers of any 

province in Canada. No other jurisdiction has protections 

for both recruitment and immigration consulting services 

that compare to these proposals. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

confident that this bill is good for Saskatchewan, good for 

foreign nationals coming to live and work in 

Saskatchewan, and good for Saskatchewan employers 

hiring foreign workers. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m also 

confident this legislation is good for recruiters and 

immigration consultants who are prepared to provide their 

services fairly and ethically. 

 

Well again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, until the boat’s in the water, I 

guess we’ll have to take the minister’s word for it and see how 

this actually works out. But past is prologue and we’ve seen 

again this government go out around the world and promote one 

bill of goods to people making decisions about businesses and 

families and inviting them here to Saskatchewan, and then 

when those families got here to Saskatchewan, changing the 

terms under which they had made their decision to come to this 

province in the first place. So it’s something we’ll be watching 

closely as the days go on and as the legislation unfolds. And 

certainly we’ll have more questions for the minister as this 

piece of legislation moves to committee, as to the particulars 

upon which this legislation will be based, and what’s going to 

happen with the enforcement measures, how that would be 

rolled out. 

 

I know that other of my colleagues are interested in 

participating in this debate and certainly I’m very happy to have 

joined in the debate tonight and will be following it as it reaches 

committee. Certainly in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, we’ve been 

beneficiary of people coming from again quite literally around 

the globe and, you know, reflected quite well in growth of 

things like the Sikh temple or the Krishna hall or the 

Vietnamese Buddhist temple; the way that different 

communities in their faith expression they’ve experienced 

growth which they’re quite proud of and quite pleased with. 

 

So again to make sure that all sides of this equation are fair and 

equitable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be watching to see that 

this legislation lives up to its billing from the minister and 

whether or not it does the job of protection and oversight for 

people engaged in an immigration consultancy or recruiting. 

 

But with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and noting that I’ve got 

other colleagues that would like to participate in this debate and 

noting the hour of the evening, I would move to adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 83, 

The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved to 

adjourn, that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 



2786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2013 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:29.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2759 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2764 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2765 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2767 

 Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2768 

 Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2770 

 Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2771 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2772 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2774 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2778 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2782 

 Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2783 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2783 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


