




















































Hansard: November 05, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 8A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3849 

 November 5, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce two guests that are in your gallery. Well actually one 

guest that’s in your gallery at the moment and one that we’re 

expecting pretty soon and running a little bit late, I understand. 

The folks from the Regina Open Door Society represented by 

Getachew Woldeyesus, the manager of settlement and family 

services for the Regina Open Door Society, apparently is 

running just a little bit late, I understand. 

 

But we are joined here this afternoon by Isabel Hernandez. 

Isabel — there she is waving to everyone — she is a 

cabinetmaker with A1 Choice Cabinets here in Regina. 

 

These individuals are joining us here today, Mr. Speaker, to 

help celebrate the improvements to the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program that were announced this 

afternoon. Mr. Speaker, please, all members, would you join 

with me to welcome Isabel to her Legislative Assembly this 

afternoon. And I think our other guest is just coming in now, so 

if you would be so kind to welcome them to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll join with the 

minister in welcoming the group from the Regina Open Door 

Society and thank them for the important work that they do here 

in our province. And Saskatchewan is a great place and it’s also 

important, Mr. Speaker, how we welcome people and how we 

best encourage their settlement here in the province. So we 

thank this very important organization for the work that it does, 

and of course we’ve had many discussions about the immigrant 

nominee program here in Saskatchewan. I’m sure those 

discussions will continue here on the floor of the Assembly, but 

that doesn’t distract from the important work that people in the 

community are doing. So I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these individuals to the Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like 

to introduce several guests who are joining us today in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. These guests come from across the 

province of Saskatchewan and are here today to support the 

creation of a provincial athletics commission to oversee 

professional boxing and mixed martial arts events in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Joining us today, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is no stranger to 

many of us, Mr. Pat Fiacco, former mayor of Regina and 

current CEO [chief executive officer] of Tourism 

Saskatchewan. Pat is also the current president of Boxing 

Canada. Anthony Scales is the head Brazilian jiu-jitsu instructor 

and co-owner of Complete Martial Arts and Fitness in Regina. 

If you can just give us a wave. Chris Desautels is the head 

instructor at the Spirit of the Dragon martial arts facility in 

Regina and is a mixed martial arts official and an RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] officer. His Worship Malcolm 

Eaton, mayor of the city of Humboldt, Chair of the mayors 

caucus and Vice-Chair of the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association board of directors, is also here. And 

Randy Fernets, director of industry development and sports 

tourism for Tourism Saskatoon. 

 

They are joined today, Mr. Speaker, by three officials from my 

ministry: Darin Banadyga, Melanie Baumann, and Benjamin 

Orr. Mr. Speaker, these individuals have been very helpful to 

the government in developing this legislation for introduction 

here later this afternoon. And I’d like to welcome all of them as 

guests to their Legislative Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome these 

guests to our Assembly this afternoon. It’s always important 

when enthusiasts of any area — arts, culture, sports — take 

their volunteer capacities, work together, and work together to 

create new initiatives like the one that’s being presented here 

today. 

 

So good work. Congratulations for all the good work that you 

do. Thank you for being volunteers and enthusiasts for the area 

that you’re interested in. And we hope you enjoy the 

proceedings here today. Thank you very much and we’d like to 

welcome you on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

ask leave to give an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for Advanced Education has 

asked for leave to give an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Great. Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce two guests in your gallery 

today. With us today is a recipient of the Saskatchewan 

Scholarship of Honour, one of 20 awards given out this year. 

We have Corporal Dane Stephen with the 2nd Signal Squadron, 

38 Brigade and he’s joined by his wife, Brianna Deis, who 

works in the health care sector here in Regina. We’re very 

pleased to have the corporal and his wife join us today. 



3850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

A few of us were able to join them over lunch — the MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Regina Northeast, 

the MLA for Wood River, among others — and we heard about 

the significance of the corporal’s studies, about his work in the 

Ministry of Justice. And perhaps not surprisingly, he was quiet 

when it came to the service to country. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

noted that and that furthered our appreciation for that service. 

 

If I could, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to not simply identify the 

corporal, but I would like to also name for our records here 

within the Assembly all those that have received the 

Scholarship of Honour this year. There are 20 names: Master 

Corporal Ciara Phelps, Corporal Devlin Clancy, Mr. Mark 

Wade, Officer Cadet William Bellamy, Mr. Fergus Schappert, 

Leading Seaman David Longchamps, Ms. Jennifer Stewart, 

Master Corporal Brandi Rink, Mr. Sean Rhind, Chief Warrant 

Officer Jean-Claude Parent, Mr. Michael Wong, Officer Cadet 

Jason Leverton, Corporal Jordan Guenther, Master Corporal 

Graig Gallant, Corporal Jenna Mikituk, Captain Nathan 

Carreiro, Mr. Jonathan Carreiro, Ms. Megan Wade, and Ms. 

Selena Carrisse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we thank all of these recipients, in fact all of those 

who have so nobly and ably served our country and 

communities, for their service, especially as we look to 

Remembrance Day coming in just a few days. I know that the 

member for Wood River will have more to say in a member’s 

statement and so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join 

me in welcoming Corporal Stephen, his wife, and a broader 

tribute to all those that have been recognized by the 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to join with the minister opposite in welcoming Corporal 

Stephen and Ms. Deis to your Legislative Assembly, and to 

quite simply add to what is symbolized in the Saskatchewan 

Scholarship of Honour, the words, thank you. To serve country 

and to put your life on the line, to put on that uniform is such a 

tremendous service to all of us. And again as the minister has 

pointed out, coming up on Remembrance Day and when we’ll 

be out thinking about what it means, lest we forget. I think that 

the Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour is a very important 

contribution to not breaking that faith with those who have gone 

before but those who have taken up arms, who have put on the 

uniform, and who have served this country so well both here 

and right around the world. 

 

So on behalf of the official opposition, again thank you very 

much. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly, and lest we 

forget. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent to own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan, 

and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. The petitioners indicate that the gym 

at Sacred Heart Community School in North Central Regina has 

quite literally fallen apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is 

no longer safe for students or staff. They point out that the 

school and community have raised this issue with the Sask 

Party provincial government since 2007 without resolution. 

They point out that Sacred Heart Community School is the 

largest school in North Central, with a very diverse population 

of more than 450 students, 75 per cent of whom are First 

Nations and Métis. They point out that it’s a growing school, 

and not just in student numbers, Mr. Speaker, but in 

achievement and in attendance as well. And they point out that 

as a matter of basic fairness and common sense, Sacred Heart 

Community School needs a gym. In the prayer that reads as 

follows, they: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 

Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 

replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 

Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 

Saskatoon and Cut Knife. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 

pleasure of attending the prestigious Saskatchewan Order of 

Merit awards presented by the Lieutenant Governor, the 

Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield. The Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit is the province's highest honour, recognizing 

individuals who have contributed significantly to the well-being 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The ceremony celebrated the achievements of seven people who 

have had an outstanding impact on our province, including Dr. 

Richard Baltzan, a distinguished medical specialist and 

administrator who helped improve the quality of patient care 

and medical education at the local, provincial, national, and 

international levels; John Cross, an innovative entrepreneur 

who celebrates Saskatchewan's potential and advances its 

innovation by bridging agriculture, business, and bioprocessing 

research; May Henderson, a passionate Métis leader whose 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3851 

commitment and advocacy regarding issues faced by Métis has 

led to significant positive changes within the Saskatchewan 

community; Grant Kook, a generous philanthropist who has 

made significant and lasting contributions to Saskatoon and 

Saskatchewan; Jim Miller, an outstanding professor who has 

played a critical role in bringing public understanding to 

Aboriginal history in Saskatchewan and Canada; George Reed, 

a living legend of the Saskatchewan Roughriders with a lifetime 

of commitment giving back to this community; and Arthur 

Wakabayashi, a dedicated public servant whose distinguished 

career with the federal and provincial public services spanned 

more than 35 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these amazing Saskatchewan citizens on receiving the 2013 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Team Honey Do 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

summer a very brave woman in Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

took the challenge to rappel down the 22-storey Hill Tower II 

for charity. The Saskatchewan Abilities Council Easter Seals 

held their signature Drop Zone event on October 24th in 

Regina, and Team Honey Do obliged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Honey Deglau was coming up to her 80th birthday 

so she dared her 54-year-old son, Rob Deglau, to join her in this 

event. The dynamic Deglaus raised a total of $5,461 for the 

Easter Seals Regina fundraiser. What an amazing way to mark 

your 80th birthday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And just as Honey Deglau has always tried to make a 

difference, her son Rob has always done her proud. Rob has 

been a resident in North Central for most of his life, attending 

Albert School and graduating from Scott Collegiate. He was 

active on the North Central Community Association board for 

over two decades, and for three terms served our 

neighbourhood as city councillor for ward 6. As community 

member and executive director of the North Central 

Community Association, Rob Deglau has participated in 20 

consecutive North Central community cleanups. In October he 

was at it again to help remove 40.51 tonnes of garbage as 

Regina prepares for hosting the Grey Cup. 

 

The Deglau family are tremendous citizens here in Regina from 

the ground up, Mr. Speaker, and North Central and Regina are 

better places for their contributions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to recognize the latest recipients of the Saskatchewan 

Scholarship of Honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a strong history of women and 

men serving in Canada’s Armed Forces. We thank them for 

serving with courage often in difficult circumstances in many 

places around the world. 

 

This scholarship was first announced in 2009 and honours the 

commitment our members of the Armed Forces make to our 

country and recognizes all individuals who stand up for peace 

and freedom. It gives returning servicewomen and men as well 

as family members of injured or fallen individuals the chance to 

pursue their post-secondary studies. The scholarship is $5,000 

and is available to all eligible candidates who apply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an example of our government’s commitment 

to the women and men that have fought for our country. To date 

there have been 113 Scholarship of Honour recipients — 107 of 

them are returning servicewomen and men and six are children 

of Armed Forces members. 

 

Today we’re celebrating the 20 recipients that have received the 

scholarships since 2012. This scholarship is a token of our 

gratitude and respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of these brave women and men, we live 

in a country where we can pursue our dreams and make plans 

for the future. For that, we are eternally grateful. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Never Too Late to Change for the Better 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise in the Assembly to recognize an important figure 

in my constituency. Denise Bougie has shown great 

perseverance, proving that it’s never too late to change one’s 

life for the better. 

 

This fall Denise completed her fourth year electrician training, 

and this accomplishment requires years of challenging school 

work and hands-on experience. Denise is now just a few hours 

shy of the 7,200 hours of work experience required to write her 

exam and become an interprovincial journeyman. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it almost didn’t happen. This is the same 

woman who, just six years ago, had incredible challenges in her 

life. Denise is not shy about talking of her life and certainly the 

legal and personal challenges that she had. But as an addict, she 

says, “A big part of my story is the recovery. And I’m proud 

that I’ve been able to turn that around and succeed.” 

 

Today she’s a proud kohkom of two beautiful granddaughters. 

Denise is currently employed at the Flyer Electric and is living 

in her home in Uranium City, which she loves. 

 

Denise offers great advice to others looking to change their 

circumstances, saying, “To anyone who is thinking about 

making a change, I would say, do it. It’s a wonderful feeling to 

be proud of yourself, of who you are and what you’ve 

accomplished.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to show Denise how proud we 

are of her and to recognize her perseverance in being an 

important role model in fighting for a better life. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 



3852 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

Lows in Motion 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am happy to rise in the House today to 

talk about a spectacular event that took place in Saskatoon on 

Saturday. Lows in Motion, Mr. Speaker, was held at Prairieland 

Park and organized by my former constituency assistant, Travis 

Low. At the time Travis worked for me, he was instrumental in 

organizing Lows in Motion on a volunteer basis, and went on to 

accept the position of executive director of Parkinson Society 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Travis’s dad was diagnosed with young onset Parkinson's at the 

age of 47, and his grandpa also lived with the disease for over 

15 years. Lows in Motion was originally started to honour 

Travis’s dad and the memory of his grandpa, but it has 

continued to grow and grow. This is their fifth year, and over 

1,100 people attended. Their aim is not just to raise money for 

research and programs, but to create awareness of Parkinson’s 

and the impact that it has on 4,000 Saskatchewan families. 

 

What an incredible Saskatchewan story this is, Mr. Speaker. 

This group of 25 committee members share a passion for 

making a difference in the Parkinson community and making a 

difference in our province. The results of their efforts have been 

raising over $150,000 in four years, and they expect the 

proceeds from Saturday’s event will add about $75,000 to that 

amount. 

 

Once again, when there is a need, Saskatchewan people 

astonish us with their generosity. I am so proud of Travis Low 

and his team. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Student Receives Prestigious Scholarship 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

recognize Levi Kirkby, a young constituent of Prince Albert 

Carlton, who received the prestigious 2013 United World 

College Scholarship this fall. The scholarship was awarded to 

him on the basis of a national competition and allows students 

to pursue a two-year international academic program. 

 

United World College is an education movement comprising of 

12 international schools and colleges in more than 140 

countries. Their mandate is to bring together young people to 

offer an educational experience based on shared learning, 

collaboration, and understanding to create students who will act 

as champions of peace. 

 

Levi began studying at UWC [United World College], 

Maastricht in the Netherlands this fall. In Prince Albert he has 

been known as a proud member of the Prince Albert Air Cadet 

Squadron, a top provincial chess player, and a member of the 

Sturgeon River Ski Club. 

 

Levi said about the scholarship, and I quote: 

 

I feel incredibly grateful for this amazing opportunity to 

represent my city and country internationally. I am so 

grateful to my teachers at Carlton High School, my Air 

Cadet leaders, and my family who have helped guide, 

motivate, and mentor me into becoming the person I am 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of this Assembly to join 

me in congratulating Levi Kirkby and wishing him all the best 

with his studies in the Netherlands. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Growth Plans 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP leader is trying to run and hide from his party’s record and 

his own record. The NDP has removed every bit of policy from 

its website. The NDP platform to the last election is gone. All 

the NDP policy resolutions are gone. Even the NDP policy 

review book, the tree book written by the NDP leader, even it’s 

gone. Why is that, Mr. Speaker? What does that NDP leader 

stand for exactly? 

 

For instance he’s been talking about a smart growth plan for 

months now. Where is the so-called smart growth plan? The 

fact is no one has seen it, so I take it he doesn’t have one. 

 

It’s one thing for the NDP [New Democratic Party] leader to 

throw around buzzwords like smart growth plan; it’s another 

thing to actually come up with a plan. 

 

The good news is Saskatchewan already has a growth plan and 

it’s working. More people are living here than ever before, more 

people working than ever before, more construction, more 

investment, more economic growth — that’s our growth plan 

and it’s working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session we should get a chance to compare 

our government’s growth plan to the NDP leader’s fictitious 

growth plan. That would be a great debate to have. The problem 

is, where is his plan? Will the Leader of the Opposition table his 

growth plan or will he just admit that he doesn’t have one? 

We’re about to find out. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Environmental Protection Measures 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When you’re a 

resource-producing and trade-dependent province, then you 

have to be sensitive to the perceptions and the policy priorities 

of trading partners. That’s a common sense thing to do and 

that’s a responsible thing to do. That’s not what we’ve seen 

from this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Wall Street Journal ran an interesting article last week on 

the Premier’s thoughts on the XL pipeline. And this is what the 

Premier had to say: “What we understand now . . . is that the 

President needs elbow room on the environmental side. Now 

we must re-double our efforts there.” 

 

So my question to the Premier: what does he mean when he 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3853 

says we must redouble our efforts on the environmental side? 

And when might we see this actually happen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I do want to 

welcome the question with respect to Keystone from the Leader 

of the Opposition, and I want to welcome his support. I assume 

that that is still the case, Mr. Speaker. It is a stand that’s 

different than his federal party, and so he deserves to be 

recognized for that because it’s important for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The direct answer to his question, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve 

already begun that effort. In my last mission to Washington this 

spring, Mr. Speaker, for example, we stressed the 

environmental record of our country. We noted that in Canada 

we have tougher coal regulations than even they do in the 

United States. We noted that we have oil and gas regulations 

coming. And we also noted for our American friends that in our 

province of Saskatchewan, we have we think the largest per 

capita public investment in a CO2 mitigation project, the clean 

coal . . . the successful clean coal project at Boundary dam 3, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we were trying to do by that is — I think the economic 

argument for the pipeline has been made — we were trying to 

demonstrate to our American friends that when they deal with 

Canada in terms of importing our oil or co-operating on a 

pipeline, they’re dealing with a country and they’re dealing 

with provinces and industry that admit we need to do more but 

that care about the environment, that care about sustainable 

energy development, Mr. Speaker. We’re already about that 

work. I understand Premier Redford’s continuing it. The federal 

government is, Mr. Speaker. This needs to be a Canadian effort 

because this project is important to the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, the words may be 

there, but when we look at the specific actions, Mr. Speaker, 

when we look at how the walk is matching the talk, that is 

where there is a disconnect. 

 

This isn’t the first time, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier has 

publicly said that environmental elbow room needs to be 

provided to the US [United States] administration. In fact he 

said a similar thing last month. But then, Mr. Speaker, he 

returned to Canada, returned to Saskatchewan, and we saw cuts. 

We saw cuts to environmental assessment, cuts to 

environmental protection, and we saw no reference, Mr. 

Speaker, no action on climate change programs. So we have a 

disconnect here between the sales job and what is the reality 

and the actual actions of this government. 

 

So my question to the Premier . . . He said it’s important to 

“offer assurances to Washington that policy-makers were 

prepared to do more.” Not double efforts in sales but double 

efforts in actual work, actual demonstration of a commitment to 

the environment. My question to the Premier: is he prepared to 

do more on the environmental side, and if so, why was this not 

mentioned in the Throne Speech? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve been working carefully with the federal government with 

respect to greenhouse gas legislation here to ensure that we can 

adopt federal regulations and maintain economic development 

in the province, Mr. Speaker, at a pace that we need to sustain 

the quality of life we enjoy in Saskatchewan. 

 

But the direct question from my friend opposite is simply this. 

His question is, where is the action? One point four billion 

dollars in the largest clean coal project on the planet, one by the 

way, Mr. Speaker, that is being tested this fall. It’ll be 

commissioned this spring. It represents a 90 per cent capture of 

CO2. It represents the capture of other emissions that we want to 

take care. of. It represents then of course the use of the CO2 
enhanced oil recovery, all of it sold to oil companies. And then 

we will store it, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll store it geologically in 

our province where almost a third of the world’s CO2 is 

successfully stored, at least from a geological perspective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we moved on the legislative front. We’re dealing 

with a legacy of neglect from the NDP, where emissions were 

up I think 60 to 70 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, when we are in 

the United States, we can say to them we support stronger coal 

regulations in this country, which the government has provided. 

And more than that, in terms of action, we’re investing in 

technology, that it’s important for our province but important 

for any economy around the world that’s still using coal for 

energy, including the United States. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, carbon capture is an important 

project. The problem is that’s where this government’s 

commitment, that’s where this government’s discussion about 

the environment ends. What we see in their overall approach to 

the environment, Mr. Speaker, after going down to do the sales 

pitch, coming back and having actions that send a very different 

message, a very different message to our trading partners. 

 

We see cuts to environmental assessment. We see cuts, Mr. 

Speaker, to any sort of approach to address climate change, no 

reference to it in the Throne Speech. We saw the last budget 

what the actions clearly were. So that is the reality of the 

actions that this government has pursued. In fact according to a 

recent Environment Canada report, this government isn’t even 

on track to meet its scaled-back emissions targets. We’re now 

on track to be 24 per cent higher than the target. That’s not a 

record to be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again to the Premier: when he said that we need to redouble 

our efforts and do more on the environmental side, what exactly 

did he mean by redoubling our efforts, and why was this not 

mentioned in the Throne Speech? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you know, just last week we 

were talking about this issue in the national media again, 

including in the US papers that have interviewed us on the 

subject after I think what have been fairly successful missions 

to the United States where we built support, helped build 



3854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

support for Keystone for example on both sides of the aisle. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the message has been pretty clear. We need 

to get the message out. We need to redouble the efforts to get 

the message out to our American friends that Canada has a 

strong record — imperfect, to be sure, like every nation — but a 

strong record when it comes to sustainable energy development: 

that the federal government has moved on stronger coal 

regulations than they have stateside; that we’re moving on oil 

and gas regulations; that companies are investing and, in our 

case, our Crown corporation, the government, the people of 

Saskatchewan are investing in the world’s largest clean coal 

project. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the only ones in this Assembly that would 

characterize that as inaction, especially with respect to that 

project, are members opposite. Senator Heitcamp from North 

Dakota was just touring the facility. I remember what she told 

her media back home, and in her tweet she said she was 

promoting the fact that Saskatchewan is acting, that 

Saskatchewan has something the world is going to look at. 

 

That’s why we’re building an international consortium to 

further develop this technology we’ve developed here, Mr. 

Speaker. And I note this for the record of this Assembly: we 

had a chance to be ahead of the curve on clean coal technology, 

but a government backed away from it, they tabled it, they 

walked away from the technology. That was the New 

Democratic Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Premier likes to 

get worked up about this, we know that he likes to torque this 

issue. We all see the ads that he approved that run on a daily 

basis, so we know his political disposition and what he likes to 

do. But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, his actions tell a very 

different story. His whole discussion, his whole approach to the 

environment, Mr. Speaker, begins and ends with carbon 

capture, again an important program. But when you look at the 

overall approach of this government, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of 

cutting programs, it’s one of reducing assessment. It’s one, Mr. 

Speaker, where targets are out the window. It’s one, Mr. 

Speaker, where they don’t even mention climate change in a 

Throne Speech. That’s how serious they take this matter. 

 

So my question to the Premier: wouldn’t it have been more 

effective and wouldn’t it have made more sense, more common 

sense, to actually do more on the environment instead of simply 

saying so? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

characterizes some of the changes we’ve made as cuts, and fair 

enough. We’ve made some changes from what they were doing. 

When we came to office they had set up a climate change 

office, but they had forgotten to actually staff the office or 

include any actions as a part of the office. I think they had a 

bunch of buses and trucks that were ready to drive through 

northern Saskatchewan and check air quality, but they forgot to 

put any gas in the trucks or people to drive them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ve moved ahead, for example with a $1 million effort to 

clean up . . . to test the quality of our boreal lakes; $60 million 

in Go Green Funds in actual . . . in action, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

contributing to our record on the environment; legislation that 

sets targets for emissions reductions; and again, Mr. Speaker, 

the anchor that I wish members opposite would be prouder of, 

because the world is interested, is the largest clean coal project 

per capita investment you’ll see anywhere in the world frankly, 

as far as we are aware of — that’s the Boundary dam 3 project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that’s not good enough, all of those things, I am 

going to wait very patiently for that Leader of the Opposition to 

stand up and say specifically what else we should be doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier is so worked up 

about this, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier is happy to comment in 

The Wall Street Journal that we need to redouble our efforts, 

my question is, why do the actions as demonstrated in the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, beyond carbon capture, why are 

they silent on this issue? Why is he saying one thing to our 

trading partners, but when it comes down to actually having it 

stated in a Throne Speech and actually having plans, why is that 

not there? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll try it again. We’ve 

noticed a pattern here in this fall session of the legislature where 

the Leader of the Opposition gets up and asks good questions 

and we do our best to answer the questions — and frankly, quite 

specifically, as I’ve done here today and we’ve done yesterday 

and I think last Thursday — so he just keeps repeating the same 

question and saying the answer is not there. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

saying that doesn’t make it so. 

 

I will repeat, Mr. Speaker, we have passed legislation that sets 

targets around emissions. We have deployed $60 million in Go 

Green funds, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve undertaken about a $1.4 

billion clean coal project. We’ll say it again; that sounds like 

action to me. 

 

I think if you asked the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

and you said, here is the side-by-side comparison. Here’s what 

the NDP did: talk and empty offices and empty air-testing vans, 

versus the largest clean coal project in the world, versus a Go 

Green Fund that was actually doing something; and then 

engaging with our American friends, doing something else the 

NDP never did, going and tell our story in Washington; joining 

the province of Alberta as a supporter, joining the nation, Mr. 

Speaker, joining our federal government because that pipeline is 

important, Mr. Speaker. That is exactly the record of this 

government, and we put it beside theirs any day of the week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC–CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government tried to 

skate around the IPAC [International Performance Assessment 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3855 

Centre for geologic storage of CO2] affair for well over a year. 

When we asked simple questions of accountability for 

taxpayers of this province, that government failed to provide 

answers about alarming allegations and wasted dollars of 

taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, we turned over all the information we 

had to the RCMP and called on government to do the same. 

Now the RCMP have confirmed that there’s a full fraud 

investigation into the IPAC affair. 

 

So my question to the Premier is this: when this government 

stepped in to wind down the IPAC office, did they retain a copy 

of every document and record, and has everything been turned 

over to the RCMP? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, when there was an 

agreement made with the U of R [University of Regina] to do 

some work on CO2 and carbon capture sequestration, Mr. 

Speaker, it was later identified that, at the U of R under their 

management, that there was some procedures that were not 

followed. It was some serious mismanagement that was 

happening at the U of R. At that time the government took 

steps, and the management of IPAC-CO2 was taken away from 

the U of R and an audit was called for from Meyers Norris and 

Penny. So Meyers Norris and Penny and the Provincial Auditor 

both audited what had happened while it was under the 

management of the U of R. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government to date has not been asked for any 

information from the RCMP, but when we are, we will be fully 

co-operating. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 

Premier. There would have been a ton of information that 

would be relevant to this fraud investigation at IPAC’s offices. 

To the Premier: when this government went in to close up shop, 

who did it send in to oversee the shutdown of IPAC and its 

office? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, IPAC had a board. On 

that board were members from CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. There was a member from 

Royal Dutch Shell as well as members from the U of R, and 

they overseen the shutdown of IPAC. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was to the Premier, and 

the question wasn’t answered. We need to remember that the 

Premier had one of his closest political advisers on the IPAC’s 

board. When we asked that they call in the Provincial Auditor, 

this government stubbornly refused. The Premier even said in 

this legislature “. . . nobody gained. There’s no evidence of 

anything.” Then he told the media that there was nothing to take 

to the RCMP. If that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, it’s more than 

interesting that the RCMP is now engaged in a full fraud 

investigation. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: why did the Premier dismiss 

all of the allegations and waste instead of seeking answers and 

accountability in sending all of the information to the RCMP 

from day one? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

need to remember that the original arrangement with the U of 

R, the original funding to the U of R for IPAC came from the 

NDP. That was approved prior to the election, Mr. Speaker. We 

have the memo that approves that funding as well as the 

president of the U of R, Dr. Vianne Timmons, has spoken to 

how that funding came about, Mr. Speaker. And the initial 

proposal from the U of R to the government was prior to the 

election when the NDP were still in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

SaskPower Rates and Boundary Dam Project 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We learned just over 

a week ago that SaskPower wants a rate increase which, if 

approved, will mean a nearly 40 per cent increase since 2009. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a hard hit for people doing their part to pay 

their bills and make ends meet. But what’s even more alarming 

than that nearly 40 per cent increase is the fact that there may be 

more still to come. In the same announcement, SaskPower said 

recent cost overruns at Boundary dam are not included in their 

latest rate application. 

 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what will be the 

impact on ratepayers to cover off this government’s over $115 

million cost overruns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

indeed SaskPower has made a request for a rate increase of 5 

per cent to the rate review panel. That is going forward as we 

see it. The cabinet at some point in the future will look at it and 

then decide whether or not to approve it or not. The rate 

increases, as a result of the infrastructure challenge that 

SaskPower is faced with — a billion, multi-billion-dollar hole 

that we found ourselves in in SaskPower — we are working 

towards that. 

 

And I think if I remember right, I believe I do remember 

correctly that the member herself was aware of that difficulties 

and commented in a very favourable way with respect to the 

infrastructure deficit that we found when we took over in 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government’s 115 million, that’s $115 million in cost overruns, 

won’t be covered in SaskPower’s rate increase. Another huge 



3856 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

hike will be needed to pay for those cost overruns, even though 

the Premier and the minister said repeatedly the carbon capture 

project was on budget. 

 

The minister said in June, “This project continues on time and 

on budget.” And the Premier called the project “on time and on 

budget.” Well now we know the truth. Why did the Premier say 

carbon capture’s on budget when it’s running at least $115 

million cost overrun? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the member 

opposite, you would assume that the NDP never had rate 

increases. Well the history shows anything but; you had 

approximately 5 per cent rate increases year after year after year 

under your management. And we also know that the hon. 

member, she fully understood that there was a problem here 

when she commented and said, well we know that there is a $10 

billion infrastructure deficit, so they are beginning to catch up. 

So that is a good thing. 

 

And I would just say that it’s good to see that the NDP, at least 

one of them, finally recognizes the disaster that they were in 

government in terms of SaskPower, and now how we are going 

to do exactly as she suggested, and that is catch up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Actually 

the question was about the cost overruns of the carbon capture 

project. And I’m sorry the minister didn’t take time to answer 

the question. And then additionally, he actually has his facts 

wrong because the quote he’s attributing to me was spoken by 

the Minister of Advanced Education who misquoted me on 

April 10th of this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about cost overruns at the carbon 

capture project at Boundary dam. Here’s what SaskPower CEO 

Robert Watson had to say on October 18th: “We’re looking at 

the project being about $115 million over budget.” But the 

minister told the committee on June 18th exactly three short 

months earlier that everything was fine, the project was on time 

and on budget. What he didn’t tell the committee was that there 

are least $35 million of engineering costs still to budget, along 

with other problems that have since come to light. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how could the minister tell the committee in June, 

“This project continues on time and on budget,” when costs 

were about to skyrocket 9 per cent in a matter of days? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, indeed the member is correct 

that there has been some cost overruns with respect to the 

power island portion of the carbon capture storing facility down 

at Boundary dam. And I believe that the CEO explained that 

very, very well at that time, which was very simply they ran 

into a number of problems associated with the power island 

portion of the project down there where they found asbestos, 

and as a result of that, then they had to do a complete wash of 

the building. That took place in the early summer months 

around the time that the member is alleging there was some 

problems. So there was a complete wash of the building that 

cost somewhere in the range of $30 million for that alone. 

 

Then there was a number of other problems relative to the 

engineering around the generation facility itself. I think the 

CEO identified it as saying it was like taking an engine of a car 

apart — when you get into it, you find out there was a lot more 

problems with the engine than you thought there was going to 

be. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Highways minister was 

on the radio this morning talking about P3 [public–private 

partnership] schools. He had just a bit of trouble keeping his 

facts straight. When he was asked about the problems with P3 

schools in Alberta, the Highways minister actually said, “There 

is no basis behind them.” To the minister: how on earth can he 

argue that it’s such a rosy picture with Alberta P3 schools? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had 

quite an interesting morning because I got to listen to him on 

the radio before he got to listen to me. And you know, he was 

talking about all the negativity around P3s and bundling of 

schools. In fact he had to go back to 1990 in Nova Scotia to find 

an example that was negative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to talk about what’s been going on in Alberta, and 

we’re going to talk about the money that they saved. They will 

talk about the auditor having to investigate if they actually 

saved 90 million or 80 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 

auditor is looking into. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people stand across the way and they want 

us to take action on so many fronts. We are taking action on 

those fronts; they just don’t like the way we’re doing it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the public simply deserves 

the facts on this front and the Highways minister also said this 

morning: 

 

It is a myth and a falsehood that the school division 

doesn’t have control. The school division has complete 

control of what goes on in that school as far as activities 

extracurricular. It is controlled by the school division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Highways minister needs to check the record. 

School divisions did not get what they needed out of those P3 

schools in Alberta. And The Edmonton Journal reported just 

last year, Mr. Speaker, that’s last year, Mr. Speaker: “No space 

was built in for community leagues, child care centres, 

preschools and other services.” So it’s no wonder that school 

divisions in Alberta said that they “. . . would prefer to see 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3857 

future schools built without private involvement.” 

 

To the minister: will he simply admit that he’s wrong to say that 

it’s a myth and a falsehood that Alberta school divisions lost 

control of schools when that’s clearly the case? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member 

opposite to check what has gone on in Alberta. In Alberta they 

went through a first bundle of 18 schools, Mr. Speaker. And if 

we’re to believe those people, you’d have to talk to the 

consortium so they could allow the kids to go into the school 

and allow the kids to come out, Mr. Speaker, because that’s 

what they talked about, losing control. If that was the case, ask 

the question, why would have Alberta done a second bundle 

and a third bundle if they’ve lost so much control? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that really seems like a right wing government in 

Alberta to give up that much control of the education system. 

Mr. Speaker, they grab at straws just like CUPE [Canadian 

Union of Public Employees] did in the water watch and the 

waste water treatment plant here where they told . . . they were 

showing kids not having proper drinking water and everything 

else. 

 

Now we see the same fear tactics coming forward. Here in 

Saskatchewan they cry for schools. They beg for schools. They 

read petitions for schools, but they sure don’t support it, 

building schools. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 108, The 

Athletics Commission Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport that Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission 

Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

 

Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Economy that Bill No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced 

and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 1 through 84. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

1 through 84. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this afternoon, after a lively question period, I’m pleased to be 

able to join in on the debate that’s been going on for a number 

of days here in the Assembly on the Throne Speech, with both 

sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, providing some thanks to 

constituents, providing some thanks to supporters, and giving, 

each member giving his or her view of the merit of the Throne 

Speech or what is lacking in the Throne Speech. And so I’m 

pleased, Mr. Speaker, today to have the opportunity to join in 

on the debate. 



3858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

In thinking back to the Throne Speech when we had it read not 

too long ago here in the Assembly, it was a day of course as 

many guests . . . And we all make the effort to invite some 

family members, to invite constituents, to invite important 

stakeholders from the province who come to hear what is in the 

Throne Speech. And I, Mr. Speaker . . .The most important 

people that I invited, at least to me, was my wife, Ruth, and our 

two girls that came to the legislature for the day of the Throne 

Speech. And it’s not that common of an occurrence to have 

them here, down in Regina and in the Assembly. So it’s always 

a pleasure to have them here. 

 

But I came down beforehand to Regina and was in my office, 

and I called back home and spoke with Ruth. And they were 

sort of . . . We were just having a discussion about logistics of 

who’s coming where, when, and making everything work. And 

Ruth was on speakerphone, and we were just having a 

conversation. And I know members know the feeling when 

you’re on a speakerphone conversation talking with someone, 

and it’s sort of cutting in and out and you’re trying to follow 

exactly what’s being said. Well it was cutting in and out 

because our three-year-old was trying to enter into the 

conversation while Ruth and I were talking about driving 

arrangements and the logistics, as I said. 

 

And so we paused the conversation, and Ruth said, oh just hold 

on a second; Ingrid wants to say something. So we waited for a 

second and, you know, it’s always a . . . I know for all the 

out-of-town MLAs, it’s always special to either be skyping or to 

be speaking with family members back home when we’re here 

in Regina. And so I was thinking, oh, it’s my three-year-old. 

She must want to cut into this conversation to say that she loves 

her daddy or to say, you know, I’m looking forward to coming 

to the office and playing with the craft supplies and everything 

else. So I waited for a second. There was a pause. And Ingrid 

said, “Daddy, Buckley is funny.” Of course, Mr. Speaker, 

referring to the member from Athabasca. That was a quote from 

my daughter, so I’ll state her name. 

 

So I have to admit, when my daughter was here for the Throne 

Speech, I doubt she retained very much of what was being said, 

retained very much of the content. But for all of us and 

especially for me, Mr. Speaker, the interactions we have with 

our kids, the interactions we have with our families really 

reminds us of what’s important. And that’s what my daughters 

do for me. It reminds me of why I’m in politics and what the 

true motivation is for doing the work that we do. 

 

And I know it’s a common question that we receive as MLAs 

when we have school groups coming to the Assembly, a 

common question. I’m sure most members on both sides of the 

House have fielded this question at some point. It’s, what made 

you decide that you wanted to run? And for me, Mr. Speaker, 

the motivation for wanting to run originally as an MLA, 

wanting to run for the leadership of our party, and to lead the 

opposition at this time, my greatest motivation is that of people. 

I think of my kids. I think of my family. And I also think of the 

extended family that I’m in, and we all have extended families 

that we care about. I think of my parents, Mr. Speaker, recently 

retired, and I extend my congratulations to them as they’re 

adjusting to a new reality. And I think of my grandma as well. 

 

And I’m thinking, Mr. Speaker, about not just my own family, 

but of course we each live in a community. We have 

neighbours. We have friends. And this really is what motivates 

me. The future that I want for my kids, the future that I want for 

my parents, for my grandma, I want the best future for them and 

I want that best future for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I know it’s been a busy summer and fall. We’re now into 

winter, though it’s the beginning of November, and even with 

all the best intentions of getting the leaves raked and getting the 

yard ready, I have to confess that politics isn’t necessarily good 

when it comes to yard care, and so the leaves will have to wait 

until spring. 

 

But as I travelled over the summer, over the fall, it really 

reminded me, Mr. Speaker, of how much I love this province. 

And what makes this province so great, yes of course, it’s the 

amazing resource potential that we have, that we’re blessed to 

have here in the province. Of course there is the stunning 

beauty of the different regions of the province. And there’s our 

incredibly rich history that we have as residents of this 

province. But the best thing about it, Mr. Speaker, is in fact the 

people in Saskatchewan. And I was reminded of this again last 

night at the Saskatchewan Order of Merit ceremony when seven 

highly deserving individuals were recognized with the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit. And it once again drove home to 

me that our greatest resource, our greatest strength here in the 

province are in fact our people. 

 

And it’s for that reason, Mr. Speaker, for me politics isn’t 

simply about the province doing well, but it’s about people 

doing well. It’s about the people of Saskatchewan doing well. I 

want every child in Saskatchewan to have the exact same 

opportunities that my daughters will have. I want every senior 

in Saskatchewan to be treated the way that I would want my 

grandma to be treated. I want a future that includes all 

Saskatchewan families in the economy and promises prosperity 

and security, not just for a few years, but for generations. When 

it comes to my girls, my neighbours, and all Saskatchewan 

families, Mr. Speaker, I’m thinking long term. 

 

And that’s why for me, Mr. Speaker, this government’s Throne 

Speech was such a disappointment. The government’s Throne 

Speech fails to deliver for middle-class families. The Throne 

Speech, it fails to properly address the seniors’ care crisis that 

we have here in Saskatchewan, and it fails to diversify our 

economy and to save for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s what’s happening in Saskatchewan today. 

All over Saskatchewan, in all of the corners of our great 

province, people are holding up their end of the bargain. 

They’re growing our province. They’re working harder than 

ever building homes, paying their bills, which are higher than 

ever, and they’re investing in our economy. They’re starting 

businesses, growing businesses, and creating more jobs, and 

this is exciting for our province. 

 

But what I keep hearing from Saskatchewan families is this. It’s 

great that Saskatchewan people, that Saskatchewan businesses 

keep delivering good news for our economy. Now what we 

need is for the provincial government to hold up its end of the 

bargain. The government’s job, Mr. Speaker, is to strengthen 

health care. The government’s job is to invest in our kids by 

responsibly investing in their classrooms. It’s the government’s 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3859 

job to provide dignified care to seniors, to our parents, to our 

grandparents, to our spouses. 

 

The government’s job is to use today’s prosperity and to build 

for the long term in a smart growth plan. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

government is not doing those things. Here in Saskatchewan, 

seniors’ care and education are getting worse, and it has to stop. 

Saskatchewan people are increasingly concerned that this 

government is missing an incredible opportunity to ensure that 

our province is an economic powerhouse for decades and for 

generations to come. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Because this province right now, Mr. Speaker, under this 

government, is putting all of its eggs in one basket, and it’s a 

non-renewable resource basket. Mr. Speaker, our province is 

blessed with an abundance of natural resources. We of course 

have plenty of potash, uranium, a significant amount of oil and 

gas, a fair bit of gold, silver, copper, zinc, salt, and a variety of 

other metals and other minerals. These non-renewable resources 

have made our province strong. And Saskatchewan’s natural 

resources, Mr. Speaker, have also helped make Canada strong. 

And I’m optimistic about the future of all of our natural 

resources, all of the resources that our province is blessed with. 

 

But I don’t want this government to keep putting all of its eggs 

in one basket, all of our eggs in one basket, Mr. Speaker. I want 

more eggs and more baskets. I want a diversified economy. I 

want our province, Mr. Speaker, to have a smart growth plan 

that ensures our economy and our prosperity is sustainable for 

the long term. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that Saskatchewan 

families and businesses keep delivering good news for our 

province’s economy, the government isn’t being terribly 

helpful. It’s not holding up its end of the bargain, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy is not as diversified as it 

needs to be. And this government, Mr. Speaker, is taking us in 

the wrong direction. The Leader-Post financial editor wrote just 

a couple of weeks ago something that is interesting, I think, for 

all members, and certainly interesting for all people in the 

province. What was written was: 

 

From where I sit, the government’s track record in 

economic development brings to mind Stephen Leacock’s 

famous phrase “riding madly off in all directions.” You 

could say it’s been two steps forward and three steps back. 

 

“Riding madly off in all directions.” “Two steps forward and 

three steps back.” That’s what the Leader-Post financial editor 

has to say about this government’s approach and this 

government’s track record when it comes to the economy. And 

those sentiments, Mr. Speaker, are something that I’m hearing 

more and more, here in Regina and throughout the entire 

province. 

 

We’ve seen the film industry, Mr. Speaker, driven out of 

Saskatchewan, a move that the chamber of commerce is saying 

cost our province $45 million in lost economic benefits every 

single year. That’s something that should concern all members 

in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and it should certainly concern 

many of the Regina members here in the Assembly. 

 

The budgets for regional economic development were slashed. 

Successful programs to educate, to train First Nations and Métis 

people for jobs were cancelled. Programs to support 

entrepreneurship and economic diversification, like 

Springboard West, Communities of Tomorrow were scrapped 

by this government. 

 

And this government has also undermined our Crown sector by 

privatizing profitable Crowns like Information Services 

Corporation, with contracting out Crown work to 

out-of-province and out-of-country companies. And this 

government has undermined our Crowns by stripping them of 

their profits just to make the government’s books look a bit 

better. 

 

Part of this destructive practice this government refuses to stop, 

Mr. Speaker, is keeping two sets of books. So it’s no wonder, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Leader-Post financial editor says this 

government’s approach to the economy is “two steps forward 

and three steps back.” 

 

Just imagine if we turned today’s prosperity and strength into 

tomorrow’s knowledge economy. Imagine if Saskatchewan 

became a Canadian hotbed for IT [information technology] 

jobs, for research and development jobs, for green jobs, for 

value-added industry jobs, and for film and television jobs. 

Imagine if we ended the boom-and-bust cycle and actually 

saved for the long term. That’s the kind of sustainability and 

that’s the kind of smart growth plan that I stand for because, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what matters to Saskatchewan people. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this government’s Throne Speech was a 

disappointment for Saskatchewan people who want to see our 

economy better diversified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seniors’ care in Saskatchewan is getting worse and 

that has to stop. Imagine call buttons going off in nursing 

homes, ringing unanswered, because of chronic understaffing. 

Imagine bedridden seniors, Mr. Speaker, going for more than a 

week without a bath. Imagine people missing meals because 

there aren’t enough staff there to ensure that they are fed. 

Imagine bed bugs that are allowed to persist in a 

government-run seniors’ residence despite repeated complaints. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s own internal report on seniors’ 

care repeats many of the concerns the opposition and I have 

presented in this Assembly. This government’s own record 

shows the deplorable quality of care in so many care homes. 

The report talked about, Mr. Speaker, seniors being forced to 

wake up at 5:30 in the morning. It talked about seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, being forced to soil themselves because there weren’t 

enough staff there to help them to the bathroom. It talked about 

seniors, Mr. Speaker, missing a weekly bath. Can any member 

imagine if this was happening to their parent, to their 

grandparent, to a spouse? 

 

In response to the embarrassing report, Mr. Speaker, the 

government rushed out a very small program. But the CEO of 

the Saskatoon Health Region said the real problem is that there 

simply aren’t enough staff, and she said that the government’s 

plan will not address that. So this government, Mr. Speaker, 



3860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

knows what the problem is. It’s that we need to improve 

staffing levels to ensure seniors in our province have the dignity 

and the care they deserve. But this government, Mr. Speaker, is 

stubbornly refusing to address the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition has been raising these concerns 

since I was elected leader, but here again the government’s 

Throne Speech disappoints Saskatchewan families by failing to 

do its part, by failing to put forward a plan that will properly 

address the seniors’ care crisis here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Over the summer, Mr. Speaker, I did a significant amount of 

travel, meeting with people in communities, hearing about their 

own experiences, experiences they’ve had in their families, 

experiences that they’ve sometimes experienced personally. 

 

I remember one conversation, Mr. Speaker. It was actually in 

the community of Melfort, and I was meeting with a group of 

seniors, and people were relaying their concerns of what they 

had experienced. And in all seriousness, at one point in the 

conversation, a woman turned to me, and her words stick with 

me because of what she said. And she said, if it gets to the point 

that I need to go into a care facility, I want them to hit me over 

the head with a shovel. 

 

I think of another conversation, Mr. Speaker, I had. I was 

actually in the community of Lloydminster, and a man told me 

about the experience that he had with his elderly father. And on 

one particular day his dad was especially disheartened by what 

was happening and what he was experiencing. And the dad 

turned to the son, and the son had been a tireless advocate for 

his father’s care, but the dad turned to the son and said, is this 

really how it all ends? Is this really how it all ends? 

 

Friends, that is not how it should be in Saskatchewan. That is 

not how it should be in Canada. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that our 

parents, that our grandparents deserve dignity and deserve 

security in their retirement. But this government, Mr. Speaker, 

has dropped the ball. This government has failed to hold up its 

end of the bargain. We’ve seen this through the actions from 

this government, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to staffing levels, as 

it relates to references to sufficient care, sufficient staffing. This 

government has dropped the ball. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need more spaces and more choices for 

seniors. We need better staffing levels in care homes. We need 

higher standards in public facilities, in private facilities, and for 

home care. And we need to support our seniors so that they can 

be independent in their own homes for as long as they want. 

Because I believe, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no excuse 

not to treat our seniors with dignity, with respect, especially at a 

time when the economy is doing well. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 

kind of dignified quality of life that I stand for when it comes to 

our parents, when it comes to our grandmas, when it comes to 

our grandpas because, Mr. Speaker, that is what matters to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m hearing from families also that many are very 

concerned not only about our parents and our grandparents but 

also concerned about our kids and, for some, for grandchildren. 

They’re concerned, Mr. Speaker, when they hear about schools 

that are overcrowded, schools that are crumbling. We’re 

concerned when educational assistants are laid off because it 

jeopardizes the one-on-one attention that many of our kids need 

for success. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to taking pressure off of 

classrooms, listening to teachers, supporting our kids, this 

government’s Throne Speech is disappointing. It’s 

disappointing to Saskatchewan families, to students, and to 

educators. 

 

Last winter, Mr. Speaker, in The Battlefords, students had to 

actually wear their winter coats in the classroom because the 

heat was turned down as a result of budget constraints forced by 

this provincial government. Can you believe that, Mr. Speaker? 

Students actually having to wear their winter coats during 

classes. It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker, especially 

when our economy is doing so well. 

 

I visited, Mr. Speaker, with educators in northern Saskatchewan 

who can’t even afford current science textbooks and where 

science labs, Mr. Speaker, that are meant for 30 students have 

60 students crammed into them. The look on these teachers’ 

faces, Mr. Speaker, is one of complete frustration. And they 

ask, how can people expect our students to learn when we don’t 

even give them the basic tools that they need? And they ask me, 

how does this make any sense, especially when our economy is 

strong? Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make any sense. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan this government, Mr. Speaker, is not 

holding up its end of the deal when it comes to First Nations 

and Métis education and employment outcomes. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have a moral imperative to improve this 

because the current situation is simply unacceptable. 

 

But I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that it’s in our province’s 

self-interest to improve it. A prominent U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] economist tells us that Saskatchewan is missing 

out on $90 billion in economic benefits because we are failing 

to close the Aboriginal education gap — $90 billion in 

economic benefits for all of us in Saskatchewan, for all of us in 

this province, for every family here. But this government’s 

Throne Speech doesn’t address that. We have got to address 

First Nations and Métis education and employment outcomes. 

 

We need to be a leader, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to First 

Nations and Métis education and employment outcomes. We 

need a cap on classroom sizes. We need to provide more 

one-on-one supports for students who need them. We need to 

repair leaking roofs and crumbling gymnasiums. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to make responsible investments in building 

new schools in growing neighbourhoods. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to consult with teachers and educators every step of the 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, treating our kids like they’re the future, respecting 

their teachers, and investing in tomorrow — that is what I stand 

for when it comes to our little ones and the high school students 

who will be in tomorrow’s workforce. Why, Mr. Speaker? 

Because that is what matters to Saskatchewan people. 

Government revenues, Mr. Speaker, have increased by a 

whopping 50 per cent. I don’t think there’s any excuse, Mr. 

Speaker, for this government to be dropping the ball when it 

comes to education. Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech had very 

little for Saskatchewan families. 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3861 

When it comes to health care, this government’s Throne Speech 

looks backward. It doesn’t prescribe a plan to end short-staffing 

in hospitals, in health care facilities, and this Assembly has 

heard about the problems caused by short-staffing. We’ve heard 

the conditions, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan’s largest hospital 

the retired nurse calls “filthy dirty.” We’re heard nurses say, 

Mr. Speaker, that they fear for patient safety as a result of 

understaffing, that they fear for patient safety. Yet this 

government’s Throne Speech offers very little that’s new and 

very little that is concrete when it comes to better health care. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And when it comes to the environment, Mr. Speaker, this 

Throne Speech doesn’t even go so far as to look backward 

because this government knows its record on the environment is 

one of lowering standards, eliminating goals, and slashing 

environmental programming by 73 per cent over just two years. 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is a disappointment to those of 

us who want a clean province and a long-lasting environmental 

sustainability for our kids and for our grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention that when it comes to 

post-secondary education, this government’s Throne Speech 

was a big disappointment. Saskatchewan students pay the 

second highest tuition in the nation. Our universities, Mr. 

Speaker, are plagued by layoffs and program cuts. This 

backwards-looking Throne Speech outlines only how this 

government brought our universities to the unfortunate situation 

that they’re in today. There is no plan. There is no vision. There 

are no details. 

 

Mr. Speaker, government revenues are up 50 per cent. 

Saskatchewan families are doing their part. They’re working 

harder than ever to pay their bills, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 

doing their part for the economy. Businesses and working 

people have built a strong economy, but the government is 

dropping the ball. This Throne Speech fails to deliver to middle 

class families. It fails to deliver for Saskatchewan families, and 

it fails to look forward to the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m listening to Saskatchewan families, and what 

I’m hearing is that we all want the same things. We want to end 

the seniors’ care crisis. We want better for our kids than 

crowded facilities and crumbling classrooms that they have 

today. We want a smart growth plan that supports diversifying 

our economy. We want today’s prosperity to mean not only 

clean hospitals and repairs to schools today but also long-term 

savings and a diversified economy for tomorrow. That fact, Mr. 

Speaker, is what matters to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’ll be supporting the amendment, and I 

will not support the government’s Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. Thanks very much, 

Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the chance to enter the debate on the 

Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. And I want to, as I do, 

acknowledge the supports at home every chance I can. And I 

guess at the beginning of this session, this is the first formal 

opportunity I have to acknowledge my family: Tami, and 

Megan and Colter actually who are busy with their studies at 

the University of Saskatchewan now, and Faith who is now in 

grade 10 in high school. 

 

To all of our other family and supports, my folks and Tami’s 

and to the constituency support we have that are both a part of 

our constituency office in Swift Current and also our own 

constituency executive, the political supports that we have back 

home, I want to thank them and acknowledge them for enabling 

me, allowing me to be able to have this great honour of being 

first and foremost the MLA for Swift Current and then also able 

to assume some other duties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think those of us who’ve followed politics for 

some time were very familiar with the refrain from those who 

review speeches from the throne, those who are pundits, those 

in the media. And that refrain is basically that they are very 

vague, that they are general, and sometimes they might outline 

a vision, but by and large they’re very general documents 

without a lot of specifics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to note that one of the reviews of 

this particular Speech from the Throne that’s the subject of 

debate here this afternoon, from a daily paper here in the 

province, was actually quite the opposite. It was actually a bit of 

a criticism. I should say they were acknowledging the fact that 

there was a lot of specificity in this particular Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

There were a lot of specifics in the Speech from the Throne that 

we’re debating and that my friend the Leader of the Opposition 

is deriding and ruling out of hand. Mr. Speaker, they did note 

by the way that they’d like to see more vision. So that was 

interesting. There was an editorial that said, lots of specifics but 

no vision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that the Speech from the 

Throne flows from the growth plan that we announced well 

over a year ago now. Mr. Speaker, our government has always 

been informed by some overarching goals, some of them 

around population — and more on that in a moment — some of 

them around just general other metrics that speak to economic 

growth. 

 

We have always been informed by those goals, as a 

government, as we’ve implemented a growth plan. Our growth 

plan has six very clear principles that we can review. It always 

has. These have been unchanging. They were reaffirmed in the 

growth plan announcement about a year ago, and so was the 

vision for the province. The vision for the province in the 

growth plan is that we would be 1.2 million people by 2020. 

 

The vision for the province is captured in some very specific 

goals around improving grade 12 completion in the province, 

leading the country in fact by 2020 in grade 12 completion, that 

we would increase completion of grade 12 by First Nations and 

Métis students by 50 per cent by that same period, Mr. Speaker. 

There were specific goals in health care and the list went on in 

the growth plan. That was the vision for the province. 

 

The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, follows on that. It’s 

ordered on that, on the vision, on that basis. It laid out many of 

the specific measures this government will take to achieve the 

vision outlined in the growth plan, to achieve the objectives of 



3862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

the growth plan. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s why some of 

those who are reviewing the Speech from the Throne noted that, 

noted that there was a lot of specifics in it. And there are. 

 

For example in the Speech from the Throne is the $10 million 

Urgent Issues Action Fund in terms of long-term care, in terms 

of care for seniors, as well as a commitment to move forward 

with more home care, Mr. Speaker, expanding pilot programs to 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert beyond what we’ve already done, 

a $2 million investment in Regina, and to contemplate 

long-term answers for seniors’ care, for long-term care in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But real specifics. Actual numbers. Actual objectives. Actual 

measures and programs. Not words. Not sort of these platitudes, 

but specifics in the Speech from the Throne that would help us 

achieve the vision and the goals of the growth plan. 

 

I note, Mr. Speaker, for example the goals remain around three 

more collaborative emergency centres. These are exciting new 

emergency centres that are going to open in those three places. 

And we know they’re going to work because one’s already been 

deployed and opened in Maidstone and welcomed there. We’re 

moving now to . . . Sorry, four — Shaunavon, Spiritwood, 

Wakaw, and Canora as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are launching a pilot around hot-spotting to 

relieve emergency rooms across the province. Mr. Speaker, 

some very specific ideas on that. We’re bringing back house 

calls, Mr. Speaker, for seniors who need them. The Leader of 

the Opposition said, well we’ve always been doing it, and he 

was wrong on that count. He’s been wrong on a number of 

things, Mr. Speaker, but he was wrong on that. We’ve had in 

the province certainly the ability. And the fact that doctors will 

go to long-term care facilities, that would constitute I think the 

house calls the Leader of the Opposition’s referring to. 

 

What we haven’t had although in the province is what they’re 

doing at Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto. And again I urge . . . 

I think my honourable friend the Leader of the Opposition is a 

thoughtful individual. I know he was involved in the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association]. I think he’s very 

interested in policy. So I urge him to look fully at the ideas 

presented here before he launches into a criticism — for 

example 50 minutes to decide the model for nine new schools, 

one in his riding, was the wrong model. 

 

But on the issue of health care, the same is true. We are not 

doing the kind of home care . . . The kind of house calls that we 

will be doing, pioneered by Mount Sinai, Mr. Speaker, where as 

a result of visits even to emergency rooms, seniors are 

identified who are candidates for house calls by doctors, by 

nurse practitioners, so that we can again prevent the overuse of 

emergency centres but also, Mr. Speaker, that we would be able 

to improve on a proactive basis the health of seniors who are 

receiving health calls. So that’s a very specific announcement, 

that part of the Throne Speech, and that we’re going to be 

working on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The student-first initiative in education also announced in the 

Speech from the Throne, and the specifics around that have 

been clarified. It was interesting; we had a good discussion on 

education here in this Assembly with the Leader of the 

Opposition. We’ve been very clear about things that we’re 

going to move forward with, things that we are pausing on, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of change. We’ve heard from teachers. There 

has frankly been too much change. And we’ve responded by 

pausing the province-wide approach to the standards-based 

methods we were using but continuing with the proven 

standards-based initiatives that are happening in places like 

Chinook School Division for example, continuing with the 

successful early years evaluation and the Tell Them From Me 

surveys, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition to that, the Speech from the Throne mentions new 

bandwidth issues in our schools. We’re investing in schools for 

the first time in a very long time to ensure that all the capital 

they have, all of those computers actually can work because 

there’s bandwidth. And we are appreciative to SaskTel for that 

effort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also announced 18 schools, actually nine 

joint-use schools around the province. And so specifics in the 

Speech from the Throne that respond to education needs, not 

just in terms of capital but in terms of operating, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve seen year over year in budgets. Again counter to what 

people might hear from the Leader of the Opposition, counter to 

what the NDP are saying, we’ve seen significant increases year 

after year after year, both the operating side and the capital side 

for new schools. 

 

And notwithstanding the fact that I think that we’ve built about 

20 new schools under our government; and well over, if you 

take a look at small capital improvements, over a couple of 

hundred of those over the years; and a number of major 

renovations to schools, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding all of that, 

the Leader of the Opposition in his capacity as the member for 

Massey Place, Saskatoon Massey Place, has done his duty on 

behalf of his constituents. He stood up in his place and said, we 

need a school. And by the way, the MLA for Saskatoon 

Southeast said Stonebridge needs a school. And MLAs for 

Regina have pointed to neighbourhoods, one in Harbour 

Landing, and said, this is a growing area; we need a school. To 

the point where the number of new schools needed got upwards 

of 18 or more. Frankly more, because there are rural schools 

that will need to be done, and we’re going to be there for those 

in the future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I was surprised when the Leader of the 

Opposition declined the chance to attend the announcement 

when the Minister of Education invited him right into his 

constituency. Fifty-four times he had took to his feet in the 

Legislative Assembly and said to the government of the day, to 

our government, we need a school in Hampton Village. We 

need a school in Hampton Village. We need a public school; 

there needs to be a separate school in Hampton Village, in my 

constituency — petition after petition after petition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I was surprised when he declined even to 

come to the announcement. I think he knew we were going to 

be announcing that school in his constituency. I was even more 

surprised that he, with the advice of the deputy leader, who is 

the financial guru over on the other side of the House, the 

deputy leader took all of 50 minutes, 50 minutes . . . The 

country’s been debating and improving P3s since about 1990, 

getting better with every iteration, getting better with every 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3863 

generation in terms of transparency, in terms of timeliness, in 

terms of the investment required. It’s taken a long time as a 

country to get these right. 

 

We as a government have thought about P3s and their 

application since we were first elected in 2007. In fact the 

Finance minister, then Education minister, was quite candid. He 

went across the country and looked at some of the examples 

that members opposite point to and said, I’m not sure these are 

quite ready yet. That’s what he said. Work was continuing right 

across the country, Mr. Speaker. And over the years that have 

intervened, we’ve seen Alberta go ahead with 18 . . . with a 

number of schools, Mr. Speaker, three different phases, and 

saved $240 million and get the projects done on time. 

 

Now so given that history of P3s, that history right across the 

country that literally stretches back to 1990 — when I bet the 

Deputy Leader might have been still in high school; I’m not 

sure of his age, Mr. Speaker — given that span of time and the 

development of P3s as a model and the improvement of P3s as 

a model, it took the NDP and their financial guru 50 minutes to 

declare their opposition to these schools. And they’re opposed 

to all of them. Mr. Speaker, you cannot have your cake and eat 

it too in this legislature. 

 

In terms of saying well we want the schools but we don’t, you 

know, want it this way, it’s one or the other. They can agree to 

work together with the government to make sure that we learn 

from all of the examples — and we will, Mr. Speaker, across 

the country — or they can oppose it. And they’ve chosen to 

oppose it. We’re going to let their constituents know because, 

you know, I’m sure they let their . . . I’m sure the Leader of the 

Opposition told everyone back in Massey Place, I stood up in 

the legislature again today. I fought for a new school here in 

Hampton Village. I bet you every time he did that he might 

have sent a few letters out saying, look what I’ve done. Mr. 

Speaker, the real test then for all of us is, what is our response 

when that action is taken, even if it’s taken by the other side of 

this Assembly? 

 

I remember, Mr. Speaker, standing in my place, day after day, 

during petitions — we did them a little differently back then as 

you might remember, Mr. Speaker — asking the NDP 

government for a new hospital in Swift Current. Our hospital 

had been built I think in the late 1940s, and there was black 

mould and asbestos, and it wasn’t meeting the needs of the 

region as a regional hospital or certainly the city of Swift 

Current. So I stood every day with petitions, thousands of 

petitions, Mr. Speaker, representing thousands of petitioners. 

And then one day — and I’m grateful the member for Lakeview 

is here because he was the minister of Health at the time — then 

one day the New Democratic Party government announced 

approval for funding and construction of a brand new hospital 

for Swift Current. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I did as an MLA was took my place in the 

Assembly. I stated a few concerns that I was hearing from 

constituents in terms of the number of beds that were going to 

be in the new facility. Really that was really the only the major 

concern. But then, I have the Hansard here, I said to the then 

minister, the current member for Lakeview, the current 

associate Health critic — I think there’s three Health critics 

over there — I said, thank you on behalf of the people of Swift 

Current. It’s my job to ask you for these investments as an 

MLA, to make the case for this new hospital. And then when 

you respond, Government of Saskatchewan, whatever your 

political stripe, whatever the difference is between us, it’s then 

my job to say thank you on behalf of the people of Swift 

Current. And may I say respectfully, Mr. Speaker, if that’s our 

job on this side as individual members, that’s also their job on 

that side of the House when we’re building schools in Regina, 

when we’re building schools in Saskatoon. That’s just kind of 

the common decency I think we want in the Assembly. 

 

You could state concerns certainly, but you could acknowledge 

when the right thing’s done, as the member for Elphinstone did 

just yesterday when the member, when the Minister of SaskTel 

stood up and said we’re building cell towers in northern 

Saskatchewan. Why is it that the member for Elphinstone is 

able to do that but his leader, who I would argue should set an 

example, is unable to simply say thanks for this commitment. 

We have a few concerns, but we appreciate the fact the 

government is moving forward on something that we’ve asked 

for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are a number of other issues and specific issues around 

the student-first initiative that we could talk a little bit about 

that are in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

It’s true, as well as infrastructure in a general way and 

highways, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about some very specific 

action we’ll take as a result of the work of the Committee on 

Traffic Safety. Mr. Speaker, that was referenced in the Speech 

from the Throne. The work of the committee itself was pretty 

specific, a specific action by a government responding to 

concerns of Saskatchewan people with respect to traffic safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is also true that the Speech from the Throne was 

pretty specific about reacting to the good work of the member 

for Saskatoon Fairview on the issue of bullying in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and very soon you’ll see the government 

come forward with some very specific actions from the 

excellent work that the member for Fairview has done in broad 

consultations across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne there was a lot of 

specificity around competitiveness because again there was 

goals in that growth plan, that vision document that’s the 

growth plan. There were goals around the fact that we’re going 

to need thousands of more workers by 2020. We need to start 

training them now and so there are 1,000 additional training 

spaces referenced in the Speech from the Throne, 700 of them 

for adult basic education. Many of those will be on-reserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, gone are the days when this government will wait 

for the federal government to do the right thing in terms of 

training on-reserve. We’re not going to try to . . . We’re not 

going to take over all their jurisdiction; the taxpayers here 

simply can’t afford it. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to pick our 

spots, and adult basic education is one of those spots where we 

will go on-reserve. In fact I think the member for Coronation 

Park helps deliver some of this programming on-reserve. 

 

We will go on-reserve and provide adult basic education. We 



3864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

have determined and we let the province know in the growth 

plan that there is a waiting list for adult basic education. That’s 

wrong, we think. If somebody wants that basic education to 

take the first step to engagement in the economy or perhaps lead 

them to the next step in engagement in the economy, any step 

towards engagement in the economy, then you bet the role for 

government is to provide that training. And there’ll be 700 new 

adult basic education seats that are referenced in the Speech 

from the Throne, as there are 300 new apprenticeship seats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know that industry is telling us we still 

need more apprentices. We’ve done a lot in the government in 

terms of responding to employers on the ratio question so we 

can see these new, trained employees deployed more quickly. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re actually, in addition to all of that, 

going to be adding training seats as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne also talked about 

something — and we’ve had a bit of a debate about it in 

question period — on the innovation side of our growth plan 

with respect to Boundary dam. There is a clean coal project 

there, Mr. Speaker. It is the world’s only post-combustion clean 

coal project that exists, frankly. It’s going to be live; it’ll be 

commissioned in the spring. They’re testing it already this fall. 

But here’s what we know. 

 

We know the technology works. We know, Mr. Speaker, that it 

captures about 90 per cent of carbon. We know that oil 

companies have purchased every bit of CO2 it’ll produce. It’ll 

produce 1 million tonnes a year by the way, Mr. Speaker, all of 

it purchased by oil companies, used for enhanced oil recovery. 

Meaning they don’t have to drill new holes. Meaning it 

reanimates existing oil assets. Then it’s stored geologically in 

southeastern Saskatchewan where we’ve been doing that 

successfully for a very long time, in part because of a project 

that the New Democrats started. 

 

When we came to government, the clean coal project had been 

completely shelved. We worked with the federal government. 

We got funding for it, about $240 million. We added to that 

funding about $1.1 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was strange in question period. The Leader of 

the Opposition kept saying, where’s the action on the 

environment? Well, Mr. Speaker, how about $1.1 billion worth 

of action on one project alone? The largest per capita 

investment in CO2 . . . [inaudible] . . . So we gave him that 

answer, but he just asked it again. It’s kind of . . . It’s 

interesting, Mr. Speaker. It’s entertaining. 

 

But you know, the good news on our side is the answers don’t 

change because the answers reflect a record on all of these files. 

The answers reflect the Speech from the Throne, informed by a 

broader vision in the growth plan that has specifics. The actions 

reflect a government that’s not afraid to set objectives in health 

care or in education or for the economy, and to be held 

accountable for those objectives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We welcome, we welcome the debate but you know, Mr. 

Speaker, in order for there to be an actual debate when one side 

presents their specific plans for the future or even their broad 

goals, in order for there to be a real debate, the other side 

generally presents its specifics and its goals. 

Mr. Speaker, there is a role for opposition to criticize. We did 

that in opposition. There’s a role for opposition to hold the 

government to account. But as you get further into the election 

cycle, there is an additional role incumbent upon all of us in this 

Assembly, and including the opposition, that they would also 

put forward their plan. Not platitudes, not to say we’re in favour 

of more eggs in more baskets, and not to say we’re in favour of 

sustainability and awesomeness and good, Mr. Speaker, but 

actual specifics. People will need to make a choice in the next 

election. And I don’t think right now they have a choice. 

 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition is holding any 

government accountable, it’s also incumbent that when they 

make a case or an accusation, that they be accurate, that they 

actually come with the entire truth. 

 

We’ve seen a few examples of it lately in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, where that has not been the case. I remember with 

great outrage when the Leader of the Opposition had a memo in 

his hand that had gone into the RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region], the health region around Regina, informing 

front-line staff that in certain situations — staffing shortages — 

certain functions of care might have to take a bit of a back seat 

if there was a shortage. And there was some things like bathing 

on there, some issues I’m sure that would be serious were those 

emergencies to arise, but they needed a contingency plan in the 

event that there was one. And I remember the Leader of the 

Opposition getting very angry about this. That how could this 

happen under the Minister of Health’s watch? How could this 

happen under this government? 

 

Mr. Speaker, he would have known full well, I am sure, as a 

former researcher for the SMA, for the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association — and we produced the memo, by the way, to back 

this up — that this has been standard practice in the province of 

Saskatchewan under different governments, under their 

government and under ours because health regions need 

contingency plans. And I noted for the record, Mr. Speaker, 

today, that when we read that memo back from 2004 that said 

exactly the same thing, he changed the subject. He moved on to 

another question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the Assembly the Deputy Leader, the 

financial guru for the New Democrats, was talking about 

bullying. There’s two ways I think you can harm your 

credibility as a political party. One is to just kind of miss some 

of all of the facts. One is to perhaps use something other than 

the facts — I’m being careful here, Mr. Speaker — and another 

is to take people out of context. 

 

I remember, Mr. Speaker, not very long ago in the life of 

politics in the province, where our New Democratic friends 

monitored an interview of mine and took the tape away and 

then they spliced the tape. I didn’t say anything in the tape that 

would be advantageous to them but what they could do . . . I 

guess they thought is, well we’ll just splice the tape, put words 

together so that it reflects something that he actually never said 

— didn’t even come close to saying — and then we’ll make an 

ad out of it. 

 

Well the Deputy Leader was a big supporter of the leader of the 

opposition who was behind this. Mr. Broten . . . Oh sorry, Mr. 

Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition was involved in writing 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3865 

the platform document for the NDP, was involved in the 

political life of that particular opposition. That’s what they did 

then. Have they changed? Did they learn? Because I think they 

were widely criticized for that tape. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, just yesterday in the Legislative Assembly 

the Deputy Leader, on the issue of bullying — by the way 

which is very much germane to the debate as part of the Speech 

from the Throne — was asking the Minister of Education a 

question. And he was referencing the fact that the member for 

Fairview that’s been working on bullying had said some certain 

things about when we could report out and take some action 

with respect to bullying. And so, you know, Mr. Speaker, I 

could read it all into the record, except I will tell you that we 

have now checked the actual tape, checked the full quote, and, 

Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition took the 

member completely out of context. 

 

He quoted her as follows, “It’s really hard to keep my mouth 

shut when it comes to that because I don’t want to jump the gun 

and let the cat out of the bag . . .” And he just ended the quote 

there. And then he went to a question of the minister and said, 

you know, this is all ready, this is all staged, why haven’t you 

released it? The rest of the quote, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

member said, and he would have access to this, is “. . . until we 

actually, you know, we do as much due diligence as we need to 

do.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty important part of the quote from the 

member who’s been working very diligently going across this 

province, canvassing what other provinces are doing to deal 

with bullying, Mr. Speaker, as earnest an effort as you will find 

by any member regardless of politics. So she says in an 

interview, I’d really like to tell the province some things now, 

but we’re not quite ready; we haven’t done all the homework. 

Except the last part he leaves out because it doesn’t fit his 

political purposes, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think they’ve learned 

anything from politics in the last couple of years in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the debate around the Speech from the Throne 

we’ve heard, just very recently, we’ve heard today another call 

for a smart growth plan from the New Democrats, from the 

Leader of the Opposition. And I just want to conclude here, 

because this Speech from the Throne is very much about our 

growth plan, and more specifically it’s about our specifics on 

how we’re going to achieve our growth plan. 

 

We have six components, Mr. Speaker. We know that it’s 

employers that are creating the wealth of this province. We 

know that the people of Saskatchewan and external factors are 

the driving force behind our growth. But governments can help 

or hurt that growth, and so we’ve laid out a plan that we think 

will help it. Mr. Speaker, dealing with the labour shortage is at 

the top of the list. Infrastructure is at the top of the list, if I can 

read these into the record. Competitiveness, we’ve dealt with 

that. That means competitive taxes. That means labour 

legislation that’s balanced, by the way, and competitive with 

other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. We’re working on that. It 

means a focus on our strengths, which include natural resources 

and agriculture, by the way. 

 

I heard the Leader of the Opposition just speak on the Speech 

from the Throne. It’s a chance to talk a lot about what’s right in 

the . . . or wrong, whatever really he wants to talk about. And I 

don’t think members . . . I’m not . . . I don’t think there was one 

word breathed by the Leader of the Opposition on agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year we broke our export records in this 

province — 32 billion in exports. We exceeded British 

Columbia. A third of those exports are from agriculture. This 

province is leading the world, leading the way in the production 

of, you name it — pulses, cereals, oilseeds, Mr. Speaker, the 

canola oil itself. Mr. Speaker, second largest beef herd in the 

country. One of the rock stars, if I can use that term, of our 

economy is agriculture. And you know, Mr. Speaker, the 

Speech from the Throne recognized that. The Speech from the 

Throne took steps to provide a voluntary livestock insurance 

program as announced at another specific action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province know that as 

long as members on this side of the House have a chance to 

serve on this side of House, we will never, ever forget the 

importance of agriculture. More than that, we understand that it 

is very much at the heart of the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The fifth component of our plan is an innovation agenda, and 

the sixth is fiscal responsibility, balanced budgets. So there you 

have it. That’s our growth plan. And we can talk about specific 

measures under each of those, some of them mentioned in the 

Speech from the Throne. Again the NDP say they don’t like 

that plan. They’ve said it in a debate today. They said they 

would have a smart growth plan. Fair enough. What is it? 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important question. I remember 

when I had the honour of becoming leader of the opposition in 

March of 2004. Mr. Speaker, we knew we had to take 

immediate steps to respond to what had happened in the last 

election because people had sent our party a message, and so, 

Mr. Speaker, we undertook a broad and sweeping review of all 

of our policy. We said, I said, look, we’re going to actually go 

beyond the membership of the party and talk to academics, talk 

to others, talk to people in business, talk to labour, and develop 

new policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also presented an economic paper for the 

province called The Promise of Saskatchewan. And then that 

fall, the fall of 2004, we met as a convention, as a party. We 

took the input from not just party members, but all those we had 

had consultations with across the province. We actually threw 

out all of the existing policies. Some of it was going to come 

back; we knew that. But we wanted to start with a clean slate, 

and we rebuilt the policy of the party. And from that then we 

proposed a platform in the last election, and from that we kept 

the promises we’ve made, and we’ve subsequently offered 

another platform. But, Mr. Speaker, we did all of that in that 

early part, in terms of development of brand new policy, 

between March and the end of November in the same year, Mr. 

Speaker, in the same year. 

 

Well my friend across the way has got half of it right. He’s 

wiped out all the NDP policy. If you go to their website and 

look for policy, Mr. Speaker, you cannot find any policy. We 



3866 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2013 

have a political party in the province of Saskatchewan that 

wants to present itself as a credible alternative to the 

government, says we need a smart growth plan, doesn’t like 

this, that, and the other thing. And you go to their website and 

say, well I wonder what these guys think about that, then click 

on policy and there is nothing there. How is that possible? 

Really? 

 

What we get though, Mr. Speaker, and we just heard it in the 

Assembly today, is things from the Leader of the Opposition 

that he says we need a smart growth plan, whatever that is. I 

think that if people thought the NDP were now in favour of 

smart growth plans, that would explain a lot about what they 

did in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker. He says, well he gave us a few 

more details today. He said a smart growth plan is sustainable, 

very — I think everybody can understand now what he means 

— it’s sustainable and that it’s more diversified, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then he went on to say, well one financial writer was critical of 

the economic policies of the government and said we were 

going off in all directions. I would point out for my honourable 

friend that that same business writer, Mr. Speaker, wrote after 

we released our growth plan that our plan was “. . . pragmatic 

and visionary, ambitious and achievable.” 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, my point is not what any one financial 

commentator might say. My point is this, to our friends 

opposite, we were waiting. If the NDP want to engage in a 

meaningful debate — if they want to share with us what a smart 

growth plan would be; if they want to share with us what their 

targets are in health care, how many health care workers should 

be there; what their goals are in education — and then, not 

maybe even right now, we’ll give them some dispensation, but 

as we get closer to the election, maybe cost it out and find out, 

are they still in favour of balanced budgets or not? When they 

have that level of detail, even some more generalities, then we 

can have a debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As for the government, we can only control what we do on this 

side of the House. And so we make some commitments to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. We’re going to work 

hard every single day to earn the mandate that they gave to us, 

Mr. Speaker, in 2011. We’re going to keep the promises that we 

made, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be focused on growth. As 

long as we have a chance to be on your right side, we will be 

focused on growth and those six components that we think will 

help sustain and facilitate further growth. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work very hard to deal 

with the challenges of growth. We know they’re there. They’re 

there in education. They’re there in health care. They’re there in 

infrastructure. We have specific ways and ideas to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, some of them traditional, some of them like P3s that 

are innovative. Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. Make no 

mistake. This side of the House, in terms of those particular 

priorities, will always, always prefer the challenges of growth to 

the challenges that faced this province under those long years of 

NDP government which were the challenges of decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when actual members of the government would 

take to their feet, NDP government, and basically, Mr. Speaker, 

dismiss the fact that this province could even grow at the 

national average, when someone who I think at the time might 

have been the Finance minister would say about our goals on 

this side to be 1.1 million people would call them farcical, 

would say that they fly in the face of reality, Mr. Speaker, 

whatever happens as a government, we’re going to make 

mistakes going forward, but we will never make the mistake of 

underestimating this province or its people, Mr. Speaker. We 

will continue to believe that growth can be sustained, that our 

best days are always ahead of us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We understand it’ll take work to accommodate that growth, but 

the people of this province have a solemn commitment in the 

Speech from the Throne and in the actions, in the words, in the 

deeds of this government that we do believe in this province, 

not just today but for the future. We do believe it can lead the 

country as it is today, not just today but into the future, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s our commitment to them. That’s what’s 

reflected in the Speech from the Throne. That’s why I’ll be 

voting for it later today. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I must inform the Assembly that under 

sessional order of November the 4th, it is my duty to put the 

question on the amendment. It has been moved in amendment 

to the main motion by the member for Regina Rosemont, 

seconded by the member for Athabasca: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 

And that this Assembly condemns this government for its 

lack of vision, for its actions and often failure to act which 

are making education and seniors’ care worse; and for its 

failure to deliver a smart growth strategy which includes 

diversifying our economy so that our prosperity is 

sustainable in the long term. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I think the nos have it. I declare the 

amendment lost. Call in the members. Recorded division. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:22 until 15:30.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 



November 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3867 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 41] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Eagles Cheveldayoff Harpauer 

Toth Huyghebaert Doherty 

Norris Reiter Heppner 

Harrison Wyant Tell 

Weekes Hart Bradshaw 

Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Wilson 

Marchuk Kirsch Michelson 

Doke Cox Jurgens 

Steinley Hickie Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Parent 

Phillips Docherty  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 9; those 

opposed, 41. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Under sessional order of November the 4th, it 

is my duty to put all the questions necessary to dispose of the 

main motion. It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Dewdney, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Sutherland: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour, please say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed, please say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the members 

for a recorded division. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:34 until 15:35.] 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 41] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Eagles Cheveldayoff Harpauer 

Toth Huyghebaert Doherty 

Norris Reiter Heppner 

Harrison Wyant Tell 

Weekes Hart Bradshaw 

Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Wilson 

Marchuk Kirsch Michelson 

Doke Cox Jurgens 

Steinley Hickie Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Parent 

Phillips Docherty  

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 41; those 

opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion passed. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:37.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3849 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3849 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3849 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3849 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3849 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3850 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3850 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3850 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Order of Merit 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3850 

 Team Honey Do 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3851 

 Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3851 

 Never Too Late to Change for the Better 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3851 

 Lows in Motion 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3852 

 Prince Albert Student Receives Prestigious Scholarship 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3852 

 Growth Plans 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3852 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Environmental Protection Measures 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3852 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3853 

 IPAC–CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3854 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3855 

 SaskPower Rates and Boundary Dam Project 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3855 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3855 

 Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3856 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3856 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 

 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3857 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3861 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 3866 

 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 3867 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


