




















































Hansard: April 23, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 51A  TUESDAY, APRIL 23, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3323 

 April 23, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

There’ll be formal introductions of some very special guests 

who are seated on the floor, recipients of the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal, Mr. Speaker, but if I can in a very general 

way welcome them and their family members and friends to 

their Legislative Assembly, their leisure centre, today. They’ll 

understand that inside joke, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, it’s a special day in the life of this legislature when 

we can take a break and honour those who are literally heroes 

in their communities right across the province, who are very 

generous with their time and efforts and give back to 

Saskatchewan in any number of ways. And, Mr. Speaker, today 

was no exception. We heard citations that make us marvel at 

the quality of people that live here and understand more fully 

why Saskatchewan is such a great place. So, Mr. Speaker, we 

do want to welcome them. 

 

The poet Edwin Markham said, “We have committed the 

Golden Rule to memory; let us now commit it to life.” Today 

we honour those in our province who have done precisely that. 

And I, like many other members of this Assembly, look 

forward to meeting them again individually as the afternoon 

proceeds. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome these 

Saskatchewan heroes, recipients of the Volunteer Medal, their 

friends and family to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier and welcome the recipients and their families here 

to the Assembly today. The ceremony that we had this morning 

was a special time, and it reminded us of the many people in 

this province that contributed in so many ways, helping so 

many people. And the individuals recognized today, Mr. 

Speaker, come from varied backgrounds, varied places here in 

the province, but they share a desire to make Saskatchewan the 

best possible place. They share a desire to help their 

neighbours. And, Mr. Speaker, they provide an example to each 

of us here and to everyone in the province. So on behalf of the 

opposition, we thank you so much for your service, and we look 

forward to your contributions in the years to come as well. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — It is my privilege to introduce 

Phyllis Cameron, also known as the cinnamon bun lady, and as 

I learned at lunch, the teddy bear grandma, from the 

constituency of Cannington who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Master Corporal (retired) Leslie Good from the constituency of 

Moose Jaw Wakamow who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my privilege to introduce Colonel (retired) Charles Keple 

from the constituency of Regina Douglas Park who today 

received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to introduce to the legislature Ms. Namarta Kochar 

from the constituency of Saskatoon Northwest who today 

received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce Dr. 

Jim Leskun from the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. Thank 

you very much, Jim. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege today to 

introduce Mr. André Moquin from the constituency of Wood 

River who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mr. Dennis Sanderson from the constituency of Cumberland 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my privilege to introduce Joan Wilson from the constituency of 

Melville-Saltcoats who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 43 grade 

12 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate in Regina. 

Accompanying the 43 students is their teacher, Ms. Kim 

Lawrence, and the vice-principal, Mrs. Krystal McPherson. 

And I will have an opportunity to get together with the students 

after question period and share in their thoughts about our 

question period. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 



3324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like to 

introduce my friend the Hon. Chuck Strahl who’s joining us 

here today. Chuck was a Member of Parliament for the 

constituency of Chilliwack from 1993 till 2011. He was 

successful in six consecutive election campaigns. He served as 

minister of Indian and Northern Affairs, minister of Transport, 

and minister of Agriculture. And he was in the city today for a 

prayer breakfast, and I had . . . When I was in Ottawa, it was a 

great learning opportunity, but the best part was the people that 

I got to meet and Chuck is definitely one of those. So I would 

ask all members of the Assembly to welcome Chuck here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the member from Martensville in welcoming Mr. Strahl to the 

Assembly. I hope he has a good visit here to our province. 

 

I also want to introduce another individual seated behind the 

bar, Mr. Speaker, Mr. John Comer who was a member of the 

Assembly from 1971 to ’75 representing the constituency of 

Nipawin. And it’s a pleasure to have him here in the legislature 

as well today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join the Opposition Leader in welcoming John Comer to the 

legislature. John Comer lived in Carrot River. He lived right 

across the street from me. And he also did a very admirable job 

of being the mayor of Carrot River for some time — a great 

person. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’m 

pleased to introduce the president of the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses seated in your gallery, Ms. Rosalee Longmoore, as 

well as members of her family including her children, Ashley, 

Dylan, and Savannah. Mr. Speaker, after 15 years of leading 

SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], Ms. Longmoore will 

retire later this week, although retirement’s maybe not the best 

word to use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce her and thank her for 

all the work that she has done on behalf of nurses and the health 

care system in our province. Mr. Speaker, she has been a 

tireless, dedicated advocate for nurses in this province, both as 

a front-line nurse herself as well as the many years she served 

as SUN president. And I’d ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming her to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Health minister in welcoming Ms. Rosalee Longmoore 

along with her family, and Donna Ottenson as well who are 

here in the Assembly. Rosalee has had a long and distinguished 

career here in the province and has contributed greatly, 

representing the concerns of her members, but also advocating 

for the health care system. And so I want to thank Rosalee for 

the work that she has done and wish her all the best in the next 

steps forward. And I’m sure as a well-known person in the 

province, perhaps better known than many of us who occupy 

these chairs here, Mr. Speaker, many people in the province 

would also wish her all the best in the years ahead. So thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I have the honour of introducing 

some very important guests from Saskatchewan’s disability 

community. Joining us here today are Merv Bender who is 

executive director of the Prince Albert and District Community 

Service Centre; Mr. Ian Wilkinson, executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council; Mr. Daryl Stubel, the director 

of the office of disabilities for the Ministry of Social Services; 

Judy Hannah, with the Saskatchewan Association for 

Community Living; and special guest Mr. David Swan from 

Saskatoon; and Ms. Gayle Dixon and her dog Daisy, also from 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of celebrating an important 

milestone this morning with these individuals where we now 

have over 10,000 individuals receiving SAID [Saskatchewan 

assured income for disability] benefits. The SAID program not 

only improves the quality of life for people with disability, but 

it does offer them dignity and independence that we believe 

they deserve. I thank the disability community for their help in 

designing the program. Our government is committed to 

making Saskatchewan the best place for people to live that have 

disabilities. I would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming these very important guests to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister on behalf of the opposition in welcoming the folks 

from the disability community here on the floor of the Chamber 

today who’ve worked so hard in collaboration with the 

government, making sure that the SAID program gets off the 

ground. But not just that, that the implementation of it works as 

it should for all those people who benefit from the program. So 

a big thank you to the folks here today. 

 

And I have to give a special shout-out to Judy Hannah. Actually 

Judy Hannah is an individual who . . . She was my boss several 

years ago when I was finishing my social work degree and 

doing my practicum at SACL [Saskatchewan Association for 

Community Living]. And Judy I consider a friend and someone 

who helps me better understand disability issues in 

Saskatchewan. So thank you and welcome on behalf of the 

opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce two individuals in your gallery and one on the floor. 

Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, Mr. Scott Simpkins, a good friend 

of mine who helped out at the leadership breakfast this 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3325 

morning. In front of him — just give us a wave, Steve — is Mr. 

Steve Berg with the Christian Embassy of Canada leader impact 

group out of British Columbia. He was the host of the 

leadership breakfast this morning. 

 

I’d like to join in with the member from Martensville and 

welcome Mr. Hon. Chuck Strahl to the Legislative Assembly. 

Chuck was our main speaker at the leadership breakfast this 

morning. A very inspiring speech on faith in the public square, 

which I think all of us in this Assembly and even in business 

could take some lessons from. So I’d ask all members to 

welcome these individuals to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we proceed, I would like to remind all 

of our guests, while I welcome all of you to the Assembly, to 

the Chamber, not to participate in the events on the floor, and 

that includes applause. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage in the Northwest. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cellphone coverage to the Canoe Lake First 

Nation along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay 

and Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nation along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring communities 

in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned time and time again, the 

people that have signed this petition asking for cellphone 

coverage for these communities have signed the petition from 

all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular petition, 

Mr. Speaker, the people are primarily from Dillon, 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know since the Act was introduced in December, literally 

hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been carried 

out in the interest of due diligence. Stable labour relations in all 

sectors run the risk of being thrown into turmoil as a result of 

Bill 85’s sweeping changes. Thousands of represented workers 

stand to lose their rights to bargain collectively and be 

represented by the union of their choice. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Prince 

Albert, Birch Hills, and Melfort. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Boston Marathon Support Run 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Sunday morning I was 

proud to join with community for the Boston support run in 

Regina. Running is often a solitary activity but it is surrounded 

by an incredibly supportive community. They cheer each other 

on and they encourage each other as they face challenges. This 

was on full display on Sunday. 

 

The run was organized by Gay Renouf, Jen Ruland, their 

running team, Marathon Matters, along with Renae Grubb, also 

with help from the Jaleta Pacers, the Regina Road Runners, and 

the Regina Multisport Club. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when tragic events like the bombings in Boston 

happen, we are often left feeling helpless and unsure of how to 

demonstrate our compassion for all those impacted. Gay 

described her motivations for organizing the run by saying, I 

quote: 

 

We decided to run because what else can we do? We are 

runners. Our forte is endurance and we endure and we 

show that we can get through a tough time and we keep on 

running. 

 

Prior to the run, the individuals who participated in this year’s 

Boston Marathon were introduced, followed by a moment of 

silence for the victims. And, Mr. Speaker, many members of 

the running community came out to show their support, 

including Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame inductee Ted 

Jaleta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in thanking the organizers of the Boston Support Run for 

providing Regina the opportunity to come together and share 

our grief and support for Boston. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

rise today to recognize that this week is National Volunteer 

Week. Mr. Speaker, volunteers come from all walks of life. 

What they have in common is their desire to make a difference 

in their neighbourhood, their community, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, in their own life by giving of their time and 

expertise. Volunteers are active in all of our province’s 



3326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

communities. We all know who they are, and no doubt each and 

every one of us and our families have benefited from their 

goodwill. Across our province they deliver services and 

programs that improve and enhance the quality of life for our 

province’s people. 

 

According to SaskCulture’s website, Saskatchewan has one of 

the highest rates of volunteerism in the country. They are 

involved in virtually every aspect of society including health, 

education, sports, the arts, public safety, and the environment. 

Volunteer Week highlights these contributions and encourages 

all of us to think about how we can help also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing and thanking the many volunteers across our great 

province, including the outstanding individuals who joined us 

here earlier on. Your work truly helps make Saskatchewan a 

better place and is greatly appreciated. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Online Tour of Cultural Landmark 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, individuals no longer need to be 

in Saskatoon in order to take a tour of Third Avenue United 

Church. Thanks to CyArk world heritage database, individuals 

will be able to tour this historic site online from the comfort of 

their own homes at cyark.org. 

 

The Third Avenue United Church, thanks to a partnership 

between Stantec, Tourism Saskatoon, Third Avenue Centre, 

and CyArk, are now among 100 major world historical 

landmarks archived online. Celebrating 100 years of history, 

the Third Avenue United Church is a significant architectural 

landmark in Saskatoon, and we are proud to share that history 

with the international community. 

 

Two years ago, the Third Avenue Centre was formed with the 

goal of preserving the Third Avenue United Church as a 

historic cultural landmark as well as ensuring that this 

incredible venue remained an important part of the cultural and 

creative community in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to attend many events at 

the Third Avenue Church, and this facility is an excellent venue 

to display the cultural vibrancy and diversity in our city. There 

have been performances by the Amati Quartet, the Saskatoon 

Symphony, Duke Ellington, and Ladysmith Black Mambazo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the members of this House to 

take the time to explore the Third Avenue United Church online 

or in person. Saskatoon has an incredible cultural history, and 

this is a great opportunity to share it with the world. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

University of Saskatchewan Appoints New Chancellor 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 

the weekend the University of Saskatchewan senate appointed 

Mr. Blaine Favel to succeed Dr. Vera Pezer as U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] chancellor. Mr. Favel earned a 

Bachelor of Education degree from the U of S, a law degree 

from Queen's University, and a Master's of Business 

Administration degree from the Harvard Graduate School of 

Business. And in 2012, Mr. Speaker, the U of S awarded him 

an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree. 

 

He is an influential First Nations leader and is the first 

Aboriginal chancellor for the U of S. He was chief of the 

Poundmaker Cree Nation and served as grand chief of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations from 1994 to 1998. 

During that time, Mr. Speaker, he led the development of the 

First Nations Bank of Canada and the Saskatchewan Indian 

Gaming Authority. He served as a special adviser to the 

Assembly of First Nations and was a panellist on the Indian 

Residential Schools Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 

 

I also want to recognize the fine work that Dr. Pezer did as the 

13th chancellor of the University of Saskatchewan and thank 

her for all she did for the university. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the 14th chancellor of the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Favel brings a wealth of experience, skills, 

and dedication to the position. I would like to extend my 

congratulations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Disability Program Marks Milestone 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

the House to share some great news about the Saskatchewan 

assured income for disability program or SAID. The SAID 

program now has over 10,000 people receiving benefits. This is 

definitely a reason to celebrate. 

 

It was back in October 2009 that the SAID program was first 

introduced, a very proud day for members of the disability 

community and this government. This program was born out of 

a desire from the disability community to have a separate 

income support program, a program that not only improves the 

quality of life for people with disabilities but also offers them 

the dignity and independence that they deserve. 

 

Under SAID, people with significant and enduring disabilities 

have more control of their finances and circumstances rather 

than being managed by the rules and structures of welfare. In 

addition to expanding enrolment, we are also substantially 

increasing SAID benefits over four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through programs like SAID, we are working hard 

to make Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live for 

people with disabilities. We want to thank all of our partners 

and friends in the disability community once again for their 

assistance and ongoing support in making this program a 

reality. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3327 

Increased Funding for Rural Physician Locum Pool 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to call 

my colleagues’ attention to our government’s continuing 

commitment to improve access to physician services for all 

Saskatchewan residents. Today we increased funding for a 

program that is bringing physicians to rural communities. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re providing $3 million for the rural physician 

locum pool. This represents a funding increase of $1.5 million 

over last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, locum physicians temporarily fulfill the duties of 

physicians who are away from their practice. This year all 

health regions will receive funding for a full-time position to 

provide relief services within their region. Since the program 

started last year, locum physicians have helped stabilize 

physician services in rural communities such as Maple Creek, 

Leader, Shaunavon, Kelvington, Kipling, Maidstone, Balcarres, 

and La Ronge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rural locum pool supports our growth plan 

goal of ensuring that health services are available to all 

Saskatchewan residents. This is one of a variety of initiatives 

that will help us attract and keep more doctors in underserved 

communities, and we look forward to seeing its continued 

positive results. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Leader’s Views 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] leader just can’t seem to keep his story straight. He 

admits the NDP’s policy on First Nations resource revenue 

sharing was a big problem in the last election. But then he says 

he supports that policy. 

 

He said he wanted to find efficiencies in the health care system, 

but now he says he’s against the government looking for 

efficiencies in the health care system. He says the NDP’s 

opposed to Bill 85, but they haven’t asked a single question 

about Bill 85 in question period in the five weeks since he 

became leader. 

 

He says he supports Keystone XL, but last year he voted 

against Keystone XL. And now his own Environment critic, the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana, doesn’t even seem to support 

Keystone. This is based on her comments in the private 

members’ debate last Thursday. She seems to have thrown in 

with Keystone opponents like Ryan Meili and Thomas Mulcair 

instead of supporting her own leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the NDP leader took over last month, the 

NDP can’t seem to get their position straight on anything. It’s 

no wonder the NDP’s a divided party. They have a divided 

leader. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Care for Pediatric Patients 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard many 

instances in question period over the last weeks, Mr. Speaker, 

about our parents and our grandparents not receiving the care 

that they need in seniors’ care facilities, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

through home care. But it’s not just seniors, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Sask Party government is neglecting. 

 

Concerns are also being raised about the proper care of sick 

children here in Saskatchewan. We heard last week that the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is looking to shut down the 

pediatric oncology ward, and we’ve learned that the health 

region is also looking to shut down the pediatric intensive care 

unit. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he think that shutting down 

the pediatric intensive care unit in our capital city is a common 

sense thing to do? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, since the government was 

elected in 2007, we’ve implemented something called the 

patient-first initiative right across the health care system. It 

prescribed a number of measures that our government followed. 

 

We are also keeping a number of campaign promises, still 

related directly to better care for kids, seniors, and patients of 

all ages, that’s seen 1,000 more nurses working in the province, 

more doctors working in Saskatchewan. The surgical wait times 

initiative, Mr. Speaker, has been decreased. More resources in 

the health regions, funding up for those significantly. 

 

And when it comes to children’s care, Mr. Speaker, compared 

to the NDP’s talk about a children’s hospital, now we see 

funding in place and planning and soon to be construction of a 

children’s hospital in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for many Saskatchewan people, 

especially to the parents of sick children, it isn’t common sense, 

Mr. Speaker, to close the pediatric intensive care unit here in 

the city of Regina and transfer those children, Mr. Speaker, 

hours away — away from their support systems, away from 

their family members — causing much strain for those families. 

 

So either the Premier agrees that this is a concern, Mr. Speaker, 

agrees with the parents and also the nurses in the province who 

have voiced concern around this, Mr. Speaker. Either he sees it 

as a priority to have that pediatric intensive care unit here in 

Regina, and therefore should put the right resources there to 

have it in place or, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is satisfied to 

preside over a decline in important health care services for 

children here in Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the Premier: which one is it? Does Regina, does 

our capital city need a pediatric intensive care unit for children 

here in the city, or is he content to preside over a decline in 

important health care services for Saskatchewan families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



3328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region wants to ensure that they have the proper level 

of support for pediatric patients when that support is needed 

within the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the region has engaged an outside consultant to 

look at the pediatric services that are provided in Regina. In 

response there are discussions about how some of those . . . 

how critically ill and injured children in southern 

Saskatchewan, how services will be provided. Plans to this 

point have not yet been finalized, Mr. Speaker, but they will be 

developing a plan in conjunction with providers and health 

professionals and partners on what is the best course of action 

to ensure that the appropriate level of care is provided to our 

pediatric, to our children who deserve and need services in 

southern Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for the families of sick children, 

it’s shocking for them to hear of plans to close the pediatric 

intensive care unit here for people living in Regina and people 

in southern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, when they think about 

the additional expenses, the additional travel times to be close 

to their children in times that no family should ever have to 

encounter, Mr. Speaker, it’s concerning and it’s shocking to 

them. 

 

It’s also confusing to them, Mr. Speaker, at a time when the 

provincial economy is doing well, why the Sask Party 

government can’t make this a priority and ensure that children, 

sick children here in Regina and in the South have the care that 

they need. 

 

So my question to the Premier: what does he have to say to the 

families of sick children who want to have a pediatric intensive 

care unit here in Regina which has been meeting their needs 

very well. What does the Premier have to say to those families 

who are now faced with this idea of having the unit closed here 

in the South? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Region and what this government is telling those 

families, is that we want to make sure that the appropriate level 

of care, when there are critically ill children in this province, 

that they have the care that they deserve within this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region has 

undertaken an evaluation of pediatric care, pediatric intensive 

care within Regina. Mr. Speaker, there have been deficiencies 

that have been found. And before we put children in a position 

where they are, where their care is at risk, Mr. Speaker, they 

need to . . . What they are doing is working through a plan to 

care for those children in the most appropriate fashion. Mr. 

Speaker, we will see children, while that plan is being 

developed, that need intensive care, Mr. Speaker. We will see 

children having service provided in Saskatoon, but this region 

is dedicated to providing a plan that will see appropriate care 

for children who need it in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, whether it’s home care services 

being cut, whether it’s seniors not receiving the proper care that 

they deserve in long-term care facilities, whether it’s the hiring 

freeze that we see in the Saskatoon health region, whether it’s 

talk of the closure of the pediatric oncology ward or, Mr. 

Speaker, the closure of the pediatric and intensive care unit, 

none of this makes sense to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, 

when the economy is doing well. 

 

I realize, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party at times has very 

selective hearing. But it doesn’t take much of an effort to listen 

to Saskatchewan families and understand how important these 

health care provisions are for their loved ones, whether it’s the 

oldest in our society, Mr. Speaker, or the youngest. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they can’t understand how the Premier talks about 

planning for growth, yet what he’s actually doing, Mr. Speaker, 

is presiding over a decline of hugely important services for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

My question to the Premier: is he content to preside over a 

decline of hugely important services for Saskatchewan patients 

like home care, like not having proper long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker, and having important pediatric units here in Regina 

closed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

problem with the preamble to that question is that it completely 

lacks credibility, coming from the Leader of the NDP. Mr. 

Speaker, it comes from the leader of a party that presided over 

the longest wait times for surgery in the country when this side 

of the House took office, Mr. Speaker. It comes from the leader 

of a party that closed hundreds of long-term care beds in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It comes from a leader 

of a party that closed 52 hospitals including the Plains in 

Regina, if he wants to talk about care here in the Queen City, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the question is asked to a government that recognizes that 

we need to do more, but also a government whose record 

includes 1,000 more nurses working today than under their 

party, 200 more doctors practising today, shorter times for 

surgery, Mr. Speaker, 93 per cent increase for the cancer 

agency, more drugs approved under the formulary, more drugs 

approved for cancer care — that’s our record. We’ll compare it 

any day of the week to the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Social Services Expenditures in the North 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When there are 

precious resources in social services, they are best used for 

front-line care for children, for families, for people living with 

disabilities, and for support for the most vulnerable among us. 

That’s why it makes no sense that the Sask Party has found 

hundreds of thousands of dollars for lawyers instead of 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3329 

front-line supports for social services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2008 the Sask Party government’s legal fees 

for Prince Albert and the North have increased from around 

$200,000 a year to over $843,000 last year alone. That is a 400 

per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. Why does the Sask Party 

government have money to pay lawyers instead of more support 

for front-line social services delivery in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The discussion 

that we had last night about lawyers within the northern region, 

we understood that this is not just Prince Albert but it’s for the 

North, and it’s the opportunity to make sure that Social Services 

can bring forward their case when it comes to children in care 

and people on social assistance. 

 

There’s always issues when it comes to decisions that are made 

by government. And first of all, I think the member opposite 

should be aware that our concern is with children. It is with 

people with disabilities. It is with people that are on wait-lists. 

And we’ve spent millions and millions of dollars to ensure that 

this is our priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite had an opportunity to 

discuss things like wait-lists, children in care, and today she’s 

talking about lawyers. I think we should be talking about the 

people that we’ve been providing services to and the people of 

the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Prince Albert 

since 2008, the actual number of child protection cases before 

the courts has declined from an average of 26 a week to an 

average of 24 a week. Skyrocketing legal costs don’t make 

sense when the number of cases is declining. In 2008 two 

Prince Albert firms received $268,000 in payments. That 

increased to $513,000 in 2009, $563,000 in 2010, $615,000 in 

2011, and over $843,000 last year alone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the cases before the courts have actually 

dropped, why would the Sask Party government pay over four 

times the amount for legal services in Prince Albert since they 

were elected? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in my responsibility as 

Minister for Social Services, I want to make sure that the 

individuals that we support within the ministry are supported 

and the taxpayers’ dollars, the taxpayers’ dollars are spent well. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we have something that comes before 

the court, it’s not the decision that’s made by myself or by the 

ministry. It’s challenges that may be brought forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the member opposite, again, hasn’t 

talked to us about the children living in low-income families. 

The member hasn’t talked about seniors’ income. They haven’t 

talked about housing issues. They haven’t talked about 

wait-lists. They haven’t talked about people in Valley View. 

But they want to talk about the justice system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the importance of it, but I also 

understand the importance of protecting the vulnerable 

individuals in our society. And that is what we are doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, all those areas, that’s exactly 

what these questions are about — limited resources. Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party government has spent over $2.8 million 

to pay law firms in Prince Albert for Social Services’ legal 

costs. One has to wonder if the Sask Party is allowing these 

massive bills to keep coming because the Prince Albert lawyer 

getting paid is a Sask Party insider who even served as the 

election campaign business manager for the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Why would the Sask Party government spend over $2.8 million 

in legal fees rather than front-line social services? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very interesting 

that the member opposite is ready to play politics. Anytime she 

has an opportunity, she talks about court systems and money. 

And I want to talk about things, about individuals, people that 

are vulnerable, children, making sure we have homes for 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not have the information on what these court 

cases were about. I do know that there was court cases, not only 

in Prince Albert, but in the North. And choosing the person 

who’s going to represent the best interests of taxpayers — and 

that is what we are doing here in this government — is 

something that I leave up to the justice system. 

 

At the same time, I’m hoping the member opposite understands 

the most important thing we can be doing in this province is 

looking after vulnerable individuals and our children. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Fort Qu’Appelle Fish Culture Station 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Even though spring 

is taking a long time to arrive, many Saskatchewan people are 

prepping their fishing rods and looking forward to getting out 

on the water this summer. That’s why it’s especially concerning 

that we have learned that the Sask Party government is 

privatizing the Fort Qu’Appelle fish culture station. This is yet 

another example of this government selling off important assets 

of the people. To the Minister of the Environment: why is the 

Sask Party selling this important asset? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the member is partially right 

in her preamble that Saskatchewan people are looking forward 

to getting out on the lakes in the summer and enjoying our lakes 



3330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

and taking advantage of what we have here in Saskatchewan. 

As far as the latter part of the question, I don’t have the 

information that the member is alleging. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, a couple years ago the Ministry 

of the Environment undertook consultations about The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act. On May 9th, 2011 the Minister of 

the Environment reported on those consultations to the 

Economy Committee. He said: 

 

There was another topic that did come up that was an area 

of focus during the consultations. That is the future of the 

fish culture station. And it was, I guess . . . The outcome 

of those discussions were based on the infrastructure 

upgrades that would be required. The stakeholder groups 

felt it was best that that remain the government’s 

responsibility. 

 

To the minister: if important stakeholder groups said just two 

years ago that the Fort Qu’Appelle fish culture station should 

remain the government’s responsibility, why is the Sask Party 

government putting up the for sale sign now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much for the 

question. I became the Minister of Environment in late May of 

last year, and since that time I have had no discussions in this 

regard. So that’s the answer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Fort Qu’Appelle fish culture 

station has operated since 1915 and is of crucial importance to 

our province because it produces about 40 million walleye and 

three-quarters of a million trout every single year. This helps 

preserve sport angling on 125 provincial waters where 

winterkill can be particularly brutal or where natural spawning 

cannot keep up with the fishing pressure. The fish culture 

station also provides an environmental service for the people of 

Saskatchewan. It has helped preserve endangered fish species in 

our province like lake sturgeon. 

 

To the Minister of the Environment: who did the Sask Party 

government . . . or why did the Sask Party government privatize 

such an important service for the environment and the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. No such privatization has taken place. I’m not sure if 

the member is talking about the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund in the broader context, but certainly in the light of her 

questions, nothing like that has taken place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Tourism Saskatchewan 

website says that our fish culture station is “unique in North 

America.” It’s been an important institution in our province for 

98 years. It produces about 40 million walleye and 

three-quarters of a million trout every single year. It’s crucial to 

preserving sport fishing on 125 provincial waters. It’s helped 

preserve endangered fish species in our province, and 

stakeholders have told the Sask Party it should remain the 

responsibility of the provincial government. 

 

To the Minister of the Environment: he is telling us it’s not 

going to be sold. Will he confirm here today that this unique 

service in North America will not be privatized? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. I’ll undertake to get the information from the member 

and report back to the House tomorrow on the question. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Immigration Issue 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For now 

more than 10 months, two international students from the 

University of Regina, Victoria Ordu and Ihuoma Amadi, have 

been forced to seek sanctuary in a local church. These two 

students came to Canada to expand their opportunities and to 

learn at the university. Having been provided with social 

insurance numbers, Ms. Ordu and Ms. Amadi mistakenly 

believed that they were able to work a few shifts at a local 

retailer here in Regina. That was incorrect of course, but in 

return for this honest mistake, Ms. Ordu and Ms. Amadi have 

been living under deportation orders ever since. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall the Minister Responsible for the Economy 

agreed that this situation was troubling and undertook to follow 

the matter up with the federal government. Can the minister 

advise the Assembly what actions he and that government 

undertook to address this troubling matter? Can he provide 

some hope for two young women who made an honest mistake, 

one for which they are paying a terrible and wildly 

disproportionate price? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 

member knows, I raised this matter with the federal Minister of 

Public Safety last October when he was visiting in Regina. I 

will have the opportunity to again meet with the minister 

tomorrow to see if there has been any change in the federal 

government position, and I’ll undertake to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Ms. Amadi and Ms. Ordu have spent the past 

10 months in the sanctuary of a local church. They have now 

missed two full semesters, effectively the entire school year. 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3331 

This is an incredibly stressful ordeal for them, as it would be for 

anyone. 

 

At the end of last year, changes were proposed by the federal 

Department of Citizenship and Immigration that would permit 

the very activities for which Ms. Amadi and Ms. Ordu are now 

facing deportation orders. The minister has talked to the feds. 

He is promising another talk tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, but surely 

he can provide an answer to what that government has done to 

reach out beyond the meeting in the fall, the meeting that is yet 

to take place, Mr. Speaker, to make the case for common sense 

and compassion for Ms. Ordu and Ms. Amadi. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I met 

with the Public Safety minister last year. And the Assembly 

will remember that the Public Safety minister, the federal 

minister, was in this House. He was in this building last 

October, and no one from the other side took the opportunity to 

raise that issue with the federal minister when he was here, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a federal government 

responsibility, but I will undertake again to have a discussion 

with the federal minister when I see him this week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we know that that government is 

very close to the federal Conservative government. And we’ve 

seen further proof of that on the floor of this Assembly here 

today. We know that there are many ties between that 

government across the way and the federal government. 

 

When it comes to Ms. Ordu and Ms. Amadi, they should know 

that their advocates have not forgotten about them. And they 

should also have it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that what was said 

in the fall stands now in terms of the position of that provincial 

government. 

 

Is it still the position of the provincial government that what 

happened in the case of Ms. Amadi and Ms. Ordu, who are still 

taking sanctuary in a local church, is it still the position of that 

government that they need justice, that they need a 

compassionate, common sense response? And what are they 

doing to get that response from the federal government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what 

more I can say. We have raised the issue with the federal 

government. We will raise the issue again with the federal 

government. The members opposite did not take the 

opportunity to raise it with the federal government when the 

federal minister was here last fall, Mr. Speaker. It’s obviously 

not an important issue for them, otherwise they would have 

raised it when the minister was in the House last year, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve undertaken to have a discussion with the federal 

minister and I will do that. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the advocates, the friends of these 

two women, Mr. Speaker, have not forgotten about them, Mr. 

Speaker, nor should this provincial legislature in terms of our 

efforts to ask for a common sense, reasonable solution to their 

situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout question period, we’ve seen examples 

where the actions of the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, 

have not been based on common sense. The first issue, Mr. 

Speaker, had to do with the possible closure of the pediatric 

intensive care unit. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he think that it is a common 

sense approach to close the paediatric intensive care unit here in 

the province that is providing important care to families? 

Families want it, Mr. Speaker, and nurses are speaking up for it. 

Does he think it’s a common sense solution to close it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the Leader of the 

Opposition’s preamble he referenced the previous question with 

respect to the refugee issue that we have going on in the city 

today after 10 long months. And I think, Mr. Speaker, I saw 

that Leader of the Opposition whisper over to the critic in 

between answers and encourage him to drag in a guest who is 

retired from the service in the federal government as some sort 

of . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I hope not. And it’s a 

good chance to clarify it, Mr. Speaker, because here I think we 

actually agree. Here we think the federal government is wrong. 

Here this side of the House has raised the matter with the 

federal minister. 

 

And by the way, I think the Leader of the Opposition was the 

critic for immigration raising this issue on behalf of these two 

individuals, as he should. When the Minister of Public Safety 

was in the gallery, when the minister was here, he had a chance 

to raise it . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They say, well we’re 

in opposition. Well opposition MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] have a chance to advocate to the federal 

government, to the provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to continue with our position with respect to this 

issue to the federal government. The Minister of Justice is 

going to do that when he meets with the Public Safety minister 

tomorrow. We’ve raised it through the immigration file as well 

with the Immigration minister. It’s a priority for the 

government. It’s not forgotten, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Social Services Expenditures in the North 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad it’s not forgotten. I think 

this is an issue, Mr. Speaker, where we can indeed agree that 

more needs to be done. And I would encourage and remind all 

people to do what they can in order to find a positive resolution 

for these two women. I think, Mr. Speaker, that would be a 

common sense approach. 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, where we haven’t seen actions 



3332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

based on common sense, or what would appear to be common 

sense, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the issue that was raised with 

the Social Service minister, Mr. Speaker, the issue that the 

number of cases per week actually decreased, meanwhile the 

legal expenses that were faced increased 400 per cent. 

 

So my question straight to the Premier, to the Premier: why is 

it, at a time when the number of cases before the courts 

decreased, the legal expenses for such cases increased 400 per 

cent? Why did we see a skyrocketing increase of legal expenses 

in this situation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government, 

as has been the case for previous governments, procures 

professional services in the province of Saskatchewan — 

engineering services, legal services, accounting services, Mr. 

Speaker. There are processes that are undertaken to procure the 

services that have not changed, to my knowledge, since when 

the members opposite were in office, Mr. Speaker. And so I 

think the Minister of Social Services will undertake to get that 

specific answer to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

She may also want to send along, Mr. Speaker, some of the 

other facts in terms of her file and what we’ve done if the 

question’s about a priority of resources spent. Because when 

she does that, she’s going to be able to demonstrate again for 

members opposite that there are 90 more front-line child 

workers working today in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. The 440 wait-list has been eliminated. We have new 

assured income for the disabled that we’ve featured today in the 

House, Mr. Speaker. And there are any number of issues where 

this government is keeping promises it’s made to protect and to 

care for Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on House Services to report that it has considered 

certain estimates and to present its fourth report. I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 91 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 91 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am glad 

to rise today to join debate on Bill No. 91. In terms of the 

changes being made by this government to pension legislation 

generally, in terms of this particular suite of efforts, Mr. 

Speaker, there would seemingly be some reasonable things 

here, some things that are worth more consideration. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the back and forth that goes on 

in the House, you know, it’s interesting in terms of the 

federal-provincial relationships, Mr. Speaker. This government 

is doing some things that seem to be fairly positive on pensions, 

but of course it would seem to make up for some of the 

measures taken by their federal cousins as regards to increasing 

the age of applicability for the Canada Pension Plan, Mr. 

Speaker, moving that age of eligibility from 65 to 67. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, for all the measures that are taken on 

the provincial front, it’s being taken away from if it’s been 

undercut by what’s happening on the federal front, Mr. 

Speaker. Well that’s a problem because something that looks 

good on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, something that 

looks good on the floor of this Assembly, if it gets out into the 

main street and into the highways and byways of this province 

only to be undone by the measures taken by their federal 

cousins, well that’s a problem. 

 

Again in terms of the housekeeping measures that are put 

forward in this particular Bill 91, in terms of the changes that 

are made, again, Mr. Speaker, you know, what would seem to 

be fairly modest, fairly reasonable assumptions, fairly 

reasonable measures, Mr. Speaker, fair enough; we’re glad to 

see them. And we’ll be glad to see how it works out in 

committee and when we can get that closer scrutiny of the 

measures under consideration here today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to again the way that federal 

actions can undo provincial actions and the way, if you’re not 

moving in some kind of concert or co-operation, then the 

people that you express an interest in serving in the legislative 

agenda that takes place and unfolds on the floor of this 

Chamber can be easily undone, can be easily damaged once it 

rolls out into the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a lot over the years about the 

give-peace-a-chance agenda of that government. We have heard 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3333 

on different times about the closeness and the co-operative 

nature of the relationship they have with the Stephen Harper 

Conservative government. And, Mr. Speaker, you’d think that 

on something like pensions maybe they’d be able to make that 

co-operative, that close cousin relationship work for the people 

of Saskatchewan. But we don’t see that, Mr. Speaker. What we 

see instead is actions that are taken on this side of the coin 

possibly being undone by the measures put forward by 

members, their federal cousins in Ottawa. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t months after the last federal 

election where that government came forward and said, oh 

guess what? And they didn’t say it to Canadian people, Mr. 

Speaker. They said it to a group of global business elite in 

Switzerland, I think is where the announcement took place, in 

terms of raising the age of 65 as eligibility for the Canada 

Pension Plan to 67. You know, not a word about it in the 

election, Mr. Speaker, not a word about it to the Canadian 

people. Instead they go across the ocean to show what global 

big shots they are, I guess, Mr. Speaker, to show what fiscal 

tough guys they are, and tell the global business elite that, you 

know, Canada is going to sock it to our seniors in terms of the 

eligibility for the Canada Pension Plan. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, how that puts undue pressure on 

measures like the one we see before us here today in Bill 91, 

how that undoes what is potentially good work contained in this 

piece of legislation as regards to the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan — we find cause for concern in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan itself, I mean a lot 

of, a fair amount of positive history for that pension plan. I’ve 

gone on record before, Mr. Speaker, in terms of declaring my 

interest in this particular set of measures as regards to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan as a member of that Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, and being reminded of that having done my taxes 

not too long ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in terms of the steps that are being taken in this piece of 

legislation, in terms of what may be good work on the face of it, 

may be good work through the front door only to be undone as 

the legislation emerges out into the land and impacts the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, when the federal changes to the 

pension landscape of this province are changed, and of this 

country are changed, we’ll see how the, you know, potential 

good work of this particular piece of legislation is impacted by 

their federal cousins. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting here today on the floor 

of the legislature. You see that warm, friendly relationship that 

exists between, you know, many leading members of that 

government and the federal Conservative Party. And if you talk 

about it though, Mr. Speaker, then you get the cries of 

denunciation, and it’s like, oh no, that can’t possibly be. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the memberships carried by the 

majority of people in that party across the way speak volumes 

about that close relationship between the Saskatchewan Party 

and the federal Conservative Party. I think the past careers of 

members across the way, and you know, some of them serving 

as sitting members in Stephen Harper’s Conservative caucus, 

you know, Mr. Speaker, and then after 2007 the whole fact that, 

you know, despite written guarantees around getting fairness 

for natural resources for the province of Saskatchewan from the 

then Saskatchewan federal Conservative caucus, despite the 

fact of them reneging on that promise, which was in writing, 

Mr. Speaker, then there being grounds for a suit — take the 

feds and get some justice for the people of Saskatchewan as 

regards natural resources. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Well you know, what was the approach of the government 

opposite? Well the Premier himself said, we’re going to give 

peace a chance. And you know, at the time, you know, I’m sure 

there’d be those that think we were cynical or skeptical on the 

opposition benches. And we certainly were, Mr. Speaker, 

because what that looked like, Mr. Speaker, was selling out on 

a file that was worth hundreds of millions of dollars to the 

people of Saskatchewan, to their federal cousins. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if you raised that in this Assembly, if 

you talk about that close, friendly relationship that exists, if it’s 

working for the people of Saskatchewan, then of course they’re 

the first ones to jump all over that parade. 

 

But when it comes to situations where the province of 

Saskatchewan, where the interests of the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan is not being served by the federal government, 

well then of course members opposite can’t run fast enough 

away from their federal cousins. They can do no end of member 

statements about other federal-provincial political relationships, 

Mr. Speaker, but when it comes to their own situation, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s pick them and choose them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the historical record, if 

you look at the facts of the matter, the fact that those members 

opposite want to run and hide when they’re called to account 

for their relationship with the federal government, when they’re 

called to account for the fact that they’ve proclaimed it as a 

special relationship, as a productive, positive relationship for 

the people of Saskatchewan, when that doesn’t come true and 

we call them to account for it, Mr. Speaker, well then the hue 

and cry is on. And it’s kind of rich to watch it unfold, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So in terms of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, in terms of the 

amendments proposed before us in Bill 91, to recap, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that what that government is doing opposite in 

this modest suite of legislation — all four pages of it, Mr. 

Speaker — well you know, fair enough. 

 

But we’ll see how it’s impacted by the changes that are being 

made by their federal cousins. And the fact that those members 

opposite sit around federal-provincial-territorial tables with 

their federal cousins, who again, Mr. Speaker, they’re no end of 

happy to talk about the special relationship. But of course when 

they make changes like raising the eligibility for CPP [Canada 

Pension Plan ]from 65 to 67, well then members opposite, you 

could make a bet, Mr. Speaker, that, guess who’s missing in 

action? The Saskatchewan Party provincial government. 

 

So I guess, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to see a little consistency. 

We’d like to see them live up to their words, where if this is in 

fact a productive, positive, co-operative relationship that that 

government opposite has with the federal government, we’d 



3334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

like to see it carried out down the line. We’d like to see them 

deliver for the people of Saskatchewan. And when it’s not in 

the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we’d 

like to see them call their federal cousins to account. And too 

often, Mr. Speaker, we see that not being the case. They’re 

pretty happy to cast the stones the other way, Mr. Speaker, but 

when it comes to that federal-provincial relationship, there’s a 

big, old glass house that they should keep in mind. 

 

Anyway with that, Mr. Speaker, Bill 91, we’ll certainly have 

more questions for it when it comes to committee in terms of 

the particular mechanics of the legislation and in terms of that 

broader impact in terms of how it fits into income security for 

seniors and for retirees in this province, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll 

allow the government to proceed to committee on this matter at 

this time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 91, The Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 92 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 92 — The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and speak to Bill No. 92, An Act respecting 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans and making consequential 

amendments to certain Acts. And of course all these things are 

coming out as part of the budget, and we understand that. And 

these are budget bills and we need to speak to these. 

 

But I do want to take a moment to reflect on how important 

these are, and again to emphasize to the minister, and we will as 

often as we can, that while this can be one part of the tool kit, 

there are many other tools that he needs to consider. And we 

have spoken at length about this in terms of looking at how we 

can best utilize the Canada Pension Plan and what that means 

for many, many Canadians and for our Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And clearly if we can show leadership in developing tools like 

this, we can show leadership by stepping up to the plate when 

others are saying, hey we need to think outside the box here and 

think and revisit that time when we felt so strongly that seniors 

cannot be left abandoned when it comes to income security. 

This is one tool that you can have and clearly there’s many 

merits of it. But we need to really sit back and think about what 

the majority of Canadians, what is the reality that they face. 

And it’s not a good picture. It’s absolutely not a good picture. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to just take a minute and reflect on 

what the minister said when he was talking about Bill 92. He 

talks about how these are a new kind of a pension plan that will 

provide employees and self-employed who do not have access 

to a workplace pension a low-cost retirement savings 

opportunity. 

 

And I suppose in some ways he’s correct, but he’s inaccurate in 

the sense that we all have access to the Canada Pension Plan. 

And that is the primary workplace pension plan in Canada — 

the Canada Pension Plan. We all have access to the old age 

security, but the second stool . . . the second leg of that stool is 

the Canada Pension Plan. And we need to make sure that we 

take the time to get it right. We’re at a crossroads, and clearly 

we’re at a crossroads because we know that there are a new 

wave of seniors coming into place. And of course I’m talking 

about the baby boomers of which many of us in this House 

belong to. We belong to that generation. And some of us are 

fortunate in that we do have a strong workplace pension to 

complement our other workplace pension, the Canada Pension 

Plan, but many others don’t have that same, that same thing. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, and I quote the minister. He says: 

 

. . . there is widespread concern that Canadians are not 

saving enough for their retirement years. Statistics reflect 

this trend, and it’s unfortunately now commonplace for 

individuals to work later in life because they find 

themselves with insufficient savings once they reach their 

retirement age. 

 

And isn’t that the truth. That is really the truth. And so we find 

ourselves searching for the answers, and we think this is the 

case. And we know it’s particularly the case in Saskatchewan 

where I’ve been able to reflect on, what has been the stats here 

in Saskatchewan? And we know that there is a real concern 

about what happens to workers when they find themselves 

being squeezed with their take-home pay. 

 

We know in Saskatchewan that we were once the most 

affordable province with the most affordable cities to live, but 

that’s no longer the case. That’s no longer the case with rents 

now making up 40, 45 per cent of a person’s take-home wage. 

It used to be under 30 per cent. We were affordable, but we’re 

not affordable anymore. And rent is squeezing costs. 

 

A high cost, and particularly when you become a senior, the 

high cost of medications. Fortunately in Saskatchewan, here we 

have the seniors’ drug plan that we were very proud on this side 

of the House to bring into place under the former premier. We 

were very happy to bring in the Canadian . . . the seniors’ drug 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3335 

plan that reached out to over, I believe, 200,000 seniors, and it 

cost some $50 million. I know this side, the government side, 

likes to talk about the seniors’ income plan, and we think that is 

a good initiative. But clearly this year, even when they’re 

raising it, won’t cost half of what the drug plan cost and reach 

only a fraction of what the drug plan costs. 

 

But seniors really are facing issues in terms of health care, and 

that’s predominantly through the drug costs. And so we have 

those issues that seniors are facing and food and all the just 

general costs of living. And we see that as part of the new 

Saskatchewan. There’s many positive things about the new 

Saskatchewan, but unfortunately one of the consequences is the 

cost of living here is much higher than it was many years ago. 

And the fact of the matter is seniors have to make difficult 

choice. 

 

And as well, working people, when they’re looking at their 

take-home pay, they have to make choices. And the very last, 

unfortunately, it seems like the very last thing that they are 

interested in doing is putting money aside, putting money aside 

for retirement. And so this is why we have some concerns about 

the pooled pension plan because clearly it is a choice. It’s one 

that they can choose to participate in. It’s a voluntary program. 

And unfortunately the track record for adults working is that it 

is their last choice to put money aside for too many people. And 

it really is a problem. 

 

Yes, and this is what the minister says, and I quote, “This trend 

is especially worrying in regards to modest- and middle-income 

families and employees of small and medium-sized 

businesses.” And he goes on to say, “Mr. Speaker, in fact the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business estimates that 

close to 80 per cent [80 per cent] of employees of smaller 

businesses have no access to company retirement plans.” 

 

And I think that’s probably quite true, and it is a challenge. And 

it’s a challenge for the owners of small businesses to put into 

place and then to have some sort of vehicle for this to move 

forward. And so this is why there’s so many questions about the 

emphasis on this. This is something that maybe we can do. It 

will be interesting in many years, many years to be able to see 

how this all plays out in 10 or 20 years. In 10 or 20 years, we 

will be able to look back and say, so was this a good idea? But I 

urge and I will say it, and I will say it many times, that we’ve 

got to make sure we provide many tools for workers to 

participate in their pension plans. 

 

And of course the one that I think and I urge the minister when 

he meets with his counterparts this spring — I think it’s this 

next couple of months — to say all right we’ve covered that 

base off. We’ve created that tool. But the real tool that will 

mean so much more to Saskatchewan citizens and 

Saskatchewan workers and Canadian workers is looking at CPP 

enhancements because the fact of the matter is that they travel 

with you wherever you are, wherever you are. It’s much easier 

to keep track of your CPP plan than it is if you’ve only worked 

a few months or half a year or a small amount, and you ended 

up with some money in this pooled pension plan. And so I think 

again we will talk a lot about this, and we will have a lot of 

questions. But I think that we do have some questions. 

 

And so with this, the minister talks about the framework was 

agreed, around the framework, in December of 2010 and 

following the consultation, public and stakeholders. And it 

would be interesting. I guess I would have some questions 

about the consultation process. But the federal government took 

about two years to put together the pooled pension plan 

legislation, came about in December of 2012. And here we are 

doing something here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so he does talk about how the pension regulation is 

primarily an area of provincial responsibility, so each provincial 

government has to implement its own enabling legislation to 

make PRPPs [pooled registered pension plan] available to all 

Canadians. So I assume that this will happen right across 

Canada. I know the minister doesn’t speak about that quite yet, 

and so again there will be a question. What happens about 

portability of this to other pension plans, and how is this going 

to be uniform across Canada? 

 

[14:45] 

 

I know in my experience as a teacher that that has been a big 

challenge particularly as teachers would find themselves 

moving across Canada. And so we would have questions about 

portability of this kind of plan. Is this allowed? Is there going to 

be recognition of contributions in other provinces? How will 

that play out? Or will you have to just take it as one part of your 

income, your retirement income? 

 

Now it will be interesting to see, as these move forward, the 

incentives and the participation encouragements that each 

province will put into place and what that may look like. We 

don’t know. These are just the vehicles. This is the framework 

allowing it to happen. But we know once these things start to 

take place and take shape over years, there might be 

encouragements, might be incentives. And how does that match 

across the country? And you know, it will be interesting to see 

how that plays out. 

 

Again I just reflect on how much more simpler it would have 

been if it had been done through CPP. But again, you know, I 

think it’s one tool in the tool kit. And if people choose to go 

down this road, then that’s fair enough. But I just have to say 

that we may be missing the boat in a big way, in a significant 

way, by ignoring something that is already in place. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, I’m just reminded of the saying, if it ain’t 

broke, why fix it? But in cases where . . . Why reinvent the 

wheel? I guess that’s what I’m trying . . . Reinvent the wheel — 

that’s my phrase — when we can just enhance the wheel or 

blow it up a little bit better. Maybe it’s a little low on air. We 

don’t have to reinvent the thing. And I guess that’s what I’m 

thinking here. 

 

Again this may be an appropriate tool. And of course, the 

minister reflected on the fact that 80 per cent of small 

businesses have an issue. And this is one we’ve discovered too, 

you know. When I was in government and minister of Labour, 

we talked about the vulnerable worker. We talked about issues 

around pensions. And clearly when you’re a low-income 

worker, it’s a tough, tough choice. 

 

But it’s also a tough choice for the employer, because he wants 

or she wants to create an environment where a worker will want 

to stay with that business. Maybe the pay is not that great, but 



3336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

it’s a great place to work and it offers a great opportunity to do 

other things. Maybe it’s the timing, the ability, you know, to be 

flexible, and flexibility in today’s workplace is huge, is huge. 

People are looking for that kind of thing. And incentives for 

workers to stay with small businesses such as a pension plan 

may be one of those incentives that will work. And so we’re not 

against that type of thing. Clearly when people can be creative 

and say these are the kind of things that we can offer you in this 

workplace and we hope you stay with us, people look at that 

and they feel they’re valued and they appreciate it. 

 

So I think there’s a complementary process here. It’s not an 

either/or, but it’s one that the work will not be done, will not be 

done quickly. And I think that my deep concern though, my 

deep, deep, deep concern is that the fact is that the vast majority 

of workers will find themselves without any kind of pension 

plan other than the CPP. It’s just a reality and it’s one that 

really does speak to the workplace. 

 

The fact is that even if we were able to increase the number of 

small businesses that did offer a pension plan . . . let’s say we 

doubled it. It’s now 20 per cent and went to 40 per cent. That 

still means 60 per cent of the workers, 60 per cent of the 

workers in that area of small businesses still do not have. You 

could even, you know, triple it and still you would have 40 per 

cent of workers without any kind of supplementary pension 

plan. And so this is the case of where, you know, the Canada 

Pension Plan does absolutely cover everyone who is in a 

workplace, and it’s such a much more all-inclusive system. 

 

And so that’s the thing that I think that we really need to reflect 

on, and I just want to make that case because we know that’s 

the case. And so it talks about we have to do our own enabling 

legislation. And as I said, we’ll be looking across, that what 

does this mean across Canada in terms of portability. And he 

talks about, unlike most workplace pensions, Mr. Speaker, a 

PRPP is managed by administrator not the employer. So once 

licensed, you have an administrator who will make sure we go 

through that. And actually it was interesting in the overall 

simple design of PRPP, it says intended to encourage 

participation by employers that may not currently be able to 

offer a pension plan to employees due to costs of the 

administrative complexity. 

 

And clearly that is a concern and a very legitimate concern. 

And I think we had that debate about the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan, an organization that does very good work, you know, 

based out of Kindersley, and they will be able to offer that role 

of administrating plans. And so that would be one group that 

would be able to do the administration of that. But the fact of 

the matter is he goes on to say, that in fact, that participating 

employers will not be required to contribute. They will be 

permitted to make direct contributions on an employee’s behalf. 

And so that’s an enabling thing and a good thing.  

 

You know, I mean obviously if you’re looking to create a 

savings account and then this is a good thing. And it’s always a 

good thing to be able to do that. I do worry, though, that we 

need to make sure that in fact the amount that is saved . . . And 

we’ll have a question for the minister in this regard because I 

know this is a case when we get into SIP [seniors’ income plan] 

and GIS [guaranteed income supplement] that in fact, that if 

your savings aren’t significant enough, it’s almost better to 

have no savings or go . . . in your senior years, if you end up 

with 30,000 or 50,000, it would have been better to have bought 

a car or something because it may be . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tax free savings account. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Okay, and that’s an answer. So we’ll have that 

answer more directly. But that is a concern . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Okay, we’re getting into a debate that maybe 

should be better left for — I won’t look over there — that’ll be 

left for the committee. 

 

But those are the kind of questions that we do have, and we 

don’t have all the answers, and this is why we have committee 

. . . Is the fact that what happens to make sure that it’s 

worthwhile for seniors to put money aside so they are not 

penalized for savings because we do agree and we do think that 

savings is a good habit to start. Start young. Start saving. Live 

on the positive side of the ledger, not on the negative side. And 

if you do that, then that’s a good habit to get into for so many 

reasons, for so many reasons. 

 

But in the past it was a problem. And we will have questions 

with the minister in terms of the fact that, as I understand it, 

several years ago, maybe not currently, that there was a 

provision when it came to GIS and the guaranteed income 

supplement that in fact that if you didn’t have a significant 

savings that it would have been better off not to have it at all 

and to spend it while you were working. And so that’s a good 

. . . We want to be sure we’re clear on that. 

 

But again there’s many parts of this as it is our job and our duty 

to raise those concerns because you know, Mr. Speaker, I did 

actually run into a senior who was in my own riding, living 

downtown, and he was very concerned because he was actually 

just . . . He had put money aside into his savings account, and 

what he was getting was a couple of hundred dollars a month. 

And he was wondering why he wasn’t qualifying for GIS. And 

it was because he had . . . Well he was making that couple of 

hundred dollars a month from an RRSP [registered retirement 

savings plan] that he had decided that he would do. And it was 

the right thing for him to save, but unfortunately it wasn’t 

significant enough for him to get out of that zone where it was 

being clawed back by the federal government, so to speak. So if 

there are ways around that . . . 

 

That’s why it’s really important to have good financial advice 

when you’re approaching the senior years to make sure that you 

can take full advantage of programs so that in fact when you 

finish up your working years, and you really are hoping that 

you can finish up your working years, that everything’s in place 

and that you don’t find yourself accidentally having to go back 

to the workplace just because the planning wasn’t there. So 

again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have many, many questions about 

this. 

 

But again it is unfortunate now, and I’m going to go on to say: 

 

When an employer chooses to adopt a PRPP, employees 

will be automatically enrolled but given the opportunity 

subsequently to opt out. While automatic enrolment for 

employees of participating employers encourages savings 

for retirement by those who may not have proactively 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3337 

saved on their own . . . 

 

It provides employees with the ability to opt out and ensures 

them to retain their freedom to set their individual priorities, 

financial priorities. And additionally self-employed individuals 

or individuals whose employer chooses not to participate can 

open up a PRP [pooled registered pension] account by 

approaching one of the administrators directly. 

 

So that’s there so that the employer can create an account, and 

they will be automatically enrolled, but they can opt out if they 

wish. And they can also decide to withdraw, or “. . . opt out 

ensures they retain the freedom to set their own individual 

financial priorities.” And in many ways that’s a good thing. I 

understand that. And particularly maybe in small businesses or 

if it’s not significant enough, they will have to look at their own 

financial things. 

 

But again this is I think the beauty of the Canada Pension Plan 

where we all contribute. We all understand that it sets a 

minimum, a bench, you know, a certain level where we can all 

feel somewhat secure, somewhat secure. It won’t definitely 

allow you to retire in Florida or anything, but it will allow you 

to have some dignity in retirement years. So this is the question 

we have. Will it meet that obligation we have as a society to 

ensure that we all have those things, those programs in place, 

and at the same time retain that freedom, retain that freedom? 

And so it’s really important for us to think this completely 

through and yet have, while we have that commitment to the 

individual choice, it’s also really important that we allow . . . 

We do actually as it is a society obligation, it’s a society 

commitment, and I think in Canada we are so proud of the way 

that we have set things up in a way that we really do take a look 

at seniors. 

 

And you know, I know the government opposite . . . And it is 

interesting because in many ways what they’ve done around the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan is a good thing. I have some 

concerns on a few of the, of parts of it because I am worried 

that in fact in Saskatchewan — and we’ll have maybe some 

questions on this because I could be wrong — but I understand 

just that there are just two people who look after the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan. Now they may have increased it, 

but actually it’s tied to the federal system. 

 

And whatever happens federally happens provincially, and so 

we don’t have our own provincial controls over it. And to the 

extent that this government has enriched that program, it 

would’ve been wise to actually maybe have more oversight on 

the program because we know every year, several people, 

several hundreds of people, if not thousands of seniors, fall off 

that program only to have to reapply to get on it. It’s pretty easy 

to apply. All you have to do is phone the 1-800 number for the 

federal government and they look after the paperwork. But 

several hundreds of people fall off for a variety of reasons and 

their savings or their income gets interrupted for a few months. 

 

And it’s just, it’s just not as consistent as it should be. And 

there’s also pockets. Like I would be interested for to hear from 

the government, their research around the Saskatchewan 

Income Plan because we know a high prevalence of folks who 

are seniors, who live in poverty, are actually low-income single 

women, and that’s a real challenge. 

[15:00] 

 

And the other subgroup of that are low-income senior women 

who are of Aboriginal descent, particularly First Nations, who 

may not realize that they, that they qualify. And this is 

something that over the years that we’ve just given out the 

1-800 number and said, please call, and you will, you will find 

out whether you qualify or not. But it’s really something that 

we need to I think do a better job of advertising and getting the 

word out there because again, if Saskatchewan is really the 

leader in that area, let’s really make sure everybody who can be 

participating is participating and that we don’t take advantage 

of the fact that some people may not know about it and 

therefore they don’t apply and the savings then goes to the 

government. I think that’s really unfortunate and we shouldn’t 

be operating like that. 

 

So I think when we talk about the Saskatchewan Income Plan 

as part of this, and my point was that when we talked about it in 

the ’70s — that this kind of senior income plan and guaranteed 

annual income was all part of a much bigger dream in the ’70s 

— about the great social contract, you know, and we talked 

about how can we look after everyone so everyone had a source 

of income so they could do the work, they could contribute to 

society, in a way that they would want to. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re into that second or third wave. I 

mean the first wave really was when old age security actually 

came about many decades ago. And then we had the discussion 

in the ’70s where we saw the guaranteed income supplement. 

And now we’re seeing something in the 2010s, and we would 

really hope that we would see the Canadian pension plan be 

revisited because it’s so, so critically important. 

 

So the minister goes on to talk about how, on retirement, 

employees will have the same options of withdrawing assets 

currently available from a defined contribution pension plan, in 

Saskatchewan particularly. The options on retirement are 

Registered Retirement Income Fund, a RRIF — so that’s fair 

enough — a variable pension benefit, or a life annuity. So there 

are choices and that’s fair enough. 

 

He goes on to say, and this is what we all agree on: 

 

The government continues to encourage all Saskatchewan 

workers to plan for the future, recognizing that in order to 

provide an adequate level of income in retirement, 

individuals need to set aside sufficient savings over their 

working lives. 

 

And this will provide them with a simple, low-cost option to 

support their retirement savings. 

 

And so again it’s a matter of perspective, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s whether you say . . . And it will be interesting, the research. 

What I’ve said earlier — who will be taking this up? Will it be 

those who are low-income, vulnerable workers? Will they rise 

to the challenge of putting money aside into these pooled 

retirement pension plans or will they not be able to do that? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I think there’s a couple of 

issues here. One, that where the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business] can point out 80 per cent of small 



3338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

businesses don’t have the wherewithal to do it, and we know 

that it’s up to some 40 per cent of people who can do this, you 

know. 

 

And here, Mr. Speaker, if I can look at some of the numbers we 

have in Regina . . . We know that in Saskatoon there are — this 

is from StatsCan — that there were 182,000 tax filers and yet 

there were 51,000 total RRSP contributors, 31 per cent, 31.9 

per cent, and the median that they actually put aside was 

$3,750. And so the people who did this, 39 per cent of the 

people who made 80,000 or more, and so there you go. And 

percentage of RRSP made by contributors with total income of 

80,000 or more was 66 per cent. So it was the high-end earners 

who actually were saving the money and not the low-income 

workers who will have the challenges in retirement years. In 

Regina, 154,000 tax filers, 45,000 — 29 per cent of the people 

— saved money but yet again the same sort of stats in terms of 

people who really were making money were the ones who 

actually saved the money. 

 

So that’s the challenge that we have before us and it’s the 

reality of the marketplace and our working world is that they in 

fact cannot, they do not have the resources to do this. So while 

it has a lot of merit, it has . . . And again it’s a tool. And we’re 

not saying it’s either-or. We think though it can be both and we 

think that for some tweaking of the CPP . . . And we’ll be 

asking the minister in finance like what is the challenges around 

having both systems, improving the Canada Pension Plan so 

that all workers can retire with some sense of dignity? 

 

I’m not saying that we all want them to or that they all should 

be expected they’re going to be retiring to Florida. That’s not a 

reasonable thought and it’s also probably one they may think 

when the savings they would have to put aside would be huge. 

And so it wouldn’t be one that they would want to be 

advocating for. 

 

But we all are thinking about dignity in our senior years. We’re 

all thinking about how can we make sure that anybody who 

hasn’t worked has a system in place where they are saving. And 

it’s their money. You know, we all make our own 

contributions. 

 

But the fact is we do have some challenges around this in terms 

of, will they have enough money put aside? Will it be portable? 

Will there be some folks who just will be left behind? And 

that’s not the nature of what we thought would be happening in 

Canada or in Saskatchewan. We’re developing these kind of 

initiatives. 

 

And it is one . . . It’s not a small initiative. It’s one that really, 

as I said earlier, as we see waves of social, I don’t know if you 

call it social engineering, but social tweaking, where we saw in 

the ’70s the whole issue about income security and how that 

might happen. And we saw that, you know, in the ’30s or ’40s 

around the old age security. That now we’re in a place, a 

crossroads, where we have to talk about what are we going to 

do yet again about seniors. And I think because of the amount 

that we have in the Canada Pension Plan just isn’t meeting 

enough, and we have to take a look at how we can tweak that. 

 

Our workplaces are changing. You know, it used to be that 

people would go to work and they would have one employer 

and it was about the workplace loyalty. And that was what we 

would expect people to do, and that’s what people expected 

would happen with their employer. But that’s not the reality at 

all. The reality is that people will change their careers many 

times. But we do not want to see that people are working 

beyond the years in which they are physically capable because 

they can’t . . . They must have to work because they just don’t 

have the resources to retire. 

 

There’s too many challenges in our communities, particularly 

around rents, the cost of living, that type of thing. And I know 

in my own neighbourhood where you have an older 

neighbourhood like Caswell where seniors are facing huge 

challenges this winter, just because particularly around the 

snowfall and icy streets. It’s been seven months of winter, and 

it’s been hard. And for retirement, I think seniors are looking 

. . . And I know this is an interesting bit of a crisis for them, the 

snow and the impact that it’s made on their houses, which is 

their primary savings. It’s their major asset they have and it’s 

been devalued because of the impact of the snow on the roofs 

and damage that’s been done to the walls and that type of thing. 

 

And so we have to look at this. We have to take a really good, 

long look. And I’m hoping that when we do have the minister 

in committee that we’ll have a good, long discussion about 

pensions and what he foresees in the future and what 

discussions will happen at the ministerial level because we just 

want to encourage him to do all that he can to make sure that all 

the tools are in the tool kit, as I said. And one of the primary 

ones, if it needs tweaking, the Canada Pension Plan, we sure 

hope to see it revamped. We don’t have all the information as 

members of the opposition. Clearly the minister has a lot more 

information that he can bring to bear on it. But clearly we need 

to have that conversation. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I can’t think of too much else to say, 

but it is I think an important bill that we have before us, and it’s 

one that we’ll be watching carefully, as I said. And when it’s in 

committee, there’ll be people watching both of those, both 

workers, young workers, older workers, people who have . . . 

This is the issue. This is one of the most major issues that we 

have. And it’s about pensions, but it’s also about security 

around those pensions, that they’ll be in place when people do 

retire and that they’ll be significant enough that they actually 

can have meaning and add to their financial stability. So thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to speak to Bill 

92. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 92, The 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3339 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 93 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 93 — The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension 

Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know this is the consequential amendments resulting from the 

enactment of the pooled registered pension plans and again a 

very important piece of legislation. And I’ve had a chance now, 

I think there must be three bills that act as a suite in this 

because I’ve had the opportunity to talk a bit about the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan and its role in this, that it would be 

able to work with this, and how important that is, and then 

talking about the enabling legislation, 92, An Act respecting 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans and making consequential 

amendments to certain Acts. And then this is the third one, also 

acting to make consequential amendments resulting from the 

enactment of The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act. 

 

And as we look through it, it is interesting that we see the 

impact that this bill will have on other pieces of legislation. 

And I will take a minute to talk about this because I think that 

people need to know some of the pieces of legislation that will 

be impacted by this. There are many Acts. And this is, as I said 

in my earlier remarks, that when we get into this kind of 

legislation, it’s one that has significant impacts in our economy 

and with seniors because this kind of thing . . . and for our 

workers in our province because this is one of their major 

concerns is, what happens with my pension plan. What are the 

impacts? What are the unintended or the intended consequences 

of this pension plan? 

 

So we’ll take a minute to look through this, and . . . [inaudible] 

. . . I see that we will be amending The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. And clearly that is one that you 

can see is a significant one because when we talk about 

enforcement of maintenance orders, we don’t want to have an 

unintended consequence where there’s one Act or one pool of 

money . . . that when somebody has a maintenance order, we 

have to make sure that we have access to all their resources. 

And that’s very important. 

 

[15:15] 

And of course the other interesting thing about this is that it’s 

also in French and that this is important legislation and that our 

language speaks to both the anglophone and Fransaskois 

community in Saskatchewan. And so these kind of bills are 

important that all the details, all the t’s are crossed and all the 

i’s are dotted, that as we move forward . . .  

 

It took the federal government two years to put their legislation 

together after the discussions at the, I understand, the 

federal-territorial-provincial meetings, that they’ve now come 

up with this. And I know that we’ll have questions, many 

questions, about this in terms of how is this right across Canada 

in terms of portability. And this is just one example, the 

enforcement of maintenance orders, that in fact that is portable, 

that it is enforceable across Canada. And it would be 

unfortunate if you saw a patchwork approach in Canada that 

some provinces went down this road. 

 

And as I said, it’s not my favourite tool in the tool kit, but it is 

one that is there, and we have to recognize it. And so when we 

do these kind of things, we don’t have any unintended 

consequences, and it’s something that is consistent right across 

Canada. And if there’s a situation that speaks to how important 

consistency is, it’s the enforcement of maintenance orders. And 

so I know that this will be one that we won’t have, I don’t 

think, as many questions. But I’m glad to see that it’s here 

because it shows some due diligence, that it’s been thoughtful, 

and it’s been worked through. 

 

But it will be part of that suite of bills around the pooled retired 

pension plans that really speaks to increased concerns that we 

have in our province and in our country around the adequacy of 

our retirement income and particularly for those, as I said 

earlier, around vulnerable workers. And if they do find 

themselves in particular family challenges, whether that be 

maintenance orders that need to be enforced, that type of thing, 

all of this can be looked after. 

 

So we’re not sure if there’s other amendments that we may be 

seeing. You know, we are heading into the final weeks of 

session, unbelievable as it is. With the snow on the ground 

you’d think we just were starting session. But you know, when 

we think of that, it’s hard to believe. But will there be more 

bills before us — I’m not sure — that relate to pensions? But 

we really want to make sure that we have completely covered 

the waterfront, as it is often thought of, that there are no gaps or 

no unintended consequences because when you talk about 

investing money in a pension plan or saving money, that it will 

be there, that it absolutely will be there for the retirees when 

they hit the age when they want to retire. 

 

But again I just want to emphasize how important it is that we 

think about the whole suite of tools and that the minister be 

thinking about the Canada Pension Plan and how that can be 

enhanced so that everyone, everyone will have a more secure 

retirement. This speaks to the participation, the voluntary 

participation. It is a choice, and we understand that. That’s fair 

enough. But even if you double the participation rates, it still 

leaves a big gap of people. As I said earlier, in Saskatoon or 

Regina where the participation rates are in the high 20’s, low 

30’s, you know, now even if you doubled it, there’s still 40 per 

cent of people who will not be participating. And you can just 

imagine that those people are probably those who are the most 



3340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

vulnerable because they couldn’t put aside money, you know, 

to the extent that they needed to. And so this is a real, this is a 

real challenge. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have lots of questions, and 

we’ll be ready to do that in the days ahead because we do think 

it’s important, and we do take this very seriously. And we hope 

that we can have a thoughtful, productive dialogue with the 

minister when it comes to the whole suite of pensions when he 

plans on taking it to the next set of meetings about this, now 

that he’s got this part done. Where do we go from here? So with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 93, The 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 94 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 94 — The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m very pleased and honoured to stand today to speak about 

Bill No. 94, and as I alluded to earlier, Mr. Speaker, this is my 

second opportunity to speak on this bill. And the bill primarily 

speaks of the increase that the province of Saskatchewan is 

implementing on a package of cigarettes, which roughly runs to 

a dollar per cigarette case as a result of the increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about increasing the price for 

one cigarette from 21 cents to 25 cents, effectively making the 

overall increase, as I mentioned, a dollar per pack of cigarettes. 

And some of the information, Mr. Speaker, I noted on his 

preamble to the actual bill itself when he introduced the bill, 

that some of the points that the minister made reference to was 

the fact that the rates of smoking in Saskatchewan have 

remained stubbornly high and that there needs to be a more 

concerted effort to try and curb the amount of smoking that 

people do. 

 

And the second issue that was raised in this particular bill, Mr. 

Speaker, Bill 94, was the fact that this measure, this Bill 94, 

would have an increase in terms of government revenues. And I 

referred to Hansard, Mr. Speaker, where on page 3234 the 

minister talks about the increase resulting in $45.2 million in 

extra revenue. So what you have, Mr. Speaker, is you have the 

price of cigarettes going from 21 cents per cigarette to 25 cents, 

which increases the overall price for a pack of cigarettes by $1. 

 

Now the minister says that these extra revenues will mean $45 

million to the provincial economy. So one would make it very 

easy to assume, Mr. Speaker, that we’re now talking about 45 

million packs of cigarettes being sold every year here in 

Saskatchewan. Now 45 million packages of cigarettes, Mr. 

Speaker, that would really to me be very, very worrisome for 

the public overall. That’s a lot of cigarettes to be smoking. So if 

my math serves me correct, the minister talks about increasing 

by a dollar, and $45 million will be generated from the sin tax. 

Obviously there’s $45 million of cigarettes or packages of 

cigarettes being sold. And that’s an alarming trend, Mr. 

Speaker, no question about that. 

 

One of the things that I spoke about earlier in the bill itself was 

how we make an effort to educate the young people in 

Saskatchewan and the older people as well that have been 

smoking for years, that this habit is not only costly to their 

wallets, but it’s also costly to their family time. It’s a threat to 

their family’s health. And, Mr. Speaker, it sincerely costs the 

health department millions, if not billions of dollars, over the 

years to look after those that suffer from smoking or 

tobacco-related deaths and illnesses. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again as I mentioned, if the translation or the 

math that I’d done was correct, 45 million packages of 

cigarettes are sold in our province each and every year. And 

that is an absolutely astounding amount of cigarettes that are 

being smoked by the people of Saskatchewan. And we need to 

do all we can to curb the stubborn trend upwards. If we’re not 

at least educating people about this, we have to bring forth 

some of this information so people know exactly what’s going 

on when you talk about tobacco. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in our earlier years I had the pleasure of 

serving in cabinet, and I remember that the minister of Health at 

that time brought forward a number of initiatives. I spoke about 

that earlier. And some of the initiatives seemed at the time to 

really seem not being very effective, like I mentioned having a 

curtain that would not allow stores to display cigarettes openly 

for the young people to see. I thought that having a curtain and 

having cigarettes hidden from public view was really not an 

effective way. But, Mr. Speaker, in hindsight, it is an effective 

way to deter young people from picking up smoking. 

 

The other issue that I noticed, Mr. Speaker, was to stop 

advertising, to stop the cigarette advertising that was happening 

in some of our magazines. And certainly from the perspective 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3341 

of trying to deter cigarette use, limiting the cigarette companies, 

the large tobacco companies’ opportunity to advertise their 

product which creates a significant health problem for the user, 

I thought that that was probably one of the effective ways of 

dealing with the issue as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also was a bit worried about the bigger argument 

we had in cabinet at the time when we spoke about the whole 

notion of smoking in restaurants or smoking in bars. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, obviously in those days smoking in bars was allowed. 

Smoking in restaurants was allowed. And a lot of people were 

really of the mixed opinion that if we undertook at the time an 

effort to try and eliminate smoking in bars, eliminate smoking 

in restaurants, that this would be the death knell for those 

particular industries. And a lot of people within cabinet had a 

very, very varied views of interest on this one. Some believe 

that you ought to have a smoking room. Others believe that you 

ought to have an outdoor smoking patio. Others believe that 

certain bars could be designated smoking or non-smoking. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the problem we had at the time, and as 

unbeknownst to me, that the Cancer Society was advocating 

absolutely no smoking in the public places because if you make 

concessions for a smoking room or smoking patio, that really 

defeats the purpose of a facility being deemed as a 

non-smoking operation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think you look at that particular aspect, that 

was where I certainly had a lot of misgivings. And I apologize 

to the former minister of Health because at the time I didn’t 

believe that any of the measures that he was advocating — the 

member from Lakeview — that he was advocating would be 

effective at all. And we also wanted to see evidence. How do 

you determine the value of encouraging people not to smoke 

and to justify some of the measures we had in place? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the key thing here was that I was a 

non-believer in some of the initiatives. I was a non-believer in 

some of the strategies we had in place. And even though we had 

some compelling arguments, some compelling evidence later 

on in which the minister of Health at the time indicated that 

there are studies, that there are models, that take into account a 

population, such as Saskatoon, where they can actually monitor 

heart attacks, heart problems, lung problems . . . They can 

actually monitor the health of the city, even though there’s 

260,000 people in that city, that they can actually monitor it 

before they implemented some of these measures. And after a 

year or two, that they could actually do an evaluation as to 

whether those measures to curb smoking and to decrease 

smoking was actually effective. 

 

And these models, Mr. Speaker, were very impressive models. 

And health professionals were involved with it, the Lung 

Association was involved with it. And they really, quite 

frankly, dissected the whole city’s population, and they came 

back and they gave us some very, very good information as to 

the rates of heart attacks, as to the rates of lung disease, and as 

to the rate of health issues of people that were smoking. And 

after the measures were put in place, of how some of those rates 

dramatically improved and that the health of the population 

overall, we’ve seen an increased performance of people’s health 

as a result of some of the non-smoking efforts undertaken by 

the former minister of Health. 

[15:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was actually an amazing thing for me to 

see. I was one in the corner that you shouldn’t be putting in 

these rules in bars, and people go to the bars. They should 

expect to have smoking because that’s a social event, and 

having a few beer and smoking a cigarette, that was pretty 

much the norm in those days. And a lot of arguments were 

made that this would hurt the business, would hurt the 

economy, would hurt the private sector, and on and on and on 

about the arguments. 

 

But nonetheless you cannot argue back if you have some very 

good, sound information in front of you. The Lung Association 

and my colleague, my current colleague from Lakeview here, 

he really advocated and he really championed and he really 

pushed the effort to decrease the amount of smoking that was 

occurring in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So some of the measures that we spoke about in those days, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is not allowing businesses to advertise right 

out in the open that the fact that they had cigarettes and tobacco 

products, that they’re forced to either close off the display rack 

with curtains or simply hide the cigarettes in drawers. People 

had to ask for them. That was an effective smoking cessation 

tool. 

 

The other argument of not allowing the cigarette tobacco 

companies to advertise in a number of newspapers and 

magazines, that was also an effective tool where our 

government worked with the publishing companies to try and 

discourage that. And making the bars and the restaurants 

smoke-free was another effective tool, Mr. Speaker. Even 

though there’s a lot of debates and arguments and fights on all 

those three particular fronts, we found that some of these efforts 

to discourage smoking was indeed very effective. 

 

And I want to say at the outset that there was a lot of 

information that was presented to me, and in my own stubborn 

way, I didn’t want to accept some of the evidence. But after 

years and years of the effort to curb smoking, Mr. Speaker, I 

can say today that I was mistaken and that the member, the 

former minister of Health, from Lakeview, was absolutely 

correct. And he championed a lot of the anti-smoking initiatives 

such as described in Bill 94, which is of course also meant to 

discourage smoking by increasing the cost of cigarettes overall. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure where I picked up the 

information, but there was a story of an analogy of how 

cigarette smoking can affect one’s life. And if anybody out 

there is listening to the presentation on smoking overall and 

some of the effects that the minister alluded to when you have 

smokers and people smoking on a regular basis, and this bill, 

Bill 94, I want to remind him of one simple thing, that we must 

do all we can to discourage smoking. 

 

I want to encourage those smokers that are smoking now to 

begin the process of not smoking. And one of the most 

important visual things that I’ll share with them, Mr. Speaker, 

is a story I heard — whether it’s true or not I don’t know. But 

they had taken the esophagus, the tube that leads from the back 

of your throat into your stomach area, they had taken the 

esophagus of a non-smoking, healthy person and they had taken 



3342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

the esophagus of a smoking person who considered him or 

herself healthy. And what they had done, Mr. Speaker, is once 

they had these two esophaguses on the lab table, they took a 

rolling pin and they rolled out the contents of the esophagus 

onto the table. And the healthy esophagus had creamy, milky 

fluid that was excreted from the esophagus as they rolled the 

pin forward. And as they’d done this with the other esophagus 

of the smoker, Mr. Deputy Speaker — using the rolling pin 

again — when they rolled the pin across the smoker’s 

esophagus a lot of black, tar-like substance came out of that 

esophagus. 

 

And the illustration, as it was explained to me, was to show 

how tobacco products, namely through smoking or chewing 

snuff, of how the esophagus is meant to trap some of the 

particles. That’s what the white, creamy fluid was. And from 

the healthy esophagus it is meant to attract particles and to 

attract nutrients and to hold nutrients and to allow the flow of 

food from your mouth to your stomach. Now what happens is 

when you have a lot of smoking happening, your esophagus 

traps a lot of the tars and the other chemicals used in cigarettes. 

 

So one of the things I would encourage people is to really look 

at some of the visuals of what I just compared in terms of a 

healthy esophagus versus a smoker’s esophagus. If that doesn’t 

discourage people from smoking . . . I can tell you that it was 

something that I heard a number of years ago. And to me I 

think that’s one of the best deterrents. I think somebody should 

make a commercial of that, if that was the case, to show people 

exactly what dangers that smoking could pose to your health. 

 

The other issue, too, I think is important, Mr. Speaker, on the 

Bill 94, when the minister talks about discouraging people from 

smoking, is that I had the pleasure of visiting my father a 

number of years ago in the hospital. And he had smoked for a 

number of years. And one of the things that they did to him 

while he was in the hospital — obviously he couldn’t smoke; 

he wasn’t allowed to smoke — and what they did during the 

day, the nurses would come to his room and they’d start doing a 

bunch of, like, pounding on the side of his chest. Not really 

hard of course but what they were doing was they were just . . . 

And rolling him over and doing the other side. And after three 

or four days of that, he finally asked the nurses what they were 

doing. And apparently what they were trying to do was to lodge 

some of the years of smoking that he had. He obviously had 

some very bad buildup of tar products in his lungs. And as they 

were hitting the side of his chest, they were trying to loosen 

some of that stuff up, out, so he’d be able to cough it out and 

clear his lungs a bit. 

 

And that’s another visual I think is important, Mr. Speaker, is 

that after years and years of smoking, not only is your 

esophagus basically trapping particles from the tobacco 

products, but then your lungs get to store all of the terrible 

substances and the chemicals that are in cigarette smoking, and 

that really affects your health overall. 

 

So the visual effects of the healthy esophagus versus the 

smoker’s esophagus, the visual of having an older guy who has 

smoked for years, as the case with my father was when the 

nurses were hitting his chest to jar some of the years and years 

of tar deposits out of the inside of his lungs — these are some 

of the things, I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to have more and 

more visual aids of that sort to tell people this is what happens 

when you smoke over the years, the yellow fingers, the terrible 

smell around you, and of course the danger to your entire health 

system, not just the lungs and of course not just the esophagus. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we tell the people 

the dangers and the threats of smoking. And the biggest thing I 

would point out is that we obviously have the warnings on the 

tobacco cases themselves as another deterrent. I think there is 

recent rules about smoking in a vehicle with children present. 

There’s also that particular issue that people are working their 

way towards. 

 

So there’s a lot of ways in which we could discourage smoking. 

And one of the things that I think is really important is now it’s 

becoming the norm where smokers, if you can find them, Mr. 

Speaker, that a lot of people socially don’t smoke anymore, and 

they don’t allow smoking in their homes. And one of the things 

that I think is important is that we encourage those people to 

continue that particular effort because it’s not about judging 

other people whether they smoke or not, or not about respecting 

your privacy or respecting your choice; it’s really about 

protecting your health. And that’s one of the things that’s really 

important to note. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I go back to the issue of the bars and the 

restaurants that don’t allow smoking, that aren’t allowed to 

have smoking areas anymore, from what I can gather, business 

actually improved following the implementation of the rules 

where you couldn’t smoke in the bars, you couldn’t smoke in 

the restaurants. People were now coming out to restaurants. 

Why? Because there’s no cigarette smoking. Before it was 

really problematic that people wouldn’t go to restaurants or bars 

because there was so much smoking. And now as a result of 

some of the rules, I think you’re finding that businesses are 

actually doing much better when they don’t allow smoking 

because a lot of people will go into a restaurant to enjoy a good 

meal without having to have the cigarette smell all over their 

clothes or them inhaling second-hand smoke. 

 

I think that’s something that again that I stand corrected on 

because in those days in cabinet, I was worried that this would 

have a detrimental effect on the restaurant business and of 

course on the lounge and the bar business. And little did I know 

at the time, but in hindsight it shows that these businesses 

actually do much better because of the non-smoking rules 

because more people go there to sit in a social environment — 

whether it’s in a lounge or the bar or a restaurant — without 

having to inhale second-hand smoke. 

 

So I think the overall, vast improvement to the effort to curb 

smoking was actually good for the economy overall. So there’s 

all kinds of solid arguments. There are all kinds of good 

notional efforts that people could make to curb smoking 

overall, and that effort has to be recognized, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what’s really important is that increasing the price of 

cigarettes, as identified in Bill 94, by $1 a pack will generate 

$45 million in extra revenues for the province of Saskatchewan. 

Which leads me to my point, Mr. Speaker, is that I want to 

make sure that the $45 million extra, the $45 million extra that 

the Sask Party government is taking in as a result of their 

increase on the packages of cigarettes, we have to know how 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3343 

that $45 million is going to be used to try and do more, to 

decrease the increase of . . . or decrease the amount of people 

smoking in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, if we’re generating 

$45 million in new revenues this year because of this bill, and 

we’re increasing the pack of cigarettes to each pack by $1, that 

would lead one to easily assume, as I said at the outset, that we 

are now selling 45 million packages of cigarettes every year in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And imagine for a moment the damage that those 45 million 

packages of cigarettes are doing to the people’s health in our 

province. And that’s one of the things that’s so very important 

is that if this sin tax is simply a tax grab, then it defeats the 

purpose of what the Lung Association is trying to do, and then 

that is to deter people from continuing to smoking and to 

discourage young people from starting. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is that if you 

look at the $45 million that is going to be generated, how much 

of that is going to be spent to certain efforts to stop smoking? 

And that’s the whole notion that I think people are worried 

about, and that the Lung Association is paying very close 

attention to, and that people that want to champion more efforts 

to discourage smoking overall, they want to make sure that 

there’s some dedicated revenues that if you’re increasing the 

taxes on smoking products or tobacco products such as 

cigarettes and chewing tobacco, then shouldn’t a portion of that 

go directly towards discouraging people from continuing to 

smoke or discouraging young people from picking up that pack 

of cigarettes? 

 

That’s what’s really important, Mr. Speaker. And I think that 

the effort behind the former minister of Health to denormalize 

cigarette smoking overall, denormalize tobacco use, I think was 

an effort that is worth, you know, a lot of the positive news that 

we hear about those that have quit smoking, the positive news 

that we’ve heard of young people that have decided not to take 

up smoking. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think we owe a lot of thanks to the former 

minister of Health for championing some of the efforts that we 

see today such as no smoking in the bars and no smoking in the 

restaurants, despite a lot of aggressive overtures from a number 

of cabinet members at the time — and I was one of them — 

that thought some of the measures that the former minister of 

Health was putting in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought 

were a bit over the top. But today I can tell you that there are 

studies that’ll qualify and quantify what he said at the time to 

discourage people from smoking. 

 

So we have a lot of work to do in this particular bill. If it’s just 

meant to be a tax grab to balance the books, which we know are 

not balanced . . . You know, the auditor said these books aren’t 

balanced. But under the guise of trying to put a sin tax in place, 

my only argument is that there’s no question from the 

opposition perspective — discouraging people from smoking is 

key. 

 

The second thing is, if all this is is a tax grab and it’s not going 

to be used to continue some of that effort, then it’s 

counterproductive. The Lung Association will tell you, you 

don’t have a sin tax for the sake of having a sin tax. You put a 

sin tax in to generate more revenues for the government to put 

in more programs and a better, intelligent response to curb 

cigarette smoking. Because I know that the minister mentioned 

and alluded to in his notice that Saskatchewan remains 

stubbornly high in the amount of smokers on a per capita basis, 

that we go through a lot of tobacco products. 

 

Well if we’re stubbornly high, it’s because the government is 

not using these sin tax opportunities to address the issue. 

Where’s the $45 million going? Mr. Speaker, it’s going back 

into their deficit budget. So it’s kind of counterproductive when 

you see all the great historical work being done on this 

particular file as it relates to Bill 94 and then you see the 

minister grabbing 45 million bucks out of the smokers’ hands 

and not doing anything to address the issue. But that’s par for 

the course, Mr. Speaker, as far as I’m concerned when it comes 

to the Sask Party government. 

 

And again, Bill 94, as I mentioned, you know, it’s all about 

increasing the sin tax and there’s no correlation in information 

from the minister’s presentation of his own bill, the Minister of 

Finance, as to how he’s going to use that money to continue on 

the good work that the NDP undertook when they were in 

government a short five, six years ago. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we basically have these questions out 

there. We know that there are people that want to get engaged. 

We know that there are people that have learned their lesson 

when it comes to cigarette smoking, and we would hope that 

the government would again not only do the sin tax increase, 

but to commit and dedicate a large portion of those new 

revenues they’ve got, $45 million, to find ways in which we can 

discourage the sale of 45 million packages of cigarettes sold in 

Saskatchewan each and every year. And, Mr. Speaker, in the 

10-year time frame, that’s 45 billion — 45 billion packages of 

cigarettes that Saskatchewan would have used. And over a 

10-year time frame, Mr. Speaker, a lot needs to be done to 

address that alarming trend. And if all you’re doing is just 

taking this sin tax as extra revenue for yourself and not 

addressing that issue, then it defeats the purpose. It defeats the 

purpose of a sin tax if it’s only used to try and balance the 

books of the Sask Party government, which we all know is not 

balanced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that note, I want to wrap up my conversation and my 

comments on this particular bill, Bill 94. I know that we’ll have 

other issues we’ll want to raise in committee, and we’ll take the 

opportunity then to address some of the other issues that we 

want to talk to as it relates to Bill 94. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 94, The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



3344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 95 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 95 — The 

Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s with great interest I rise today to speak to this recently 

tabled bill, Bill No. 95. It’s got a long name: An Act respecting 

the Operation of Public Registry Statutes, establishing the 

Office of Public Registry Administration and making 

consequential and related amendments to other Acts. 

 

And before I get started, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to 

comment on how interesting it is to hear my colleague speak 

about the tobacco tax and the changes to tobacco smoking in 

Saskatchewan. And it’s something we certainly take for granted 

now, but what a story that was. And I remember people saying, 

you know, bars would go out of business and that would be the 

end of social life in Saskatchewan. But I think indeed, as my 

colleague commented, it’s not the case at all. And now it’s the 

norm, the new norm. 

 

But it’s always good to hear the descriptions of people that 

were here during the debate and during the actual development 

of these new initiatives. So I know some day somebody’s going 

to talk about what we’re doing here today and look back on it 

and say, I remember when. So it’s always an opportunity for a 

rookie MLA like me to sort of get a sense of the perspective 

that happens in this Chamber and in the Assembly. 

 

As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill is the creation of 

the ministry for certain purposes, and particularly to facilitate 

Bill 69 which is before the Assembly, in terms of the creation 

of a new, privately owned land titles corporation. And so we 

know that in October that bill was foisted upon the legislature, 

and I think in a very quick fashion. And I think this bill is an 

example of why . . . or is evidence that that bill was introduced 

very quickly because this is a huge piece of work that you could 

see public servants have had to do. And they had to comb 

through many, many, many statutes, do a whole ton of work, 

and they’re amending probably between 10 to 15 different 

statutes. In fact I can tell you exactly how many there are. 

There’s one, two, three, four . . . In this Act there are 16 Acts 

that have to be changed because of that Bill 69. And then in the 

next bill, Bill 95, there’s another three Acts that have to be 

changed, and they’re bilingual Acts, or Bill 96. 

 

So this is a big, big piece of work on the part of public servants. 

And what it does is it puts through many contortions the former 

Crown corporation, Information Services Corporation, which 

because it’s being privatized is now being . . . There’s all kinds 

of things that had to happen behind the scenes to make that 

work. And it’s somewhat ironic I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that it’s been contorted and twisted back into a shape that 

somewhat resembles what was there previously, but certainly 

with the imposition of a new privately owned corporation that 

will be put up for offer. In June, I believe the IPO [initial public 

offering] will be introduced in June, and it’s going to 

significantly change the bottom line for this government in 

terms of their revenues on an annual basis. And there’s a 

number other of concerns, of course, that arise out of the 

privatization of Crown corporations. 

 

So just to sort of give you a flavour of what’s in this bill, the 

first few pages deal with the establishment of a new office and 

the repatriation, if you want to use that term, of a number of 

registry type functions or director functions that are currently 

housed within the Crown corporation. And this was all part of 

the grand plan back in 2000 when ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] was modernized, when the 

electronic record was created in place of the paper record for 

our land titles office. And I’ll get into that a little bit later, once 

I look at some of the statutes that have to be amended in order 

to create this new strange entity that will be the privatized 

Information Services Corporation. 

 

So you can see in the Act itself there’s a number of definitions. 

And the definition section actually tells a large part of the story 

for this bill and how ISC is going to be reflected after Bill 69 is 

passed and this bill as well. Bill 69 certainly could not pass 

without this companion piece. One of our concerns, I think, 

from an opposition perspective is that this bill should’ve been 

introduced at the same time that Bill 69 came in. Obviously the 

homework wasn’t done. That bill was introduced in October. 

We’re now six months later when we finally get this bill 

introduced. It was just introduced last week in the Chamber 

here, and that’s really too late for proper consideration of a bill 

of this sort before the end of the session. 

 

So we’re not exactly certain why it took so long, although I 

suspect when I look at the number of Acts that had to be 

amended, there were several Justice lawyers combing through 

many, many pieces of legislation in order to ensure that Bill 69 

would be properly enacted. So it’s just a ton of work that you 

can see that has gone into this piece. And I again would extend 

my kudos to the good public servants over at the Ministry of 

Justice, who I know how hard this is and how time consuming 

it is. And so for them to be able to pull this together, before the 

end of this session even, I think was a monumental 

achievement. And certainly I think the onus was on them to 

perform a very significant task in light of the government’s 

hasty decision to privatize the Information Services 

Corporation. 

 

So in the definition section we see something called contractor, 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3345 

and it seems to be an innocuous term. Contractor is with respect 

to any public registry statute, someone who the minister has 

entered into a service agreement with. Well that’s the essence 

of this whole bill, is we have now government contracting with 

this newly formed private corporation, Information Services 

Corporation. And so the whole relationship is reduced to a 

contractual relationship. Mind you, it’s embedded within a 

statute but it’s still, I think, really down plays the importance of 

those registries in the functioning of our public service and in 

the functioning of public administration. And it just seems that 

to reduce it to a contractual relationship in this sense is 

disappointing at best, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next definition we see in the Act is a deputy registry 

officer. And that’s pretty straightforward. No issues there. Just 

that’s a deputy registry officer appointed pursuant to a public 

registry statute. 

 

Then the third definition is the initials ISC, and that refers to 

Information Services Corporation as the Crown. So this is 

necessary in this Act to refer to ISC before it becomes private, 

and then the rest of it relates to ISC after it’s privatized. So in 

this Act, ISC after it’s privatized is the contractor. ISC before 

it’s privatized is ISC. So just to make that clear as we go 

through this bill. 

 

The next significant definition is the definition of office. And 

that reads: 

 

“Office” means the Office of Public Registry 

Administration established pursuant to section 7. 

 

So once we get to section 7, we’ll have a look at what that 

office looks like. But this is the new piece. It’s a whole new 

government body that has to be created because the 

privatization of ISC is being sort of carved up, and only certain 

portions are going and certain portions are staying. 

 

So it becomes very complicated and quite bureaucratic, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in terms of how ISC is going forward as a 

private corporation. It certainly will not have any of the full 

force and effect of what it is as a Crown corporation. It’ll be a 

shadow of its former self, essentially. And these registry 

positions are now being clawed back into the public service, 

and we’ll talk more about that later. 

 

The next description I think that’s a definition that’s important 

in this section is the description found in section 2(1)(h), and 

that’s the public registry statute. Now this provides I think a fair 

bit of discretion for the ministry in terms of what can be listed 

in here because it says a public registry statute is an Act 

designated pursuant to subsection (2), which is a list of Acts 

that I will get to in a minute, and includes any regulations. 

 

And then it goes on with this strange subsection (ii) which says: 

 

an Act for which a contractor is authorized to exercise 

powers or fulfil duties in accordance with subsection 10(1) 

and includes the regulations made pursuant to that Act. 

 

And section 10 is the delegation of powers section, so we’ll get 

into that in a little bit as well. 

 

I think one of the concerns . . . And I certainly want to spend a 

considerable amount of time today talking about concerns 

raised recently by the Privacy Commissioner with respect to 

this bill. And he has some significant concerns in relation to 

that. And just as a flag, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very 

disappointing that the Ministry of Justice chose not to consult 

with the Privacy Commissioner on this particular bill because 

there are a number of significant concerns that he has raised 

after the fact. He wasn’t consulted prior to it being drafted. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And again I can imagine the pressure that the ministry was 

under to produce this bill. I fear that they simply didn’t have 

enough time to take the proper measured consultations that 

were necessary to ensure that this bill does not threaten the 

privacy rights of individuals. And there’s a number of 

comments I want to raise in relation to that once I get through 

the bill. 

 

There’s the definition of registry found in (i), and this basically 

says any registry under a public registry statute. 

 

The next interesting definition is registry officers. So who are 

these people now that are going to be clawed back from the full 

Crown corporation known as ISC or Information Services 

Corporation? Who are these people that are going to be cut out 

of that corporation and put back into the public service? Well 

we have the director of corporations; the registrar as defined in 

The Companies Act. We have the registrar as defined as in The 

Co-operatives Act. We have the registrar of titles, who’s 

appointed under The Land Titles Act, 2000. We have the 

controller of surveys appointed pursuant to The Land Surveys 

Act, 2000. We have the registrar of personal property security, 

who’s appointed under The Personal Property Security Act, 

1993; and the ubiquitous “any other prescribed person.” 

 

So certainly we see here, the minister — whichever minister 

will be responsible for this operation of public registry statutes 

— can add registrars at will as, I suppose, new public registries 

are created or other existing registries are pulled into this office 

and as well be, I guess, subcontracted out to ISC for service 

delivery. 

 

The next main definition and the last definition is service 

agreement, and that refers to Part II of the Act. And there’s a 

very long portion of the Act that’s devoted to what can be 

found in these service agreements. 

 

Subsection (2) lists all the Acts for which this new office will 

be created and, I assume, for which ISC will provide services 

to. So there’s a lot of very important bills that are subject to 

this, and I’m going to go through them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The first one is The Business Corporations Act. That’s a major 

piece of legislation for which we have a director of 

corporations. Same with The Business Names Registration Act 

and The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act and The 

Companies Act. I believe all those . . . No. The first three are 

certainly under the auspices of the director of corporations, and 

under The Companies Act, they have their own registrar. 

 

We have The Condominium Property Act, which is currently 



3346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

under the responsibility of the registrar of titles. We have The 

Co-operatives Act; The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act; 

The Land Information Services Facilitation Act; The Land 

Surveys Act, which is of course the controller of surveys; The 

Land Titles Act, which would be the registrar of titles. We have 

The Names of Homes Act. And I don’t know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if you’re aware of The Names of Homes Act, and this 

is a very interesting little piece of legislation. And I think 

anyone in the Assembly, if they’re aware of it, they can actually 

apply under The Names of Homes Act and get their own name 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I am having some difficulty hearing 

the member from Nutana, so I would ask that perhaps the 

conversations that are taking place, perhaps we use a somewhat 

lower level. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

was just referring to a piece of legislation called The Names of 

Homes Act. And this is something that may be of interest to the 

Assembly. Really, for a small application fee you can apply to 

whatever registrar is responsible for that, and give your home a 

name. And it can become, by law, the official name of your 

home. So it could be Shady Nook Home or Our Place of Rest or 

Our Haven, or whatever you want to name your home. And it 

can actually be officially named in legislation. So I have some 

friends who have done that in Saskatoon, and I think it’s kind 

of an interesting thing. 

 

I don’t know what the history of that bill is, or that Act, but it’s 

an interesting little piece of legislation that will now be subject 

to, I guess, management by this new privatized corporation. If 

you make your application, it’ll end up in the new ISC and you 

will get to pay your fees to a privately held company rather than 

going into the coffers of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The next Act that is affected by this bill is The New Generation 

Co-operatives Act. We also have The Non-profit Corporations 

Act of course, which is managed by the director of corporations, 

as well as The Partnership Act. And then finally, The Personal 

Property Security Act, which is managed by the registrar of 

personal property security. 

 

So that’s the types of Acts that are being clawed back from ISC 

as the Crown, being put back into the public service through 

this bill, and for which the new ISC will become a much, again 

as I said before, a shadow of its former self. 

 

Part II is really the, if it’s not the meat and potatoes of the 

agreement, it’s certainly the meat of the agreement, or of the 

new Act. And this is the description of this service agreement 

that the Government of Saskatchewan will enter into with the 

contractor, small C contractor, as defined in the Act. And I’m 

hoping it will be ISC. There’s nothing in here that requires the 

minister to enter into a contract with the new Information 

Services Corporation, so I think there’s discretion there as well. 

We can only hope that that’s who will get the contract 

respecting these public registry statutes. 

 

But the first clause, 4(1), of the service agreement section says 

that the minister on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan 

can enter into a service agreement with a contractor respecting 

a public registry statute. So there you go. We have the minister 

with the authority. He can enter into a contract with anyone, 

basically, as defined under contractor. So that could be anyone. 

It could be maybe you. Maybe Mr. Deputy Speaker and myself 

form our own business, and we want to provide land titles 

services. We can apply to the minister and provide those 

services. So there’s no restriction on the minister to deal with 

the new Crown corporation under this section, and I think that’s 

something of note, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The second part of the clause (2) says that if a service 

agreement is entered into, the contractor is going to manage this 

and provide all the services in accordance with this Act, the 

public registry statute, and the service agreement. So that’s 

basic provisions in terms of these types of agreements. 

 

And then section (3) lists quite a large number of things that the 

agreement, the service agreement would contain. There’s about 

20 or more different types of things like dispute resolution, 

obligations on termination, and those types of normal 

contracting clauses. So there’s a statutory provision that 

prescribes what the terms of the contract will be. 

 

And then there’s a section going on, section 5, is if . . . It says 

that if the minister and the contractor enter into a service 

agreement, everything that that contractor does is deemed to be 

taken by and on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. So 

there’s a deeming provision there I think, which is quite 

interesting. And it really creates a tie between what this private 

corporation will be doing and the Government of Saskatchewan 

in a legal fashion. So that’s an interesting clause, I think, that 

may bear some further examination. 

 

Section 6 is in relation to the fees. So we’ve got a service 

agreement. We’ve got a ministry, and we’ve got a contractor. 

What about the fees? And section 6 tells us that the contractor 

can establish and charge a fee for any service or function it 

provides or performs pursuant to the public registry statute. 

And the contractor doesn’t have to do anything until the fee is 

paid or arrangements, satisfactory arrangements have been 

made to pay the fee. And these fees have to be public, so the 

contractor has to publish the fees in the manner that he’s agreed 

to do so or they’ve agreed to do. And also the fees, the 

subsection (4) is notwithstanding any provision in the statute or 

any other Act. The fees are the fees that must be paid to the 

contractor, “And any fees established pursuant to the public 

registry statute do not apply.” 

 

So I’m not sure exactly what the intent of that is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but the contractors’ fees are their fees it looks like. 

And the fees under the public registry statute would not apply. 

Those fees are the property of the contractors. So it appears to 

me that there will be fees established in the public registry 

statutes like The Land Titles Act that are prescribed by law, and 

then the contractor will enter into their own additional fees for 

the services they are providing. So I don’t know if this will 

cause a double whammy in terms of services fees or if fees are 

going to actually go up. We know that the ones established at 

law are the ones that are currently charged. So again there’s 

going to be more questions about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

I think we’ll need to take a very close look at that. 

 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3347 

The next clause in relation to fees is section 6(5), and here we 

have the registry officer which is now the public realm, the 

officer under the public authority. And they can also waive fees 

or direct contractors to refund any fees in whole or in part. I 

think this is a good example of where this new private 

corporation is really a strange kind of corporation because most 

private corporations set their own fees in relation to what the 

market bears or what their competition are doing. Of course this 

is a monopoly. This new corporation will be the only one 

providing these services in Saskatchewan, and we have a 

government that can control the fees or waive fees on behalf of 

the contractor. So it seems to be the long arm of government 

reaching into this new corporation in many ways, and of course 

we know that under the Bill 69 the government will still own 60 

per cent of the shares of the new corporation plus the golden 

share. That’s been established under Bill 69 as well. 

 

So it’s a strange beast, Mr. Speaker. I think this is a really 

unique kind of privately held corporation that really doesn’t 

have any equivalent in the private market at all, and as a 

monopoly I mean it really is not something that we see very 

often in a public regime. So it could be interesting to see how 

all that pans out. 

 

Part III is the new creation of the office of the public registry 

administration. So here we have section 7 which creates the 

office of the public registry administration. In this section, the 

minister can provide any kind of assistance — technical, 

clerical or other types of assistance — that the office requires. 

And who is in this office? Well it’s the registry officers that I 

referred to earlier and other employees who are necessary to 

fulfill the functions of this office. 

 

Now we know for the upcoming budget cycle, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there is a line in the Ministry of Justice on the 

allocations for this office, and it looks like it’s $420,000 under 

the budget allocations. If you look at the five individuals, at 

least that we know will be now located in that office: the 

registrar, the personal property security, the comptroller of 

surveys, the registrar of titles, and the director of corporations 

as well as the registrar in The Companies Act and The 

Co-operatives Act. I think that’s the same person. Those are 

five individuals at $420,000. 

 

I don’t know how far that’s going to go when it comes to 

salaries right off the hop and then what other clerical support 

these folks are going to need. So there may be other salaries 

that are required over and above the five that have been 

identified, and I suspect that this is going to cost this 

government a whole lot more than $420,000 a year. And 

perhaps it’s low at this point because we know that this won’t 

take place until later in the year once the initial private offering 

is made. . Or perhaps the day this bill is passed, they will be 

taking their new offices whenever the Royal Assent is given to 

this bill. 

 

So it’s costing this government at least half a million dollars 

already just to have this Act, and there’s no suggestion 

anywhere that the cost of the office is going to be pushed on to 

Information Services Corporation which is a private 

corporation. And that’s another question that we’re going to 

have and want to look at closely. 

 

Now section 8, he talks about what are these registry officers, 

what will their status be? And it’s very clear that these registry 

officers are now going to be employees and agents of the 

Government of Saskatchewan “for all purposes related to a 

public registry statute and registry services.” So “all actions of a 

registry officer . . . are deemed to be taken on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan.” This is a very clear, clear 

statutory provision that indicates that these officers are clearly 

Government of Saskatchewan employees, agents and that all 

their actions are taken on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The clause goes on to say that “no person shall attempt to direct 

a registry officer in the performance of any statutory duty” and 

that’s a typical clause you would find in one of these types of 

sections. And finally, the registry officer has an obligation 

under subsection (4) to “report to the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General any business or practice of a contractor or of 

any other person that, in the opinion of the registry officer, 

impairs the registry officer’s ability to carry out his or her 

powers . . .” 

 

[16:15] 

 

So I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, back in, I think it was 2003, I 

spent about nine months working as a Crown land expert for the 

registry and for the land titles system as a Crown corporation, 

as Information Services Corporation. And there was definitely 

. . . This was the third year that ISC was in existence, and there 

was a lot of interesting tensions or discussions between the role 

of the registrar and then the corporate or management function 

of the corporation. 

 

And you could see that having taken a function like a registrar, 

which had been in existence for decades . . . We had the master 

of titles, and we had all the registrars of the local land titles 

offices. All of those positions were now in a corporate 

environment, and there was a lot of angst about that. There was 

a lot of concern about what the actual role of the registrar was, 

vis-à-vis the public, and then what the role of the corporation 

was in terms of managing the business of the Crown 

corporation. 

 

And it was an interesting dichotomy that we saw unfolding in 

terms of the evolution of this Crown corporation. And I got to 

know the people involved there quite well. And the registrar 

had some very important public functions to serve, and the 

management of the corporation also had what they saw as their 

important contributions. So there was some definite to-ing and 

fro-ing and different perspectives that presented themselves 

when you looked at those two functions. 

 

So now what we have is the registry officers, particularly the 

registrar of titles and the director of the abstract registry, being 

put back into the government function and that if anything that 

the contractors do that impairs the registrar’s ability to carry out 

their functions, the registrar has to report that to the Minister of 

Justice and Attorney General. 

 

So I think I’m going to follow this very closely. It’ll be 

interesting to see how it all unfolds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because what will the Minister of Justice do with this 

information? If the contractor is still meeting their obligations 



3348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

under the service agreement and yet the registry officer is not 

able to carry out their powers — and again that was the kind of 

tension I think that was presenting itself when the Crown 

corporation was formed, was the ability of the registrar to 

provide a public service vis-à-vis the need of the corporation to 

provide funds to their shareholders like a healthy bottom line — 

those are not always compatible, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so 

this is some section I think that will be very interesting to 

follow as we go along. 

 

Well, you know, these folks, these registry officers are certainly 

going to be within the government when we look at section 9. 

The following Acts that apply to them are The Public Service 

Act, The Public Service Superannuation Act, the public 

employees pension Act, and The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act. So certainly these registry 

officers will be much like they were before the formation of the 

Crown corporation Information Services Corporation. 

 

There’s an interesting delegation clause in section 10. And 

there we see a registry officer is able to delegate any powers or 

duties imposed on the registry officer by an Act to any 

employer or agent of the Government of Saskatchewan or — 

and here’s the interesting clause — to the contractor or any 

employee of the contractor. So we have these registry officers 

can now delegate their powers not only to employees of the 

Government of Saskatchewan but to the contractor and any 

employee of the contractor who’s providing services for the 

Act. 

 

Now the section goes on to say that even if there is a delegation 

done, the registry officer is still responsible for any actions that 

are taken by their delegate and also that they can continue to 

exercise that power themselves. So even if it’s delegated to 

someone else, it doesn’t mean that that officer couldn’t 

continue to exercise the power independently themself . So 

we’ll watch those clauses, and we’ll have more questions on 

those as well as we go through this in committee, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Part IV of the Act is what I would call some boilerplate type 

clauses dealing with immunities, transfers of liability, 

indemnification. The interesting part on part IV is in section 11, 

and this is who owns the information. And I think this is a very 

important question for the public, the people in the public. No 

longer will Information Services Corporation own the 

information. That information that they hold in all of the 

registries, all of the records, all the information in these 

registries will be the property of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so that’s an interesting clause, and I think one that bears 

examination. We want to see that the ownership of this 

information remains in the Crown. I think the idea of just 

creating the private corporation to do the services and functions 

of the Crown agency or these registries is still not exactly the 

way to go, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But it is, I think, positive to see 

that the information and the records in the registry remain the 

property of the Government of Saskatchewan. I think that’s 

something that’s very important. 

 

And access to those records “is to be provided only in 

accordance with this Act, the relevant public registry statute, 

and the relevant service agreement.” And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

when you look at some of the concerns of the Privacy 

Commissioner, this is one of the concerns that he has, whether 

the language in this section is strident and strong enough to 

prevent abuse of the information through the Internet and 

various electronic means. 

 

Part V is the next section that we can look at. In section 15, 

there’s only two sections in this part. Section 15 allows, and 

this is a fairly strong power that the registry officer or the 

minister has, where they can actually suspend any or all registry 

services or functions for the period that those circumstances 

prevail, and the circumstances described there, where would 

they do this, and when, where the circumstances are such that 

it’s not practical to provide one or more registry services or 

functions. 

 

So whatever that might mean. When it’s not practical to provide 

any of these functions, I really can’t even think of a situation 

where that might come up. But surely the drafters have, so I 

assume there’s some concern there about the ability for the 

registry officials, the registry officers to suspend those activities 

over and above the service agreement and the promises made in 

the contract. So there’s an order then that they can make under 

subsection (1) that’s to be gazetted, and there’s other different 

provisions. They have to identify what’s being suspended and 

the date and time that it will be suspended, and it has to happen 

not more than 30 days before the order is made. So there’s 

some timeframes there in subsection (2). 

 

In subsection (3) the registry office or the minister can 

recommence all these activities effective as any date that they 

deem appropriate. So not only can they suspend the activities, 

they can recommence them. And the order has to identify 

what’s being recommenced in the same way as the suspension 

has occurred. It also has to be published in the Gazette. 

 

So that’s an interesting power that I think the registry office or 

the minister has, and I think giving the minister the authority to 

suspend land titles functions or land registry functions or our 

business corporation functions seems to be a strong power for a 

minister to have. But I think that’s something we see in a lot of 

the legislation that’s coming from this government. 

 

If I think of the . . . I forget the name of the Act, but it’s the one 

introduced recently by the Minister for Government Relations 

where the minister can actually create, not planning and 

development commissions, but regional planning commissions. 

And the minister has all the power in that particular bill. And 

here we see the minister giving himself power in relation of 

operation of registries, which I think you would not find in any 

previous land titles statute or land survey statute. So interesting 

to see that kind of position being presented in this section and 

in this part of the Act. 

 

The next section I think that’s important is section 16. It’s the 

second part of part V. And this is where the board of directors 

of the contractor, so in this case we would assume the board of 

directors of the new ISC, would . . . The government can 

discharge them. Period. The section says: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint an 

administrator for a term specified by the Lieutenant 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3349 

Governor in Council to discharge the powers, duties and 

functions of the board of directors of a contractor with 

respect to the management and operation of a registry or 

the provision of registry services . . . 

 

And when they would do that is when the minister is of the 

opinion that there’s an immediate and direct threat that could 

compromise significantly the management and operation of the 

registry. 

 

So here we have again the authority of the minister and where 

in his or her opinion there’s an immediate and direct threat to 

the registry that the Lieutenant Governor in Council can appoint 

an administrator who will do all the things that the board of 

directors of the contractor were currently doing. And if that’s 

the case, and there’s an order by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to appoint an administrator, the board of the contractor 

cease to hold office unless otherwise ordered by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this seems to me to be a good 

example of where this beast, the new ISC, has a lot of weird 

sort of genetic features that you wouldn’t find in an ordinary 

company. Because I don’t think anyone in this Assembly could 

find another piece of legislation that could suspend the board of 

directors of a company and appoint an administrator on behalf 

of the government to manage that company. So it’s 

extraordinary, I think. It’s certainly not ordinary. It’s 

extraordinary. 

 

And it just shows the weird connection in this thing between 

the government wanting to retain certain things within the 

Crown but wanting to have some sort of private company that’s 

doing things, but the government can step in at any time and 

take over the role of the board of directors of that company. 

Imagine any other company that a government would do that 

and the hue and cry that would ensue if governments insinuated 

themselves in the business of private businesses. 

 

Even though the government continues to hold 40 per cent of 

the shares, this will be a private company. And I guess part of it 

is in relation to the fact that it is a monopoly. And again that’s 

extraordinary, where we are creating a privately held company 

that is a monopoly, and there will be no other competition 

available. Certainly with, you know . . . Maybe at some point 

the government might decide to let somebody else provide land 

titles registry services or the other services that ISC is currently 

providing. But it seems strange to create a private company that 

immediately has a monopoly on the business that it’s being 

created for. 

 

Part VI is the regulations provisions. Again you know, and I’ve 

said this before in this Assembly and that is, the regulatory 

powers that are being given in modern legislation is vast. And 

certainly I understand the idea that, you know, with the 

complexity of modern governments, regulations are extremely 

complex and to bring every regulation before the House for 

approval would unnecessarily tie up the business of the House. 

But we see that this regulation clause allows the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to make regulations prescribing additional 

matters to be included in service agreements, regulations 

respecting the suspension of registry services or functions, or 

the recommencement of services or functions, or any other 

matter or thing required or authorized by the Act to be 

prescribed in the regulations. 

 

And then of course there’s always the catch-all, very broad 

power of the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make 

regulations “respecting any other matter or thing that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council considers necessary or 

appropriate to carry out the intent of this Act.” So it’s giving 

great powers to the executive arm of government to continue to 

regulate this new beast and the new office without ever 

bringing it before the House again. So these are things that I 

think that are of concern. 

 

I know that the minister indicated in his opening comments that 

there will be a tabling of these contracts. I don’t see it in the bill 

itself and perhaps I missed that section. It could be in the 

service provision section, things that come out of the service 

agreement. I know he indicated that they would be tabled. Yes 

there it is. Something I should mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

in section 4(4), and this is in the service agreement part, “the 

minister [must] . . . lay before the Legislative Assembly every 

service agreement entered into by the minister within 90 days 

after the agreement is entered into.” So although the Assembly 

will not see the agreement before it’s entered into, it will be 

tabled. And so there will be an opportunity for public scrutiny 

at that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But that of course is after it’s 

been signed, so there wouldn’t be any opportunity for 

suggesting amendments or raising concerns about the content of 

the service agreement. 

 

[16:30] 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m just going to talk 

a little bit about some of the consequential amendments under 

this bill, Bill No. 95. There’s a number of statutes that are being 

amended. The first division in Part VII, which is the related and 

consequential amendments, deals with The Business 

Corporations Act. And this is a good example I think of where 

you see the hard work of the folks in the ministry having to go 

through line by line of very long and complex statutes and 

analyzing what the impact of carving these registry functions 

out of the Information Services Corporation as a Crown, 

bringing them back into government, and then putting the much 

less — or shadow of its former self is the best phrase I can 

come up with, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but the new ISC which is 

a much smaller and I think relegated to a much less important 

function within our public service for sure and more of a 

service provider than it is currently where it’s got a very 

important role in terms of directing the future of the registries 

for which it’s providing the services. 

 

So in The Business Corporations Act amendment, we see quite 

a big change to sections 279 to 279.3, and this relates to the fees 

in particular and how the director is going to be appointed. So 

what the Act had to do, I presume, was to take out the 

provisions of the director being under ISC. Now the director is 

no longer under ISC and is brought back into the Crown itself. 

And the fees that the director can charge are now established 

under the new 279.1. And it says that they can enter into an 

agreement for special services like we see in other registry 

authorities. 

 

And it says here all revenues derived from fees are the property 



3350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

of the Crown unless the Lieutenant Governor in Council directs 

otherwise. So this is a piece I think where we’ll have more 

questions. How is this going to work? If business corporation 

fees collected under the Act, The Business Corporations Act, 

are going to be the property of the Crown, then what is left for 

the contractor? Is that a separate set of fees that will be charged 

in addition? Is The Business Corporations Act going to keep the 

same fees that it has now, and that’s what you pay under 

Information Services Corporation? Are there going to be . . . It 

sounds like there will be two sets of fees. And will the sum of 

those two fees be greater than the current fee? And I think those 

are the kinds of things that we’re going to have to follow up 

with in committee with the minister. 

 

There is some transactional clauses here about the former 

director and then finally the immunity clause which is a typical 

boilerplate clause but you will see where, as the director moves 

out of ISC and into the Crown, who’s immune from what 

actions. I won’t go into the detail on that clause. There’s a 

number of other small amendments that have to be done to The 

Business Corporations Act in order to bring forth the new ISC. 

 

The second division in this Act is The Business Names 

Registration Act, and there’s a few amendments that we see 

about fees again as prescribed in the regulations. And there’s a 

couple of new subsections where it’s actually creating a public 

registry. So if you look at the new subsection 4(2.1), “The 

business names registered pursuant to the existing subsections 

(1) and (2) form a public registry of the people of 

Saskatchewan.”  

 

And the next clause reads, (2.2), that “All information in the 

registry is the property of the Government of Saskatchewan”. 

So again it’s very clear that the intention of this government is 

that ISC is not to take ownership of any of the records or the 

information in any of the registries for which it provides 

services. 

 

There’s a number of other changes that are included in this 

again in relation to fees. And the big change I think in The 

Business Names Registration Act is the section 25. It’s a new 

section, and it allows the minister to establish the fees for these 

types of services. And it’s almost identical to the previous 

clause in The Business Corporations Act. So a bit of a theme 

emerging there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in relation to the way fees 

are going to be charged and that these fees are the property of 

the Crown. 

 

Division 3 is a few minor amendments to The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act. And I don’t think there’s anything 

really of note in that division. 

 

Division 4 is The Companies Act. And it looks like again some 

basic . . . some actually modernization and cleanup of some 

language in some of the sections. But again, section 54(3) of 

The Companies Act is being amended to deal with some of the 

fee issues. Also if you look at section 219(1), there is a repeal 

of the existing 219 and a new clause about companies failing to 

pay fees, and that’s there to be seen. 

 

And then the big change for The Companies Act is found in 

sections 240 to 240.3, and again we see almost identical 

language to the changes in The Business Corporations Act in 

terms of how the director is appointed, the fees and charges that 

the registrar under The Companies Act can pass. In fact they’re 

basically word for word the same changes as we see in The 

Business Corporations Act, and of course the immunity that I 

referred to earlier, and some transitional activities to make sure 

that the transition to this new body under the office of public 

registry statutes is made. 

 

Division 5 there’s some changes to The Condominium Property 

Act, and basically again it relates to fees. So we have section 

112.1(2)(d) of the condominium Act being repealed and then a 

new section being added after subsection 112.1(2). And again 

it’s the same language relating to fees that we have seen in the 

amendments of the other Acts. So there’s some consistency 

being applied here across the board. 

 

And I know the . . . I get a bit nostalgic here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because when I worked at ISC back in 2003, I’d been 

very intimately involved with all the bumps and troubles that 

happened when the conversion from the paper record went into 

the electronic record. And certainly condominiums were one of 

the most concerning and difficult problems that the new registry 

faced because when you think about condominiums and the 

ownership of them, they’re really suspended in the air. 

 

And the way ISC was designed and the new registry was 

designed for land titles was that every title would be attached to 

a geographical GPS [Global Positioning System] or GIS 

polygon, is what they called it. So it made a lot of difficulty for 

ISC and their computing people to arrange for a polygon in the 

air, so to speak. That wasn’t one that was easily definable on a 

map or a GIS fabric that they had established for land titles 

purposes. 

 

So the amount of computing work . . . And I think this is 

something the people of Saskatchewan have paid for, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But just building that system alone, it was the 

first of its kind in North America, as far as I know, and perhaps 

even throughout the world, where you could actually have an 

electronic title in a computing system that was attached to an 

electronic geographical space. 

 

And that was the beauty of the ISC system, and it was very 

sophisticated and certainly very novel at the time. And I’m not 

sure if other jurisdictions have taken it up because it was 

complicated. And what it required was a lot of work getting the 

fabric, the GIS fabric, in place. 

 

And as I said, the condominiums, when they were being 

brought into the system, there was kind of this, oh oh, how are 

we going to do this? And I could tell you the amount of work 

that went into creating just the registry that would 

accommodate condominiums was significant and I think we 

saw a lot of the costs associated with bringing that system 

online. And that’s the kind of things I think that often get 

overlooked, in terms of the volume of work and the attention to 

detail and the amount of brainpower that goes into creating 

these systems within a computerized environment or an 

electronic environment. 

 

So it just sort of brings back a few memories of some of the 

troubles they had. Of course the other area that was really 

problematic for Information Services Corporation was the 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3351 

mineral layer, because when you think about mineral titles in 

Saskatchewan, quite often they’re done in terms of shares, like 

one-fifth or there could be four-fifths and one-fifth titles. So 

you’re going to see titles for one-fifth of the minerals here and 

four-fifths there. And that’s all historical, based on various 

portions of our province’s history. Or you might see a situation 

where it could be coal and everything else but coal. And so all 

the way the commodities that were described within the mineral 

descriptions on titles had to be incorporated into the new 

legislation, but also within the GIS fabric. 

 

And so it was a really fascinating time for me to sort of see how 

. . . Because you had to understand what was before you could 

move into the new world. And that’s exactly what they called it, 

the new world. And those types of exercises of intellectual 

thinking were complex and certainly expensive. And I think the 

end result was well worth it. 

 

But the new company that’s getting the benefit of this is this 

privately owned corporation, the new ISC. And I’m not sure 

how you could value those assets, but I would think the people 

of Saskatchewan should be able to gain some profit, not just 

through the share offering but also for the assets, the intellectual 

property assets of that company because those are significant 

and they did cost the taxpayers many, many millions of dollars. 

 

Of course we see now that the revenues are coming back 

through the annual fee that the corporation pays to the 

government, but I don’t think we’ve anywhere near caught up 

on the costs that the taxpayers paid for to get this system up and 

running. So it seems somewhat unfair to turn that profit or the 

positive benefit of that over to individuals who purchased 

shares in the company. And we’ll certainly have to look closely 

at how the IPO is structured to ensure that the taxpayers get 

their fair share of the profits for the sales of shares in this new 

company. 

 

The next bill that is amended through this Bill 95, the operation 

of public registry statutes is The Enforcement of Money 

Judgments Act. And this Act is under the supervision of the 

registrar of the personal property security. And again most of 

the amendments deal with fees. And Division 7 is an 

amendment of The Land Information Services Facilitation Act. 

 

That’s an interesting Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s one 

that’s rather frozen in time. It was as we moved from the paper 

system to the electronic system for land titles. And the sections 

that are being repealed are 32, 33, and 34. And this is basically 

how the new Crown corporation, the new ISC back in the day 

was transitioned over, and all the assets that it received. I think 

we want to take a pretty close look at this section because it 

does describe all the assets that are being provided to 

Information Services Corporation as a Crown corporation. And 

as I mentioned earlier, it would be nice to ensure that the 

taxpayers’ investment in the original Crown corporation is 

recouped appropriately. I’m not sure that’s going to happen 

through the IPO or not. 

 

Section 32 then is just a definition section. But 33 of The Land 

Information Services Facilitation Act is called the transitional 

section. It’s the transfer of assets and liabilities. So this is how 

ISC got vested with the assets of the Government of 

Saskatchewan in the day. And then section 34 was the transition 

of the employees to the Crown corporation, which was a big 

deal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it certainly affected a lot of 

people’s lives within the individual land title offices in the 

various communities, but also in the head office of the 

corporation. 

 

So then there’s the amendments to the division 8, The Land 

Surveys Act, 2000. Again this is various technical changes that 

have to be done to ensure that the controller of surveys is no 

longer part of a Crown corporation, but it’s now back within the 

public service directly. 

 

And we see, again, a change to the fee clause, similar to the 

changes in the other legislation. And then division 9, The Land 

Titles Act, 2000, same thing: making sure that the registrar and 

is properly within the public service again. And section 118(1) 

is the fee clause. That’s being changed there. 

 

There’s some other minor changes to The Libel and Slander Act 

and The Names of Homes Act. Again The Names of Homes Act, 

as I mentioned earlier, is available to any citizen here. And 

there’s the fees again; the fee clause is being amended to reflect 

that of the others. 

 

The same is going under The New Generation Co-operatives 

Act, same kinds of changes, and as well The Partnership Act, 

where the same language, and The Personal Property Security 

Act, significantly changed to ensure that the registrar is now 

back within the government fold and that the fees are being 

charged appropriately. 

 

Division 16 is The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act. 

And it’s being amended as well, although in that case we know 

that the role of vital statistics is now being transferred to 

eHealth, which will become the responsibility of the Minister of 

Health. And so that’s worth a close look as well in division 16 

to make sure that those are going to properly protect the 

individuals in question. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to bring into . . . That’s 

basically my comments on the bill itself, but I do want to bring 

into the record some comments being . . . Oh, Mr. Speaker, you 

surprised me. I had my head down. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to bring into the record some comments 

being made by the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy 

Commissioner in a letter dated April 19, 2013. And in that letter 

he’s indicated that he was not consulted at any time with 

respect to Bill 95. And certainly in committee last night he 

raised the same concerns with the minister. 

 

The function of this commissioner is also an advisory function, 

and I think it’s disappointing that the ministry for whatever 

reason . . . And I assume it’s just the sheer pressure of time to 

do all the review of all the legislation they had to do to get this 

bill in place before the end of this session. He still took the time 

to provide some commentary, and he’s raising some very, very, 

very interesting questions about the bill. 

 

He says, in his second page of his letter, “The focus of my 

concern is that much of the information in the custody of the 



3352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

government institutions in question is information about 

individuals.” And certainly that is of major concern, I think, to 

everyone. We don’t want to see that information misused. And 

that’s where I think some close examination of this bill is very 

necessary. And I’m anticipating that the minister is taking these 

comments very seriously, and hopefully we will see some 

amendments at the committee stage to ensure that these very 

valid points are being reflected. 

 

One of the problems that the Privacy Commissioner has 

identified is the definition of public record. Within his own Act, 

the freedom of information and privacy Act, there is no 

definition of public record, and certainly there is none in this 

Act either. So he’s wondering if it would be appropriate to 

define that because it’s not defined anywhere else. And I think 

this is something the minister should take into account, is to 

ensure that there is a proper definition of public record, so that 

we know what information is public and what information is 

not. As is now stands, Bill 95 could draw in information that is 

currently private information of individuals. 

 

And I think he describes that in the second point of the 

questions he listed on page 3. He said that there . . . You know, 

although the bill lists those 16 statutes in section 2(2) that I 

referred to earlier, it also includes that sort of generally wide 

open clause, “other matters that the minister and the contractor 

consider appropriate.” And his question is, what criteria will be 

applied in making this determination? And I think this is 

something else that we would look to the Minister of Justice to 

take a very close look at and say, how will the minister and the 

contractor decide what other information and what other 

matters can be drawn into a public statute bill like this? 

 

And his next question, again, it’s a very good question, on the 

third question: “Is it appropriate to exclude materials and 

organizations altogether from FOIP in this summary fashion?” 

Because this is an interplay between section 3 of the freedom of 

information privacy Act and where it doesn’t apply to any 

material that’s a matter of public record. So FOIP doesn’t apply 

to public records. This could be a back door for the government 

to bring in information as a public record so that FOIP would 

no longer apply. And I think that’s a big concern from the 

Privacy Commissioner. 

 

There’s all kinds of questions he has here. And I think we’ll be 

taking these up extensively in committee, so I’m not going to 

raise them today. But I think that it’s important that we look 

closely at these comments. He did not have a lot of time to 

prepare them. He obviously spent a lot of time and thought and 

provided a whole bunch of resources to the minister to think 

about, at least. 

 

And it’s really, really unfortunate that the minister chose not to 

consult with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner before 

presenting this bill to the legislature. But it’s not too late. 

There’s still time. And hopefully within the committee process 

he will have time to bring forward some of the amendments. 

 

A few more comments, Mr. Speaker. I think at the heart of this 

bill and at the heart of this legislative agenda for this session is 

privatization. And we see that this is a continuation of the 

privatization agenda of the Sask Party. We know that they’ve 

stated all along that they are interested in privatization, and this 

is yet another example of that. 

 

What has the Sask Party said about selling Crowns? Well we 

know even back in 2003 a former member for the Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, Brenda Bakken Lackey said, quote, some other 

80-some Crowns will be sold. So it was an intention to sell 

then. 

 

We know that in February of 2003 the member for Arm 

River-Watrous said that the Treasury Board Crowns would be 

sold off when the selling price would reap the best bang for the 

buck. 

 

We know that the member for Cypress Hills told The 

StarPhoenix in 2004 about STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company] if we could find private sector bus operations that 

would undertake the passenger and freight service that’s 

provided by STC, we would recommend that could happen. 

And this session alone, Mr. Speaker, we see STC, certain routes 

being cut. So we know where that’s headed. 

 

We see the former member from Melfort told the Leader-Post 

in 1998 that they would intend to privatize some Crown 

corporations, and he would have privatized STC and SaskTel. 

 

We have the former leader for the Sask Party saying in 1998, I 

definitely support the sale of STC and that he thinks there’s 

support to sell other Crowns. 

 

And we also have in 2008 the former minister responsible for 

Crowns wrote in ISC’s annual report that his priority was “. . . 

to ensure that Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations remained 

publicly owned . . . This is a promise our Government made to 

the people of Saskatchewan, and it is a promise we will keep.” 

 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a promise this government has 

kept. It’s a promise they have broken to the people of 

Saskatchewan. This bill, this idea was never mentioned during 

the election. It was never mentioned during the throne speech of 

last year. It’s obviously a broken promise. It’s a surprise to the 

people of Saskatchewan. The people did not vote for this 

privatization. 

 

We know ISC is a highly profitable company, and by selling a 

majority of the company, the Sask Party’s giving away a 

majority of the profits — last year 17 million; this year 19 

million. We’re just afraid that this is a government that’s out of 

money, and they’re looking for quick cash. And this is not the 

way to go. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to conclude my 

comments on this bill. We’ll certainly have many, many 

questions in committee. And so I would conclude my 

comments for now. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 95, The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 



April 23, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3353 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 96 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 96 — The 

Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of Public Registry 

Statutes Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s my pleasure 

to rise today to speak to Bill 96, The Operation of Public 

Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. It’s the 

end of the adjourned debates portion of this session, and I’m 

certainly disappointed that it has to be on this topic, Mr. 

Speaker, because this is the last piece I guess that is needed to 

privatize Information Services Corporation. 

 

And what this bill basically does, as I spoke earlier on Bill 95, 

it provided for amendments to I think I said 16 statutes that are 

in English, and this bill is to make consequential amendments 

from Bill 95 to three bills that are bilingual. So the Acts that are 

being amended here is The Co-operatives Act, and The 

Non-profit Corporations Act, and The Vital Statistic Act, 2009. 

And those are the changes that are being proposed in this bill. 

 

Again it’s the similar types of changes that we saw in Bill 95 

for the English-only statutes, where we have some changes in 

terms of the registrar description, the fees and charges that the 

registrar can pay, the immunity clause, and the transitional 

clause. The only difference in these Acts is that they are 

bilingual Acts and which require the bill itself to be in both 

official languages. So that’s basically what we see in that Act, 

and I would refer to my comments from the previous bill in 

terms of the substance of that. 

 

Again I just wanted to leave this portion of the adjourned 

debates with a few thoughts about what happens to ISC and 

what’s going to I guess be the net result for the people of 

Saskatchewan because what we see is millions and millions of 

dollars went into making this company what it is, and they are 

taxpayers’ dollars in terms of the investment in the computing 

systems. 

And I was part of a focus group in 2004, 2005 maybe, which 

was the online portion, online application for ISC for land 

transfers. There was a huge investment by the company just on 

that one small piece so that people could apply online and 

register their transactions online. The number of hours that 

went into that, the number of hours that went into converting all 

those titles from paper to electronic records and the big studio 

that was set up on the east side of the city, where hundreds of 

people were hired to take all the information from that paper 

and convert it into an electronic record, the investment for the 

geographic information system and the land registry — or 

sorry, the land surveys people — I mean the contribution that 

those people made and that the Government of Saskatchewan 

made to modernizing our land titles system is now going to be 

turned over to a private company, sort of. 

 

We see that the Government of Saskatchewan still wants some 

of it and that the Government of Saskatchewan is also, through 

Bill 95 and 96, keeping a substantial number of strings attached 

to this new privatized corporation. So it’s not really privatized 

because there’s the golden share that the province is keeping, as 

well as the 40 per cent ownership that they could keep, which 

we don’t know for sure if that’s going to remain as well 

because there’s flexibility within Bill 69 for those shares to be 

sold as well. So it’s really a strange thing. 

 

And if you recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister’s 

justification for doing this was that ISC wasn’t finding any 

customers and that somehow customers didn’t like dealing with 

Crowns. And I just find that strange, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because we see other Crowns successfully finding customers 

internationally, like SaskTel International. We see other 

Crowns like SaskPower making deals with other states and 

provinces. 

 

So although the minister’s made the statement, I think it’s very 

dubious and really one that has to be questioned. But of course 

he’s going ahead stubbornly and insisting that for some reason 

ISC can’t make sales because it’s a Crown corporation. And 

somehow by converting a highly successful Crown corporation 

into a weird, privatized — partly privatized with lots of strings 

still attached to it — corporation that’s a monopoly, that 

somehow those shares are going to be attractive to individual 

purchasers and that this is going to be a highly desirable 

company now, which will have clients lining up at the door. I 

think the minister is sadly mistaken. 

 

And certainly we’ll keep a very close eye on the future of the 

new privatized and, as I would say, the shadow of the former 

ISC. We will see, Mr. Speaker, whether or not these clients will 

line up, as the CEO [chief executive officer] of the company 

and the minister are indicating. 

 

So I think on that note, it’s kind of a sad day when we have to 

end the adjourned debates portion of our session talking about 

broken promises by this party, talking about surprises by the 

Sask Party that the actions of government are not what the 

people voted for. They’re not what the people were told during 

the election. They’re not what they were told in the Throne 

Speech. And we end up with a debate on it in the House at this 

point. So I think, Mr. Speaker, I am concluding my remarks 

now on Bill 96, and will leave it to the House Leader to wrap it 

up. 



3354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2013 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 

96, The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3323, 3324 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3323 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3323 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3323 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3323 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3323 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3324 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3324 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Boston Marathon Support Run 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 

 National Volunteer Week 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3325 

 Online Tour of Cultural Landmark 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3326 

 University of Saskatchewan Appoints New Chancellor 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3326 

 Disability Program Marks Milestone 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3326 

 Increased Funding for Rural Physician Locum Pool 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3327 

 Leader’s Views 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3327 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Care for Pediatric Patients 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3327 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3327 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3328 

 Social Services Expenditures in the North 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3328 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3329 

 Fort Qu’Appelle Fish Culture Station 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3329 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3329 

 Immigration Issue 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3330 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3330 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3331 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3331 

 Social Services Expenditures in the North 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3331 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3332 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3332 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

 



 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3332 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3334 

 Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3334 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3339 

 Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3339 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3340 

 Bill No. 94 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3340 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3344 

 Bill No. 95 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3344 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3353 

 Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3353 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3354 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


