




















































Hansard: November 21, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 17A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2013, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4139 

 November 21, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There 

is a lot of things that are completely unique about the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders when you compare it to any other 

franchise in the CFL [Canadian Football League], and this 

morning we were introduced to yet another wonderful feature of 

the Riders that is very new to this season. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re fortunate to have the Saskatchewan 

Roughrider Drumline, not just drumming outside the legislature 

today but also seated in your gallery. And we want to thank 

them very much for coming, thank them for what they’ve done 

all season. It has added a lot to the game day experience, Mr. 

Speaker. Again we’re the only club I think in the league that has 

it. 

 

Corey Taylor is . . . I think he’s there with us, is he not? Behind 

the clock. He really envisioned this and founded this. And of 

course a vision without drummers or action is just that, and it’s 

come to fruition because of these amazing players. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, we just want to thank them for providing a bit of 

pre-question-period encouragement, if I could use that term, 

and also to thank them for what they’ve done for the Riders and 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming the drumline, thank them for starting 

off the events here in the Assembly in an interesting and unique 

way. But what we most look forward to is the role that they’ll 

be playing on Sunday, leading a chorus in a sea of green. So I 

join with the Premier in welcoming the drumline to the 

Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 

to all the members of the Assembly, seated in your gallery and 

in keeping with this wonderful championship season that we’re 

having here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 

16 graduating players from the Dr. Martin LeBoldus Golden 

Suns football team that recently won the provincial 4A 

championship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are accompanied by their coaches, Mr. John Foord who I 

asked this morning related to our Stu Foord, and indeed he did 

say yes. In fact I think, John, you have Stu’s number on. 

Awesome. And along with John is Billy Brennan. Billy 

Brennan is the assistant coach. Mr. Speaker, it’s important to 

note that both these gentlemen of course have spent countless 

hours developing and working with our student athletes. And 

I’ll have a little bit more to say about that later on. 

 

Also about Bill Brennan, I think it’s important to note that Bill 

has served the province of Saskatchewan probably for the last 

45 years in many different capacities as a student coach and 

contributor, as well as being one of our foremost basketball 

referees, not only in Saskatchewan but in all of the country. 

He’s refereed at the highest national and international levels, 

Mr. Speaker. And so I’d like all the members of the Assembly 

to welcome this championship football team and their coaches. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite to welcome the provincial champion 

LeBoldus Golden Suns to their legislature, and to welcome Bill 

Brennan who has a long legacy in sport here in our province, 

and as well Coach John Foord, of course. 

 

And a couple of familiar faces up there of, I guess, children of 

good friends: Trevor Morin’s son Dylan and Muna De Ciman’s 

son Chan I think is up there as well somewhere. But I welcome 

all these athletes to their Assembly. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

you’ll recall just last week that we welcomed a group of 

students from Peacock Collegiate, and in fact they were 

celebrating their high school championship football team. 

 

Well we’ve got 34 more students from Peacock here in the west 

gallery, and we’d like to certainly welcome them and especially 

. . . They’re very in tune with government, systems of 

government, and it all goes to the credit of their teacher, Carrie 

Kiefer. So Mrs. Kiefer is up there as one of them with the 

students, along with Dana Skoropad, Brittany Gabel, Freya 

Knafelc, and Lloyd Beutler. So I’d ask all members to welcome 

the Peacock Collegiate High School grade 12’s. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

if you’ll indulge me, I have a couple of introductions here this 

morning. First of all, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, it is 

my honour to introduce you to Mr. Shayne Smith. Mr. Smith 

joins us on the floor of the legislature here this morning. 

 

Shayne is in Regina doing a presentation to Regina high schools 

to celebrate the success of athletes and the spirit of the 101st 

Grey Cup, Mr. Speaker. He has been talking to students. He 

told me he’s visited with four or five schools now, high school 

students, about bullying and making the best of what you’ve 

been dealt with. 

 

Shayne has spent much of his life proving people wrong, Mr. 

Speaker. These people range from doctors who didn’t give him 

much of a chance to live after he contracted a form of 

meningitis at just four months of age, to coaches who watched 



4140 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

as it took four years for him to sink his first shot in wheelchair 

basketball, Mr. Speaker, a sport he went on to compete in at the 

international level in the 2012 Paralympics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Shayne now travels all over the world as a 

motivational speaker. His goal is to fuel dreams through 

motivation, inspiration, and collaboration. I want to thank 

Shayne for sharing his message of the only thing holding you 

back is you, to the young athletes and aspiring athletes in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join me in 

welcoming Shayne Smith to the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, as I’m sure all 

members have friends or family members travelling into the 

province for the Grey Cup, I have a couple of friends joining us 

in the Speaker’s gallery today, Mr. Speaker. First of all, Mr. 

Rob Lee who hails from Edmonton, originally from Winnipeg, 

but now lives in Edmonton. His daughter is part of the Eskimo 

cheerleading squad that’s going to be arriving here later today 

to partake in the festivities. So welcome, Rob. And joining him 

is Mr. Jason Weinstein, a good friend of mine from Vancouver, 

Mr. Speaker, who is a lifelong Lions fan, a season ticket holder. 

I didn’t say anything to him, Mr. Speaker, after the western 

semi-final. He arrived at my house last night very gracious, 

went into the room that’s been assigned to him and came out 

wearing a Ti-Cat jersey, Mr. Speaker. So I threw him out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to welcome these very good friends of 

mine to the Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce a few guests up in your . . . up in your 

gallery. Sorry, Mr. Speaker. It’s been an interesting morning, 

especially for a Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

I’m delighted to help welcome Dr. Larry Rosia who is the 

president of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology]. He is joined this morning by the board Chair 

of SIAST, Mr. Ralph Boychuk, and they’re both joined with our 

deputy minister, Louise Greenberg. Mr. Speaker, a little later 

this morning we’re going to see the introduction of The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. 

 

But I think importantly, especially given the context, I need to 

highlight that Mr. Boychuk is a lifelong Rider fan and that 

matters profoundly because he’s helping with a little bit of 

acculturation of our new president at SIAST, who joins us from 

Alberta. I have some empathy here. It takes a little bit of time to 

understand the significance of Rider nation. I asked him this 

morning where his loyalties are and I think at breakfast he said 

he was still on the fence. He’s still got a little bit of affinity 

towards the Stamps but I think, Mr. Speaker, having seen the 

drumline, I think it’s safe to say that he’s coming down on this 

side of Rider nation and certainly getting behind everyone in 

Rider nation. 

 

And so I’d like to welcome all three to their Assembly and 

thank them for their great work, and I’ll ask all members to join 

me in welcoming all three. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming Dr. Larry Rosia, board 

Chair Ralph Boychuk, and Deputy Minister Louise Greenberg 

to their Legislative Assembly. The good work that is done on 

behalf of SIAST is much appreciated, you know. 

 

The Rider nation piece, you know, I’m sure that the 

conditioning is coming along nicely. The fact that you’ve 

shown up here I’m sure is, you know, speaks well to that, but 

again I’d wish the minister well with the acculturation. 

 

But seriously, Mr. Speaker, we’re here today to see the 

introduction of the polytechnic Act which looks to be a good 

piece of legislation and a signal to the good work that is done at 

SIAST. So again I’d join with the minister opposite in 

welcoming Dr. Larry Rosia, board Chair Ralph Boychuk, and 

Deputy Minister Louise Greenberg to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to all members of this Legislative Assembly, please 

join me in welcoming my constituency assistant, Trudy 

Deranger, seated in your gallery. This is her very first visit to 

the Assembly — and welcome — but it will not be her last. 

Trudy stepped up to the plate in June when I needed a new 

constituency assistant, and I can assure you that despite being a 

very big job, she’s filling the job very capably. Trudy is a treaty 

member of Fond Du Lac First Nation and I have been very 

privileged to learn about the Dene culture in northern 

Saskatchewan from her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming Trudy 

to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it may not 

be a surprise to you that I also have guests that are here this 

week, in fact my youngest sister Sharon and her husband, Ken. 

They are here visiting Ken’s mom. They live in Vancouver, 

more specifically South Surrey, so they may want to introduce 

themselves to the Vancouver guest that’s sitting beside them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both Sharon and Ken grew up in Cupar and went 

to high school there and so on, left Saskatchewan back in the 

mid-’70s. But as you can see, they are still true Rider fans. 

They’re here to take in some of the festivities and also, as I 

mentioned, visit Ken’s mom who is doing very well and lives in 

the seniors’ complex just here on South Albert. So I’m so 

pleased. They don’t have many opportunities to come and see 

Sharon’s older brother, the place where he works, and so I’m 

really pleased that they could be with us here this morning and 

I’d ask all members to welcome them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4141 

through you to all members, I’d appreciate the opportunity to 

reintroduce a friend and constituent who was previously 

introduced by the member from Moose Jaw North, Mr. Dana 

Skoropad. Dana is a brilliant young educator in the city of 

Moose Jaw who has contributed and continues to contribute 

immeasurably to the future of Saskatchewan and to the lives of 

his students. I hope that all members will welcome Dana. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noticed that 

while introductions were under way we have some more guests 

that came into the Assembly. Seated in your gallery is the CEO 

[chief executive officer] of Cameco, Tim Gitzel, and seated 

with him is a senior official with Cameco, Jeff Hryhoriw — or 

as I like to call him, Jeff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not very long ago Tim Gitzel or officials sent me a 

tweet with a picture of the very, very first shipment of 

Saskatchewan uranium at Shanghai port as that very robust 

civilian nuclear market is now open to Saskatchewan uranium 

— a very significant development, not just for the company but 

for the province. This industry, of course, employs a great many 

people in Saskatchewan, specifically in northern Saskatchewan 

and specifically Aboriginal people, in great careers. And so we 

want to thank them for that. But we want to welcome them as 

well this morning to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming Tim Gitzel and Jeff Hryhoriw to the 

Assembly today. As the Premier said, Cameco is a hugely 

important corporation for Saskatchewan, representing 

employment in the North but bringing large benefits to all of the 

province. So we thank them for the role that they’re serving 

here in the province, and we welcome them to the Assembly 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take the opportunity to welcome all 

our guests today and to remind them to please not participate on 

events on the floor, and that includes applause. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of anti-bullying. And we 

know that bullying causes serious harm, and the consequences 

of bullying are devastating, including depression, self-harm, 

addictions, and suicide. And other provinces have brought 

forward legislation and various tools and programs showing 

swift and effective government action. And we know that 

bullying can occur within schools, but also through social 

media, cellphones, and through the Internet, also known as 

cyberbullying. It’s a human rights issue, one of safety and 

inclusion. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan children from bullying because the lives of 

young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition. 

Many northern residents benefited from the rental purchase 

option program also known as RPO. These families are very 

proud homeowners in their communities. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many northern residents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School. The petitioners point out that the gym at 

Sacred Heart Community School in north central Regina has 

been closed since last spring, when the gym became unsafe for 

occupation. This fall petitioners were well aware that there was 

a temporary solution put in place with the refurbishment of the 

old sanctuary of the old Sacred Heart Church, but a permanent 

solution is needed. The petitioners point out that the school and 

community have raised this issue with the Sask Party provincial 

government since 2007 without resolution. 

 

They point out that any school needs a gym as a place for the 

school and the community to gather together to engage in 

cultural and educational activities and to promote physical 

activity, which we know is good for the mind, body, and spirit. 

They point out that Sacred Heart Community School is the 

largest school in north central Regina with 450-plus students, 

75 per cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. They point 

out that the enrolment has increased by 100 students over the 

past four years and that attendance and learning outcomes are 

steadily improving. And they point out that as a matter of basic 

fairness and common sense, that Sacred Heart Community 

School needs a gym. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the government to immediately replace the 

gymnasium of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 

Estevan, Regina, Saskatoon, and Hagen. I so present. 



4142 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Green is the Colour 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the table is set for the 

101st Grey Cup to be a historic and classic battle here in 

Saskatchewan — home field advantage, the last Grey Cup to be 

played on Taylor Field at Mosaic Stadium. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you may have noticed that we don’t always 

agree on both sides of this Assembly, but I know we’re all 

united with Rider pride and want nothing more than to win the 

cup right here at home on Sunday. So today I ask all of us to 

sing from one song sheet, literally. So I ask every last member 

in this Assembly, on both sides of this Assembly, would you 

please join with me in a chorus that Rider nation knows by 

heart. One, two, three: 

 

Green is the colour, football is the game. 

We’re all together and winning is our aim. 

So cheer us on through the sun and rain. 

Saskatchewan Roughriders is our name. 

 

One more time. A little more oomph here, folks: 

 

Green is the colour, football is the game. 

We’re all together and winning is our aim. 

So cheer us on through the sun and rain. 

Saskatchewan Roughriders is our name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s go Riders! 

 

The Speaker: — I would suggest members don’t quit their day 

job. I recognize the member for Regina Douglas Park. 

 

High School Football Champions 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

a tough act to follow. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, thank you. I rise in 

the House today to recognize the entire LeBoldus Golden Suns 

football team from Dr. Martin LeBoldus Catholic High School 

in Regina. For the second year in a row, Mr. Speaker, the 

Golden Suns are Saskatchewan’s 4A provincial football 

champions and for the second year in a row they defeated the 

Holy Cross Crusaders from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations to both football programs. Mr. 

Speaker, every championship game has its highlights and this 

game was no different. Early in the first quarter, quarterback 

Chan De Ciman completed a 106-yard touchdown pass-and-run 

play with receiver Kade Belyk. Again in the final quarter, 

Shamar Donelson was on the receiving end of a 108-yard 

pass-and-run score. Mr. Speaker, we could use a couple of those 

Sunday for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was the 18th consecutive victory for the 

Golden Suns, who haven’t lost a game since the 2011 city 

semi-finals. Mr. Speaker, the football program at LeBoldus has 

been rated the no. 3 high school football program in all of 

Canada for the second consecutive year and boasts graduates 

like Scott Flory of the Alouettes and Paul Waldu of our own 

Riders. Mr. Speaker, these are big accomplishments. 

 

Equally as big as the Golden Suns’ accomplishments are those 

of the Pinehouse Lake Lakers football team who recently 

captured the six-man Northern Saskatchewan Football 

Championship last Saturday against the Buffalo Narrows 

Eagles, Mr. Speaker, a truly significant accomplishment in 

many, many respects for the community of Pinehouse Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the LeBoldus coaches, John and Bill, and to the 

Pinehouse Lake coaches, assistant coaches, volunteers, and 

staff, thank you for all that you have done for our student 

athletes. You have dedicated countless hours, ensuring that 

these students achieve to the best of their abilities both on and 

off the field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating 

the LeBoldus Golden Suns and the Pinehouse Laker football 

programs. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we proceed I just want to inform 

members that we’re having some problems with the clock, so 

please bear with it. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Celebration in Rider Nation 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Grey Cup 101 is well under way. 

It’s impossible to go anywhere these days without seeing and 

experiencing the infectious spirit of Rider nation. 

 

I want to take a moment to pay tribute to all those who are 

helping to put on this 101st Grey Cup festival. This week’s 

Celebration in Rider Nation would not be possible without the 

support and passion of all the organizers, volunteers, and fans. 

Everyone is chipping in to make this Grey Cup celebration a 

huge success. The volunteer committee announced that over 

2,400 volunteers have signed on to help with the game and 

related activities. And we know that there are thousands more in 

form of volunteers who are giving rides and opening their 

homes and spreading the Rider nation spirit. 

 

CFL Commissioner Mark Cohon had this to say: 

 

Saskatchewan’s passion for Canadian football is 

legendary. Its hospitality is second to none. And its pride 

in all things Canadian is tremendous. The 2013 Grey Cup 

will bring all of those ingredients — as well as thousands 

of Canadians — together in a very special way. 

 

We echo this sentiment, Mr. Speaker. We couldn’t be more 

proud of the Roughriders, and we couldn’t be more proud of the 

way Saskatchewan people have come together and lined up this 

year’s Grey Cup celebration for success. Go Riders! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Players Carry on Weyburn Football Tradition 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later this day 

as part of the 101st Grey Cup celebrations, six CFL awards will 

be handed out to recognize this season’s outstanding players. In 

announcing the nominees two weeks ago, the league noted that 

seven players nominated are Canadian, a CFL record. 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4143 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to single out two. Not only are nominees 

Brett Jones of the Calgary Stampeders and Brendon LaBatte of 

our Saskatchewan Roughriders both from Saskatchewan. Both 

are proud Weyburn boys and, Mr. Speaker, are we ever proud 

of them. Both should be commended for their hard work and 

dedication in achieving this level of excellence and deserved 

recognition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Weyburn has a proud football tradition. From the 

1966 Grey Cup champion, the pride of Weyburn, Hank Dorsch, 

to Kelly Trithardt of the 1989 Riders to the builders of the high 

school and minor football programs like Brent Allin, Len 

Williams, and the late Darold Kot who coached our high school 

Eagles for 30 years, just to name a few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this tradition continues today under numerous 

coaches and volunteers at the minor football level, as well as at 

our high school team under coaches Chris Michel, Michael 

Hoffman, and for the past 19 seasons, head coach Darren Abel. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all of Weyburn is hoping that these two young 

men come home this off-season with awards in hand, and for 

Brendan, with the cup. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Donation Supports Power Engineering Program 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to congratulate SIAST on receiving a generous donation 

from Husky Energy to support the power engineering program 

at its Saskatoon Kelsey Campus. And yesterday SIAST 

announced it received a 1.125 million donation from Husky 

Energy. 

 

Two-thirds of the donation will support upgrades to the power 

engineering technology lab. The remaining third will be 

dedicated to scholarships for students seeking to obtain their 

third class power engineering certification. The scholarship 

recipients will be offered employment opportunities with Husky 

upon graduation. And as a result of the renovations, SIAST will 

be able to run its power engineering lab year-round and increase 

lab capacity by 25 per cent to almost 200 students annually. 

 

The scholarship portion of the donation is being matched by the 

Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship program 

offered by the Ministry of Advanced Education. 375,000 from 

this program will go towards these scholarships. Up to 10 

scholarships will be available per academic year over the next 

five years. And, Mr. Speaker, the Innovation and Opportunity 

Scholarship program offers $5 million per year to support 

students in new and emerging areas of innovation. 

 

This program encourages institutions to find industry and 

business partners to match scholarship funds. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we would like to thank Husky Energy for their very 

charitable donation and to SIAST for helping move 

Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

British Parliamentarians Visit Carbon 

Capture and Storage Facility 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on Tuesday I and some of my colleagues had the pleasure of 

meeting with seven members of the British parliament who 

were in Saskatchewan to learn more about the Boundary dam 

project. These members are part of the select committee on 

energy and climate change in the British parliament. 

 

As you know, the Boundary dam project is the world’s first and 

largest commercial scale, coal-fired carbon capture and storage 

facility, and is a world-leading project in environmentally 

friendly power generation. 

 

In May of this year, SaskPower and the UK [United Kingdom] 

Carbon Capture and Storage Research Centre entered into a 

memorandum of understanding to examine research 

opportunities of mutual benefit. One of the key observations 

raised by Sir Robert Smith, Chair of the committee, was the 

importance of actually seeing a carbon capture facility being 

built rather than just talked about. They were impressed by the 

leadership of Saskatchewan in this area. Furthermore, retaining 

coal as a fuel in an environmentally responsible way was 

perceived by some of the members of the committee as a 

sensible and highly encouraging example for their own country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is recognized as an international 

leader in innovation for the capture and storage of carbon. It 

was a privilege to showcase our government’s leadership and 

commitment and to further strengthen our province’s ongoing 

relationship with the British government. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Go Riders, Go! 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 

finish today’s member statements the same as we started. 

 

It wasn’t that long ago that Rider nation began dreaming of a 

101st Grey Cup championship featuring the home team. This 

dream has now come true, Mr. Speaker, and we are just a few 

short days away from the championship game featuring our 

Riders and the Hamilton Tiger-Cats. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Rider nation couldn’t be more proud, and 

the level of excitement is evident in the amount of green and 

white seen around Regina this week, not to mention this very 

room, Mr. Speaker. The 101st Grey Cup will feature many 

familiar faces, including Kent Austin, Henry Burris, and Andy 

Fantuz, but we kind of like Corey Chamblin and Darian Durant 

and Weston Dressler a little bit better, Mr. Speaker. We do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s guaranteed to be a great matchup, and I’m 

certain that all of Saskatchewan will have their eyes glued to the 

game this Sunday. In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, go Riders, go! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



4144 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

Educational Assistants and Classroom Supports 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More and more 

teachers are expressing their complete frustration with how this 

government has handled our education system. Of particular 

concern, Mr. Speaker, is the lack of educational assistants to 

help teachers and to provide the necessary one-on-one supports 

that many students need. 

 

Darren Cannell wrote, “In the end, when you close your 

classroom door, you stand in a room which is underequipped, 

overcrowded. And if you are unsuccessful, it will be your 

fault.” 

 

My question to the Premier: when the economy is doing well, 

why are there fewer EAs [educational assistants] in so many 

schools, and why are teachers left alone to deal with 

underequipped and overcrowded classrooms? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government recognizes that investing in education is very much 

a part of the growth plan for the province. In fact the dividends 

of growth help provide for the increased investment. 

 

Again we have to check the Leader of the Opposition’s 

preamble to his question. As is the case, it’s incorrect or would 

certainly lead people to believe something that’s not the case if 

unchecked. The fact of the matter is our government has 

increased operating funding in education significantly year over 

year over year. And, Mr. Speaker, more to the point in terms of 

capital funding, Mr. Speaker, this government has invested in 

renovating schools, in building new schools, frankly like no 

other government in contemporary history in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d point out a couple of other initiatives. 

Last year, for the first time in the history of the province, we 

actually provided an increase in-year to deal with the very 

issues that are being raised by the Leader of the Opposition. 

When I met with teachers last spring, we heard some of the 

same things. We have a lot of growth. We have, in some 

centres, some classrooms that need more supports. That’s why 

we made that decision last fall. It’s why we have actually more 

educational assistants in the province today, significantly more 

than when members opposite were in the government. 

 

We know there’s more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, but 

education’s a priority for the government. It’s not just talk on 

our side, it’s action. And there’ll be more in the budget 

upcoming. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier can claim what 

he wants, but the facts show a different reality. Half of our 

province’s 28 school divisions have actually lost educational 

assistants under this government: Christ the Teacher, Good 

Spirit, Holy Family, Holy Trinity, Horizon, Living Sky, North 

East, Northwest, Prairie Spirit, Prince Albert Catholic, Regina, 

South East Cornerstone, and Sun West School Division. Mr. 

Speaker, all of these divisions have fewer EAs now than when 

this government came into power. 

 

Again to the Premier: at a time when our economy is doing 

well, why do we have fewer EAs in so many schools, and why 

are teachers left to stand alone and deal with under-resourced 

classrooms and overcrowded classrooms, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here are the basic facts, and I 

would ask the Leader of the Opposition to pay close attention to 

them. In 2007 Saskatchewan school divisions reported 3,546 

EAs. January 2013 there were 3,565 EAs. There are more EAs 

today in the province of Saskatchewan than there were when 

members opposite were in government. That goes contrary, 

precisely to the contrary of what that member just said. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, psychologists in the school system, 21 

per cent more; speech language pathologists, 22 per cent more; 

medical facilitators, nurses, 105 per cent more for the 

classroom; and 6 per cent more social workers. Right across the 

board, Mr. Speaker, right across the board, more EAs, more 

supports in the classroom. 

 

More needs to be done, especially in high-growth areas, Mr. 

Speaker, but if the best indication of future activity is the past 

activity, based on this government’s record, we’re going to 

continue to see increases in school . . . in classroom supports in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the activity that we’ve seen 

from this government is the fact that today, in the school 

divisions that I listed, there are fewer EAs now than when this 

government came into operation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need the professionals that the Premier 

mentioned in his reply. We need the speech language 

pathologists. We need those professionals. And teachers tell me 

and parents tell me, we also need the professional educational 

assistants who are in the classroom to assist teachers, Mr. 

Speaker, and to pay attention to the children’s needs. 

 

What the Premier is saying, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t match the 

reality that many parents and teachers and students are 

experiencing. A teacher from north of Saskatoon wrote in and 

said, “Now our EAs’ hours are maxed over the school day, and 

we no longer have that block of time to get students caught up. 

And it is really showing.” And that’s the reality, Mr. Speaker, 

that this government’s ignoring. 

 

Here in our capital city, there have been no additional EAs 

added under this government, despite a significant increase in 

students, many new Canadians, Mr. Speaker, who require 

additional support. No wonder teachers are demoralized. No 

wonder parents are frustrated. No wonder students are 

frustrated. 

 

My question to the Premier: when our economy is strong, why 

is it that so many schools have fewer EAs and teachers are left 

on their own to deal with it? 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4145 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the economy is strong and 

that’s helping us provide more educational assistants into the 

system through funding. Mr. Speaker, the final decision about 

where those educational assistants are deployed are made by 

school divisions. They’re made by administrators. Mr. Speaker, 

in some cases, Mr. Speaker, it could well be that students 

leaving the school system, or in some areas where we haven’t 

seen enrolment growth, there may or may not have been some 

decreases or at least the status quo in educational assistants. 

 

But again, I’d point out to the members opposite, under the 

NDP [New Democratic Party], their focus was solely to, at least 

indirectly, provide educational assistants in the classroom. And 

that’s important. But what we found and what school divisions 

were telling us, and in many cases teachers, is that other 

supports like psychologists, like speech pathologists were not 

the focus of their administration. Mr. Speaker, under our 

government, that has changed: 21 per cent increase in 

psychologists; speech language pathologists up 22 per cent; 

medical facilitator, nurses 105 per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, 

this is important. 

 

In addition to that, compared to 2008 shortly after our 

government took over, there are now 439 more teachers in the 

province — teaching, funded and teaching, and 86 more 

student-support teachers. All of that combined tells us that the 

government’s committed to classroom support. We’ve heard 

from teachers more is needed. That’s why we responded last 

fall. That’s why we will continue to respond, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Cyberbullying Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the federal government 

introduced changes to the Criminal Code to address some 

aspects of online bullying, in particular those related to 

inappropriate sharing of intimate images. The Premier said 

yesterday that the government couldn’t really comment on it 

until he’d actually seen the text of the bill. To the minister: has 

the government assessed the federal legislation yet, and does it 

recognize there’s a need for this province to fill in some of the 

gaps? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, let me first say we’re very 

pleased with the federal government’s response. Last October in 

Regina at the federal, provincial, and territorial ministers’ 

meeting, we raised the issue of the distribution of intimate 

images on the Internet without consent, and we’re very pleased 

that the federal government has reacted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have reviewed the legislation. It’s not the 

position of the government at this particular point in time that 

we need to make any changes to provincial legislation. 

However, Mr. Speaker, I will say that we will monitor the 

effects of the legislation, how it’s being implemented, and how 

it’s being enforced by the police, and we’ll assess that as time 

goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the federal legislation only covers 

intimate images, but we know there are many other aspects to 

online bullying. And the websites that young people are on 

these days, like Ask.fm, are ones that parents may not have 

even heard of yet, but they’re places where there’s awful 

bullying going on that’s happening far too often. 

 

Nova Scotia has implemented concrete, specific actions to 

combat cyberbullying, and we have repeatedly called on this 

government to do the same. One of the things Nova Scotia put 

into place to fight cyberbullying was the cyberbullying 

investigation unit called CyberSCAN. To the minister: will this 

government adopt the CyberSCAN model for Saskatchewan 

kids? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have reviewed the 

legislation that was introduced in Nova Scotia. We don’t have 

any information with respect to how that legislation is working. 

We are, however, monitoring that legislation to see what effects 

it will have. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we’re very, very 

supportive of the amendments that have been brought forward 

by the federal government with respect to amendments to the 

Criminal Code. We on this side of the House, as do all members 

of this House, abhor cyberbullying in any of its forms, Mr. 

Speaker, so we’ll do whatever we can in terms of making sure 

that an end is put to it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to monitor what’s 

happening in Nova Scotia, but as I said, we have no concrete 

information at this particular point in time how it’s working. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago I called for 

transparency and accountability in that government’s private P3 

[public–private partnership] school plan. That government 

couldn’t offer a thing. In fact they haven’t shared any more 

details since my bill’s introduction to clarify its plans, like how 

much it will cost or how long Saskatchewan students will have 

to wait for relief from today’s pressures.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this private deal is worth hundreds of millions of 

dollars and will impact taxpayers and students for generations. 

My question to the minister: why has he failed to provide the 

public the details they deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve seen growth in the education system across the 

province for sure, but never more obvious than in our two major 

cities and communities around those major cities like 

Martensville and Warman, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we’re 



4146 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

moving forward to address those pressures. 

 

We’re looking at examples in other provinces that have been 

successful, such as Alberta that’s moved forward with bundling 

of schools, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re looking at here in 

Saskatchewan: a bundle of nine schools through a P3 model 

that has been effective, that has saved taxpayers money in 

Alberta. We believe that will be the case here. We are going . . . 

It’ll be transparent, Mr. Speaker. We will be going through a 

value-for-money evaluation of this, Mr. Speaker, before we get 

to the RFP [request for proposal]. 

 

All that due diligence will be done because it is proper protocol 

and procedure that’s been successful across Canada. We want to 

duplicate that here in Saskatchewan. The only ones that are 

standing in front of new schools in this province are the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we know the experiences 

of other jurisdictions with P3 schools. The experiences haven’t 

been good: costing more, forfeiting control, causing delays. 

 

And I’m glad the minister mentions Alberta because we’re 

hearing far-reaching current concerns about the P3 plans, P3 

schools in Alberta. For example, Alberta school board members 

and community groups denounce the current P3s. The auditor is 

currently investigating purported claims of government, and the 

current Alberta P3 bundle has gone off the rails with only one 

bidder, no competition, with all opposition parties united calling 

for the P3 plan to be scrapped. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers, communities, boards, 

parents, and teachers have concerns and they have valid 

questions. My question to the minister: why does that 

government think they can deny Saskatchewan people the 

answers, accountability, and transparency that they so deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what we’re hearing from 

parents, students across this province: when there’s 

overcrowding, we need to address that. That’s what this 

government is doing, Mr. Speaker. We’re not talking . . . We’re 

not closing hundreds of schools, Mr. Speaker. This government 

is talking about building new schools that will deal with those 

pressures, Mr. Speaker. There will be a due process that is gone 

through that has been proven out since 2004 where there’s 204 

P3 projects going on across Canada. 

 

In Alberta they’re on their fourth bundle of schools, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes, there is only one proponent, and they’re looking 

at that and making sure that the value for money for the Alberta 

taxpayer is still there. We’ll be doing the same. But I can tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, on our first bundling, we expect that there’ll 

be strong interest, Mr. Speaker, that there’ll be strong 

competition, which is only good for Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s really evident that 

despite concerns and without any details from this government, 

they’re ramming forward with its P3 school plan. An RFP for 

its P3 bundle’s project management had already opened and in 

fact it closed this week already, Mr. Speaker. This is only one 

month after this controversial plan was announced. 

 

It’s obvious this government has chosen not to listen to the 

public’s concerns, and plans to plow full steam ahead with its 

P3 private school plans. My question to the minister: if that 

government is so confident in its private P3 school plan, if it’s 

actually defensible, then why won’t that government support 

our bill, put some daylight on their plan, and provide the public 

with the upfront, independent accountability and transparency 

they deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we went through a very 

interesting time in the city of Regina not too long ago with the 

waste water treatment plant, Mr. Speaker. We know the results 

of that. The people in Regina, Mr. Speaker, voted in favour of a 

P3. But, Mr. Speaker, during that debate there was some very 

strong claims made by, not the opposition, but by CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees]. Those same claims are 

being made by the opposition right now. They’ve got their 

speaking notes straight out of the CUPE briefing book. 

 

You heard in the preamble, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

opposite called them private schools. They are not private 

schools, Mr. Speaker. They’re simply trying to fearmonger, Mr. 

Speaker. You can have the Leader of the Opposition stand up 

and say, there’s crowded schools. We’re taking action. And 

then you’ve got the Education critic saying, no you shouldn’t 

build new schools, Mr. Speaker. Which page are they on? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Funding for Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a great need for seniors’ 

care spaces all over northern Saskatchewan. In La Ronge we 

need a facility that would hold 48 beds, according to the Croft 

report prepared for the health region four years ago, but we 

currently have 16 beds — 14 for long-term care and two for 

respite. To the Minister of Rural and Remote Health: when will 

that government meet this need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I know we had this question from the member 

opposite in the spring after the budget. At that time, Mr. 

Speaker, we said that we’d be evaluating future projects as we 

get to future budgets, Mr. Speaker. We know the need 

particularly in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker, a need frankly that has 

been there for a number of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have committed over $230 million to building 

and rebuilding long-term care beds across this province, Mr. 

Speaker, 13 new long-term care facilities. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

doing replacements in other communities as well and, Mr. 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4147 

Speaker, this will be something that we’ll look at in future 

budgets. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, northern seniors are suffering 

as a result of this government’s neglect on seniors’ care in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

In April we heard how Barbara Blyth, an 84-year old woman 

with cancer and a broken foot, ended up in a women’s shelter 

because there was no space in the care facility in La Ronge. 

Barbara was treated well by the shelter staff, but the point is 

that she should’ve been able to go to a care facility when she 

needed it. 

 

There are many stories, heartbreaking stories from seniors and 

families in northern Saskatchewan. To the minister: when will 

the government finally do something to meet this need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe in that particular instance, while that individual needed 

some short-term housing while I believe a furnace needed to be 

replaced, it wasn’t necessarily a case of somebody being 

assessed for long-term care, Mr. Speaker. So I want to make 

sure that that’s, that’s clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have, as I’ve said, versus the members 

opposite who invested about $300 million in health capital over 

a six-year period at the end of their government, we’ve invested 

$1 billion in health care capital, Mr. Speaker. In long-term care 

facilities, Mr. Speaker, it’s over $230 million. We know that we 

have a long way to go to fix the infrastructure deficit that was 

left by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of those 13 long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, they all have 

a compelling need to be replaced, as do more. Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask the members opposite which of those 13 would they 

have us not do, Mr. Speaker, under this $230 million package? 

Mr. Speaker, which one would they not have had us replace? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, clearly her health care nurse 

told her that, her home care nurse told her she needed to be in a 

facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, community members and leaders in La Ronge and 

area are coming together to push for a care facility. The health 

region has done the work it needs to do. The community is 

doing its part. To the minister: why doesn’t this government . . . 

Why does this government keep turning its back on seniors in 

La Ronge and area? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not. Mr. Speaker, through the review that 

took place, Mr. Speaker, the $10 million Urgent Issues Action 

Fund, Mr. Speaker, all health regions are eligible to apply for 

that funding, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and we look forward to 

flowing those dollars out in the coming weeks, Mr. Speaker, 

that will address many of the urgent issues that came forward 

from the CEO report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have mentioned before, we know that there is 

over $1 billion in health infrastructure that does need to be 

replaced, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we know the records of the 

members opposite — $300 million in a six-year period; this 

government, $1 billion in health care capital. But we know that 

we have a long ways to go, and we’ll evaluate additional 

projects, Mr. Speaker, in future budget years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Prince Albert Bridge 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government has been stubbornly dismissive of Prince Albert 

residents and the residents of northern Saskatchewan who 

continue to demand a second bridge in Prince Albert. The 

government finally agreed to fund an underwater inspection of 

the current bridge in order to look for erosion of the piers. 

That’s good, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not good enough. 

 

P.A. [Prince Albert] needs a second bridge, not just a 

replacement of the current bridge, if indeed the original study 

was wrong and the bridge is not structurally sound. To the 

minister: is this government still completely dismissing the idea 

of a second bridge, or is it finally going to listen to the people in 

Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of the 

concerns in the Prince Albert area and some of the people that 

are lobbying for a second bridge. We’re certainly aware of that. 

We’re also aware that the work that the Ministry of Highways 

and Infrastructure has done on the bridge that is existing there, 

Mr. Speaker, to have it up and running this whole past season in 

good shape, all four lanes running, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There has been a study done by McNair and associates that was 

sponsored partially by the city of Prince Albert as well as the 

Government of Saskatchewan that said that, at the current 

economic development right now in Prince Albert, the one 

bridge will do. But if there is more economic development into 

the future, Mr. Speaker — and we certainly hope there is, 

there’s a much better chance of there being more economic 

development under this government for sure than there was ever 

under the NDP — if we can see more economic development 

and more traffic in that area, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly look 

at it into the future. But at the time right now, Mr. Speaker, the 

bridge that we have is up and running quite well, Mr. Speaker, 

actually quite a bit better than when the NDP were in 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just last 

week, the Prince Albert City Council passed a motion, a fully 

supported motion to seek the support of SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] for a second bridge in Prince 



4148 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

Albert. Councillor Zurakowski said: 

 

Since SUMA speaks on our behalf and is a lobbying 

organization to the provincial government, it would be my 

expectation that they step up with us shoulder to shoulder 

and advocate on our behalf. 

 

Isn’t it a shame, Mr. Speaker, that the two MLAs [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] from P.A. are such ineffective voices 

for their community that the city council needs to look 

elsewhere for help to convince this government for that second 

bridge? 

 

To the minister: why won’t this government recognize what 

P.A. residents and northern Saskatchewan residents know, that 

P.A. needs a second bridge now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the past number of 

years, Mr. Speaker, over the past couple, we’ve had both seats 

in Prince Albert. And before that, prior to that when we only 

had one, we had great representation. They’ve carried the 

message of Prince Albert to this government very, very 

effectively. In fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s why our government put 

$4.2 million into the bridge in Prince Albert. 

 

I find it curious, Mr. Speaker, the member is so anxious to talk 

about Prince Albert. When he was the minister of Highways, 

Mr. Speaker, he did nothing. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they took the 

top off the bridge and they made Prince Albert put it back on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious issue for 

not only Prince Albert, for the entire part of northern 

Saskatchewan. Prince Albert is the gateway to the North; 80 per 

cent of the traffic that goes to northern Saskatchewan goes 

through Prince Albert. So this is also a big northern issue. 

 

And the people of Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan 

know better than this government as to what they need. They 

need a second bridge. This government finally finished 

twinning Highway 11 — which the NDP started, Mr. Speaker 

— and now there’s a new bridge at St. Louis, Mr. Speaker. So 

the importance for a second bridge in Prince Albert is growing 

because of the increased traffic and the great opportunity of that 

whole region, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: I realize that the P.A. MLAs are not strong 

voices. But why is this government completely ignoring, 

completely ignoring this important need, this very important 

need for Prince Albert and the entire half portion of our 

province called northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that not only 

the two members from Prince Albert but all the members 

around Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, that sit on this side of the 

House have been strong advocates. And that’s the reason, Mr. 

Speaker, that you’re seeing this government in the P.A. area 

because of the strong advocacy of the members all across the 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I know . . . Order. I know we had the 

drumline in here revving people up today, but I don’t think we 

want to see members practising their tackling on either side of 

the House. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, and I do, when I look 

back sometimes I have a hard time finding them out of 48. I 

never have a hard time finding the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. Never, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $90 million has gone into the P.A. area, Mr. 

Speaker, from other ministries as well as the Ministry of 

Highways. That is a strong representation and strong support of 

P.A. and northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would say though, Mr. Speaker, is that we 

haven’t had any concerns from the P.A. area when they had to 

go to Rider games. And I know that bridge is going to be used a 

lot this weekend as they come down for Grey Cup, and we see a 

Rider victory on Sunday. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Act be now introduced and read for a first time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

moved that Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be 

now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan  

Polytechnic Act 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4149 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 be now 

introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 120, 

The Lobbyists Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved that Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saltcoats 

Melville. 

 

Support for Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate the opportunity today to get up and debate the CETA 

[Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement] deal, the free trade deal that the federal government 

and the European Union have agreed to in principle. And I 

think it’s important to repeat that, that this is an agreement 

reached in principle. 

 

We had this debate not long ago in this legislature, very similar 

to this, Mr. Speaker, and what we were asking for is the 

members opposite and the members in the government to 

support the federal government in their negotiations with the 

Europeans. But at the same, it was in principle; many of the 

details we don’t know yet. But really what we’re looking for is 

support of this legislature overall. 

 

Now it was interesting that day, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

opposite, in fact some of them when they got up to speak, 

seemed to support the deal. But then out of the blue came an 

amendment to that motion, Mr. Speaker. And in the final 

outcome, they voted against a free trade deal with the European 

Union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think over history, the NDP has really shown its 

colours when it comes to things like NAFTA [North American 

Free Trade Agreement]. There was a real example of a free 

trade deal with the Americans and, in the end, Mexico where it 

opened up markets for our businesses and all across 

Saskatchewan, created thousands and thousands of jobs. 

 

And I remember back, Mr. Speaker, I may be dating myself a 

little bit, but I remember back that the NDP in this province and 

the NDP right across this country were dead against the 

NAFTA deal. In fact if you were to believe what they were 

putting out at that time, the end of the world was coming and 

the economy in this province would be completely lost. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, total the opposite happened. It created new jobs 

when the markets were opened up more with the Americans. It 

still is helping this economy of this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

precisely helping the two industries that we’re talking precisely 

about today, the uranium industry and the agriculture sector in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to know or it would be 

interesting to know where the Leader of the Opposition actually 

stands on this issue. I noticed this week Erin Weir, who was a 

leadership candidate for the NDP in the last leadership rundown 

and actually got a lot of support out of the NDP party, this week 

has made a number of comments. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

pessimism again that comes out of NDP leadership candidates 

like Erin Weir have nothing positive at all to say about an 

agreement like this. 

 

Now I don’t know whether it’s he just doesn’t like new people 

coming to the province, new jobs for the province of 

Saskatchewan, but I think the NDP present leader should be on 

the record of saying, does he support an agreement like this for 

the province of Saskatchewan where many thousands of jobs, in 

the end, will come to the forefront? Many dollars will come into 

businesses across this province. 

 



4150 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

But, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks today I’m going to deal 

mainly with the agriculture sector because I know the member 

for Prince Albert Northcote is going to second this motion, and 

a number of my colleagues are going to talk about the uranium 

side of this debate today. So a lot of my remarks that I have 

today, Mr. Speaker, are going to be tied to the agriculture 

sector. But again, Mr. Speaker, I think we need this entire 

legislature to support an agreement like this, and I think our 

farmers in this province deserve nothing less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know from past history that the NDP have 

kind of wrote off rural Saskatchewan, and they’ve wrote off the 

ag sector. Mr. Speaker, I know that. And I know a number of 

my colleagues here who are . . . actually some are still in the 

agriculture business out there, and many of us that were over 

the past number of years when the NDP were in power, and the 

NDP really wrote us off for the sake of possibly surviving with 

just the two large cities and electing members out of the two 

large cities. And you know, Mr. Speaker, we certainly saw what 

happened in 2007. That didn’t work. And, Mr. Speaker, in 2011 

it even got worse. And, Mr. Speaker, in 2015 or 2016 when the 

next provincial election happens, I think they may be a little bit 

short of members over there once again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working with trying to open up trade 

markets around the world. In fact just this last while the 

Minister of Energy has been over in Europe, and he’s been 

dealing with a lot of the issues that the CETA deal would bring 

to the forefront here. And I’m just going to quote some of the 

information I’ve got here, Mr. Speaker, but it says, Canada’s 

agricultural exports to the EU totalled about an average of 2.5 

billion between 2010 and 2012, led by wheat, durum, spring 

wheat, soybeans and other oilseeds, canola oil. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s so much of the agriculture sector right now 

that relies on trade around the world. And you know, I think the 

biggest part of this, Mr. Speaker, is that the efficiencies of our 

ag sector across this province are growing more products for 

market every day. And we know, I think everyone in this 

legislature understands, that a very large part of what we grow 

in this province is for export, so we have to rely on the world 

markets to buy that product. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the members opposite 

when the Wheat Board issue was up. And again they tried to tell 

everybody in this province that the end of the world was 

coming if we ever lost the monopoly of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board’s been 

gone for about a year and a half, and guess what? Prices are up. 

Markets are out there. Private companies are buying our grain. 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, there’s never been a better time in 

this province’s history. All you have to do is go across this 

province right now and take a good look at the number of full 

bins across the province, grain bags that are right across the 

province. 

 

I had the opportunity to go from the east side of the province 

here about a month ago to the west side of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. Never in my lifetime have I seen that many grain bags 

across the province, and not in pockets, Mr. Speaker, right 

across the province. And then actually one of the biggest 

problems that farmers had is they couldn’t get access to any 

more grain bags. They had to put piles on the ground. I think 

my colleague from Arm River is probably one of those farmers 

that had a big concern because he had this big pile of grain out 

there on the ground. What a great problem to have, Mr. 

Speaker. I know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . We really 

appreciate the opportunities that these free trade agreements 

will do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, as we all understand that trade is so 

important to this province, many of the things that we export, 

Mr. Speaker . . . Because we have a reputation of being really a 

reliable provider of safe, high-quality agriculture products and 

also because we have in excess of 40 per cent of all the arable 

land in this country, our ag sector is probably the largest in this 

country when it comes to grains and oilseeds, and some of them 

are pulses and wheat and barley and oats, oilseeds, our livestock 

sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a good example of that was Agribition that just finished 

last week, Mr. Speaker, one of the most successful shows that 

they’ve had in the history in this province. But I think the big 

thing was that how many outside-the-country people came to 

this province looking for genetics for animals, looking for 

animals themselves, and just taking part in Agribition and 

showing us that there’s a market for our products around the 

world. But we have to get the trade barriers removed in a 

number of cases so that our producers can actually get more for 

the products that they’re marketing out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we produce about 96 per cent of Canada’s lentils, 

90 per cent of Canada’s chickpeas, 84 per cent of Canada’s 

durum, 70 per cent of Canada’s mustard, 63 per cent of 

Canada’s dry peas, 78 per cent of Canada’s flaxseed, 46 per 

cent of Canada’s canola, and 46 per cent of Canada’s oats. Mr. 

Speaker, that just goes to show the size of our agriculture 

industry here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I touched on before, we have a record 

harvest in this province, probably the biggest one that we have 

ever, ever had and, in part, Mr. Speaker, that comes from the 

efficiencies of the agriculture sector and our farmers. I think we 

all know that farms are getting bigger out there. But to a degree, 

with that comes more efficient seeding equipment, more 

efficient harvesting equipment, but also the input of our 

agriculture producers across the province and the knowledge 

that they’re putting into their trade, and in return is creating 

thousands and thousands of tonnes of more grain across the 

province, which really, Mr. Speaker, in the end, helps every one 

of us in this province, whether you’re urban or rural. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we passed Ontario and we passed Alberta as a 

food exporter in the last couple of years; Mr. Speaker, 11.2 

billion in agriculture and ag food exports last year. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the feeling is this year that it’s going to be even 

higher. Mr. Speaker, our canola seed is our top export product, 

and that was it increased to $2.7 billion, Mr. Speaker, up 215 

per cent since 2007 — and again it goes back to the efficiencies 

of our farmers in the province of Saskatchewan — and also, Mr. 

Speaker, about a 25 per cent increase since 2011. Mr. Speaker, 

some of our other top exports are wheat at $2 billion, canola oil 

at 1.7, durum at 1.2, lentils at 673 million, and peas at 626,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of our top countries that are marketing . . . 

where we market to right now are the US [United States] and 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4151 

China and Japan and India and Mexico. But once we get into 

the European market, we’re looking about another half a billion 

people that we will be trading with, Mr. Speaker, and that only 

can bode well for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it also shows the importance of the 

members opposite getting on board with this, putting their, you 

know, their ideology behind them, and just supporting a market 

like this where it’s good for the entire province of 

Saskatchewan, but especially the agriculture and uranium 

sectors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we’re on pace for a record year 

this year. Our exports are up 13 per cent in the first six months 

of 2013. The EU [European Union] is the world’s largest 

importer of ag products in the world. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

the exact market that we’re talking about getting a foothold in, 

and CETA could generate about 1.3 billion in benefits for 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous market, and I can only think 

of my own farmers at home in the Melville-Saltcoats 

constituency that will see benefits of this. But not just the 

farmers, Mr. Speaker. I can think of every car dealership, every 

business out there across my constituency and, for that matter, 

across every constituency in this province that’s going to 

benefit from a trade deal like this. 

 

And remember, Mr. Speaker, as I said when I started, agreeing 

with this agreement with the European Union, Mr. Speaker, in 

principle, it shouldn’t be that hard for the members opposite to 

put their, you know, their biases away and support a motion like 

this. And just for once, just once, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

see them stand and support the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all of us on this side of the House and 

many of us that have been here for a number of years, Mr. 

Speaker, have watched the NDP’s support for agriculture and 

their support for rural Saskatchewan dwindle over the years. 

Mr. Speaker, I was a reeve of an RM [rural municipality] when 

the NDP came to power in 1991 and instantly, Mr. Speaker . . . 

I’ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The community of Langenburg had raised money for a new 

hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP came to power in 1991 

and very shortly after, even though the community of 

Langenburg had their money up for a new hospital, the NDP 

closed the one they actually did have there. But it didn’t stop 

there, Mr. Speaker. They went on to close another 51 hospitals.  

 

And again I’m not quite right, Mr. Speaker, because they closed 

one more on top of that. They closed the Plains hospital that 

actually supported all of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

you know, when you look at parking and everything around the 

General Hospital — and which is a really good hospital, Mr. 

Speaker — but if you looked at where the Plains hospital was 

and where it was situated, rural people could get to that hospital 

in a very quick time, Mr. Speaker. And you know, decisions 

were made then that affected rural Saskatchewan, affected 

agriculture, the uranium industry which creates jobs for First 

Nations and Métis people and creates jobs for people right 

across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, when you make some of these 

decisions, whether it comes to hospitals or schools, it affects the 

people that are growing the products that we’re talking about 

here today in this agreement with the European Union. Mr. 

Speaker, I commend the federal government. And the federal 

Agriculture minister has worked very, very hard to open up 

markets around the world. Mr. Speaker, on many occasions 

they have toured the world in trying to . . . Whether it’s our 

cattle markets or what it is, they’ve tried to open up these 

markets, and every time they get another market open, it’s more 

dollars for our producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this deal is good for Saskatchewan, but it’s 

especially good for rural Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think why it hits home here so much is because I believe we 

represent every rural riding in this province. Mr. Speaker, that 

didn’t just happen. There’s a reason we represent every seat in 

this province. Mr. Speaker, we care about the agriculture 

industry, we care about farmers, and we care about rural 

businesses in this province. And I think it’s something that the 

NDP, if they hope to ever form government again — which I 

have a little bit of a bias there, Mr. Speaker — but should they 

ever hope to form government again, they’re going to have to 

get a different attitude about rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think in winding down my remarks here, I 

would like to move the motion in support of this agreement in 

principle. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll move my motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes and supports the 

opportunities for Saskatchewan’s agriculture and uranium 

industries with the comprehensive economic and trade 

agreement, CETA, reached in principle by the Government 

of Canada and the European Union. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes and supports the 

opportunities for Saskatchewan’s agriculture and uranium 

industries with the comprehensive economic and trade 

agreement, CETA, reached in principle by the Government 

of Canada and the European Union. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, it’s a great pleasure to rise in today’s 75-minute debate 

here in the Assembly. However I’m a bit concerned about what 

we’re debating here because, Mr. Speaker, we wholeheartedly 

support the motion as it stands and, you know, are certainly in 

favour of what’s being suggested by this motion. 

 

So I don’t know what the member from Saltcoats was referring 

to when he said we’re not in agreement with this type of 

motion. There’s a large difference between what’s being put 

forward today and what was put forward last week in the 

motion. And I think the problem is that members opposite 

didn’t bother to listen and understand what the distinction is 

between the motion that’s on the table today and the motion that 



4152 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

was tabled last week. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve spoken about this before, I 

come from a farming family here in Saskatchewan. I have two 

brothers who are farming and I had my dad and my grandpa 

were very active in the farming industry and very active in 

making life better for farmers, Mr. Speaker. And you know, one 

of the things that the early farmers were concerned about was 

getting their grain to market. Agriculture is all about trade, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is exactly what this is about. And this is why 

we agree that CETA is an important agreement for the 

producers here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:15] 

 

You know, back in the early days farmers had to work hard to 

make sure that they were getting good prices for their grain, and 

they did that. They worked together and worked co-operatively 

and they formed important groups like the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool. And again my grandfather was one of the original 

organizers for that, and it was very important in those days for 

farmers to not be taken advantage of and to ensure that they got 

the best price for their grain and the best price for their cattle. 

And that situation continues to apply to farmers today. 

 

We know that farmers have made great strides — I’m including 

the farmers in my family, Mr. Speaker — and that the notion 

that we get the best trade agreements for them as governments 

is something that we’ve always supported and have no issue 

with whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s a bit strange that the government introduced the motion 

in different wording today, because we’re appreciative of that, 

and perhaps they did listen to the arguments that were being 

made in the debate last week. And I’ll get into that in a few 

minutes, Mr. Speaker. We know, and the NDP agrees, that 

progress on the trade agreement with Europe is a good thing. 

There’s no question about that and there never has been. Our 

leader has been very clear about that and our party have been 

very clear about that. 

 

Saskatchewan New Democrats welcome the progress that’s 

been made. Certainly we appreciate the work that’s being done 

for our producers. When I was out talking to producers last 

week at Agribition, Mr. Speaker, it’s been made very clear. 

When I talked to producers here in the rotunda after the Throne 

Speech, it’s very clear that this is something that’s important to 

the producers of this province, important to the cattle industry. 

And I know the Minister of Agriculture made some comments 

and referred to some of the comments they’ve made publicly. 

And we have heard from those producers, and we totally agree 

with the notion that improved trade for the cattle industry, for 

the grains industry, and for all agricultural products is 

important, and we support any efforts that make that better here 

in Canada. 

 

We welcome the progress with the trade agreement with Europe 

and we know, we know that having a better trade relationship 

with Europe makes sense. The European Union represents some 

of the countries with their democracies. It’s important to have 

good partnerships with them. They have high environmental 

standards. They have high labour standards. And these are the 

kinds of trading partners that we want to have. These are the 

kinds of trading partners that we want to encourage. And these 

are the kinds of trading partners that we want our producers 

here in Saskatchewan to have the opportunity to deal with. 

 

We know it’s also common sense to strengthen our economic 

relations with the European Union from an eggs-in-baskets 

perspective. We trade heavily with the United States — all the 

members opposite know that — and we know that that’s a good 

thing. But we know that as a trading province, it’s vital for us to 

access broader markets. We can’t just limit our markets. We 

want more eggs and we want more baskets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is one of the ways that CETA . . . And I don’t know 

why members opposite would disagree with that. We know that 

it’s better to have wider and broader markets. They seem to 

think that it’s not. They seem to think that it’s not important. 

We know that we want a wider, we want a wider discussion and 

a wider opportunity. We want more eggs and we want more 

baskets. Rather than limiting everything to, for example, raw 

trade, we want to see value added and we want to see a lot more 

of that here in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 

businesses produce world-class products and some of the best 

agricultural exports in the world. And we know it’s good for us 

to open up new markets in order to ensure that Saskatchewan 

producers and Saskatchewan people are able to access those 

markets. And that’s why — and I hope members opposite are 

listening — that’s why New Democrats in principle agree with 

the proposal that’s been reached with Canada and the European 

Union, in principle. 

 

We did vote in terms of the proper amendment because last 

week’s motion was flawed, and these guys don’t seem to 

appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. And we are certain that the motion 

that’s being produced today makes way more sense than the one 

that was moved last week. 

 

So we do welcome the agreement in principle. We support 

expansion and diversification and trade relationships, and we 

think and know that the countries of the European Union make 

good trading partners, Mr. Speaker. We know that the ag sector 

relies on trade. We know that it’s important as the member from 

Saltcoats mentioned. We know that we need efficiencies in our 

agricultural industries. We’re looking for that. We’re looking 

for advancements in technology. And those are things that are 

very important to the producers of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s important to support the work of those producers. 

They’re very successful. They work very hard. And they’ve 

certainly been doing their part to keep the economy going and 

to increase the productivity of our agricultural sector here in the 

province. 

 

What the members opposite seem to be missing though, Mr. 

Speaker, is that this agreement while in principle appears to 

make sense, we don’t have any details. And what the problem 

is, is I think maybe some of the members opposite might like to 

go and see a picture of a car on the Internet and just buy it 

because it looks good, Mr. Speaker. We know that that’s not 

responsible. We know that that’s not responsible at all. Without 

looking under the hood, without taking a test drive, without 

examining the details, it seems strange that the members 

opposite are just willing to accept holus-bolus without any sort 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4153 

of examination whatsoever of any of the details of this 

agreement. And that frightens me, Mr. Speaker, when you have 

a government that’s willing to do that without any examination. 

 

And in fact just yesterday the Premier seems to be going 

contrary to that, because when we had talked about the new law 

on cyberbullying, he said he didn’t want to comment on it until 

he had an opportunity to read it and look at it, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s a big difference than what we’re hearing from members 

opposite right now, so they must disagree with the Premier. 

And I don’t know why they would disagree with their own 

leader, because he’s saying it’s important to take a look at the 

details. 

 

And yet across the board we have ministers of this government 

saying, we think this is great because we’re told it’s great. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough for the NDP. We have to 

be able to examine the details, allow people of this country to 

have a good look at what’s inside this agreement. And it’s a 

massive agreement, and it’s probably one of the biggest trading 

agreements that this country’s ever entered into. 

 

So don’t you think it’s important that we take the time, that we 

have the opportunity . . . We know it’s going to be at least two 

years before all the other European countries have ratified the 

deal, if they ratify the deal. And we think, what’s the rush in 

terms of saying this is . . . we’re just going to accept 

holus-bolus whatever the agreement is without even having an 

opportunity . . . 

 

We’re talking about transparency and accountability, Mr. 

Speaker. And those are something that this government says is 

important, but we surely don’t see an example of that in this 

case. We haven’t had an opportunity to be accountable as 

legislators. I think it behooves us to really ensure that we take 

the time that we need and we reach out to the constituents and 

to the people who understand these issues, the experts in trade, 

the experts in all the implications of this trade agreement, and 

we have a long period of time to do that. 

 

So make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, the NDP supports the CETA 

agreement in principle. And if they had stopped their motion 

there last week, it would have been much easier to support. So 

we do support the agreement in principle but we don’t want to 

look at a swift implementation, which was the flaw in last 

week’s motion. Swift implementation would be irresponsible. It 

would not be a good move on our part as legislators to just 

swiftly implement an agreement that we haven’t seen. And I 

think the government recognizes that, and they certainly 

wouldn’t conduct themselves in business that way on a private 

level, so why would they conduct themselves in business that 

way here in public when we’re responsible for the future of our 

producers, we’re responsible for the future of all of our citizens 

when it comes to all the aspects of this trade agreement? 

 

So I hate to disappoint the members opposite but I actually do 

support the motion as it reads today. And I’m not sure what the 

debate is all about, Mr. Speaker. It’s unfortunate last week’s 

motion was flawed but I think they got it right this week. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Opportunities — that 

is the best word there is. Opportunities, synonymous with our 

plan for growth. Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to participate in 

this debate as the seconder for this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farming is in my blood and it warms my heart to 

hear my colleague, the member from Melville-Saltcoats, move 

this motion and discuss all the benefits of CETA to our 

agricultural community and Saskatchewan. With our innovative 

spirit and dynamic businesses run by resilient, determined, 

brilliant people, opportunities is indeed a word that is music to 

the ears of the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, businesses create jobs; jobs that support our 

families, jobs that create a higher quality of life, jobs that 

contribute to a thriving community. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan we have 38,749 small- and medium-sized 

businesses. These are businesses run by innovative, determined 

people that take action. Saskatchewan, by the way, has the 

second-highest number of small- and medium-sized businesses 

per 1,000 people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Roslyn Kunin is Troy Media’s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There is still opportunities for 

members to enter the debate. They don’t have to carry on the 

debate when another member has the floor. I recognize the 

member for P.A. Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 

Saskatchewan has the second-highest number of small- and 

medium-sized businesses in Saskatchewan. That’s per 1,000 

people across the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Roslyn Kunin is Troy Media’s business columnist 

in BC [British Columbia]. She is also an economist. She says, 

and I quote, “Every business needs customers.” She goes on to 

inform us that: 

 

At about [500,000] . . . people, Europe offers more 

customers to Canada than what we currently enjoy with the 

United States, which has a population of 317,000,000 

[people]. And most Europeans enjoy a standard of living 

and a level of income that makes them willing and able to 

afford and enjoy Canadian goods and services. 

 

The Economist goes on to say, on October 26th, 2013, “On its 

own, CETA is hardly trivial: the European Commission reckons 

it could boost bilateral trade by 23% or $36 billion.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP is against the uranium industry. Oh no, 

wait, wait, they’re for it. Well we’re not sure what they’re for or 

against. Let’s listen to a few things that they’ve said over the 

past few years. Here’s a quote from NDP policy on uranium 

mining in 1990. It’s a quote, an STV, SaskWest Television 

news report dated March 8th, 1990: “Uranium mining is 

something that the New Democratic Party does not approve of. 

Its policy is to slowly phase out all three Saskatchewan mines 

and prevent new ones from getting started.” 

 

Then just a little while later we hear, and I quote, “Because we 

produce 30 per cent of all the uranium used in the world and 30 

per cent of all the potash, these are very strategic resources and 



4154 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

I think we can be getting a much better share for the people of 

Saskatchewan.” That’s from a former NDP leader, Dwain 

Lingenfelter, on March the 11th, 2011 on Missinipi radio. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP proposed to dramatically increase 

royalties in order to fund their irresponsible 2011 election 

promises. Today what we learn or what we know now about the 

provincial uranium royalty regime is that it is being 

modernized, and it will enhance Saskatchewan’s 

competitiveness and it is essential to continue attracting new 

investment and encouraging expansion of the industry in the 

North. 

 

We also know, Mr. Speaker, that long-term uranium royalty 

revenue in Saskatchewan is forecast to triple in the next 15 

years. Competitiveness, Mr. Speaker, is one of the cornerstones 

of the Speech from the Throne in 2013. In fact we see two 

pages dedicated to competitiveness. 

 

Roslyn Kunin, and I quote: 

 

Because of the increased access to markets and improved 

productivity, Canadian producers will become more 

competitive. And CETA will give Canada a competitive 

advantage that no other major industrialized country has: 

we will have comprehensive trade agreements in place 

with both the United States and Europe, a total of over 

800,000,000 of the most prosperous people on earth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exciting. Our province will see benefits as 

federal restrictions on EU companies in the uranium mining 

sector will be lifted by the federal government. Saskatchewan 

led the push for these changes in the negotiations. Mr. Speaker, 

Canada will no longer require EU investors to first seek a 

Canadian partner in order to receive approval for uranium 

production projects. Note that Canada retains the ability to 

apply national security considerations in its approval process. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Talk about opportunities. This will make Saskatchewan the 

most attractive destination in the world for EU investment in 

uranium mining. Mr. Speaker, in 2012 Saskatchewan was the 

second largest producer of uranium in the world, right behind 

Kazakhstan. Right now Cigar Lake is the newest uranium mine 

development. Several other projects are continuing to advance 

through the feasibility and environmental stages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, northern and Aboriginal people, and indeed 

people from all over our Saskatchewan, are directly benefiting 

from the uranium industry. There are 3,372 employees and 

contractors working in the uranium industry in the northern half 

of our province. Mr. Speaker, Cameco is the largest industrial 

employer of First Nations in Canada. Any time anyone flies into 

or out of P.A., they can’t help but notice that there is a parking 

lot dedicated to Cameco employees, and there’s dozens and 

dozens of vehicles in there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have more opportunities. In 1951 one of our 

most brilliant scientists, the Hon. Dr. Sylvia Fedoruk, former 

lieutenant governor of Saskatchewan, as a part of a team, 

successfully treated a cancer patient with cobalt-60 radiation. 

Today and every day, there are more than 45,000 radiation 

treatments delivered in more than 80 countries. This is an 

opportunity for people that have cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of us know of someone near and dear to us 

that has had the benefit of having cancer knocked right out of 

them because one of our brilliant people, the Hon. Dr. Sylvia 

Fedoruk, set a goal and achieved it. Once the cancer is knocked 

out of these people, they contribute to an improved quality of 

life for the future of our province. We have implemented Sylvia 

Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear . . . Let’s try that over, 

Sylvia Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation. Its 

areas of impact are nuclear medicine; materials science; 

improving nuclear energy systems, including small modular 

reactors; and the relationship between the nuclear domain and 

environmental society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier we heard that the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana said, certainly we are in favour of today’s motion. So 

why do members of the NDP, namely failed leadership 

candidates such as Erin Weir, slam CETA and with that the 

uranium industry? Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Opposition 

Leader to bring out a clear policy stance. 

 

We have a plan for growth, Mr. Speaker. We set goals. Some 

said they were too bold but we went ahead with them anyways. 

Our government set a goal to welcome 100,000 people to 

Saskatchewan in just 10 years. That goal is surpassed and now 

we are on to the next goal of 1.2 million people by the year 

2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth has never been for the sake of growth. It is 

for the improvement of the quality of life for all Saskatchewan 

people. Mr. Speaker, the uranium industry is on track to help us 

achieve those goals and CETA . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next speaker. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter discussion here this afternoon as it relates to a 

very reasonable motion put forward by the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. And certainly the motion that’s put forward 

is something that we agree with in principle, that we agree with. 

And it relates to CETA, which is a very important opportunity, 

it would appear, for Saskatchewan markets and for our 

Saskatchewan economy. And so we certainly, as we said on the 

record, as we stated, Saskatchewan New Democrats, the official 

opposition, certainly see progress on this trade agreement with 

the European Union as a very good thing. We recognize how 

important it is to our province and we’ve been listening to 

Saskatchewan stakeholders on this front in the agricultural 

sector and right across the province, Mr. Speaker. So as I say, 

we welcome progress with a significant market. 

 

When you think of the European Union, you are looking at a 

very large market and a market as well that is well established, 

well regulated, and could be a very valuable partner for our 

country moving forward, and for our province. When we look 

at the European Union itself, of course, they’ve got rule of law 

that applies and that they adhere to. We see strong 

environmental norms. We see respect for workers’ rights and 

labour standards. These are all important aspects to be 

considered in who you’re choosing as strong trading partners. 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4155 

Of course, any opportunity that we can have to grow 

responsible good trade like this is something that we should be 

embracing as a province. Providing the opportunity to broaden 

and diversify trade and investment for our province is 

something that we, is something that we support and something 

that we should all be working towards, which is why the very 

reasonable motion put forward by the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats here today is something that we are 

supportive of and pleased quite frankly to see on the record here 

today. 

 

I know when we look at the trade for our province right now, 

we’re rather reliant on the United States. And they’re a very 

important and also a vital trading partner, and certainly we want 

to continue to strengthen and expand trade with the United 

States. But when you’re provided an opportunity to make sure 

that there’s new markets, new avenues for trade for your 

province, it’s something that you should be pursuing. 

 

In this whole discussion, it sometimes seems that the current 

government’s focus may be not on the full picture that it should. 

We do believe that there’s an opportunity to bring a continued 

focus and leadership to value-added opportunities right here in 

Saskatchewan. And hopefully through this trade deal, there’ll 

be opportunities for value-added product and refinement of 

products by way of agriculture here in this province. 

 

So we see this as a good thing. And I know we’ve had the 

opportunities that certainly connect with the agriculture sector 

on this front and the resource sector on this front. And when 

you’re looking at expanding trade for our agricultural products, 

that’s a good thing. And I think when you look at markets like 

bison, for example, which have certainly come through difficult 

periods and have developed into a fairly mature industry here in 

Saskatchewan, this could be a very important partnership for 

the bison industry. Certainly it seems that consumer demand out 

of the European Union or out of the European countries, with 

the countries within the European Union, would provide some 

demand for a product that we can provide. And we know that 

we have some of the best bison producers here in the world, and 

certainly that’s creating opportunities for them. 

 

I think as well of our beef producers, our pork producers. But 

our beef producers . . . And I know speaking with the 

Cattlemen’s Association and seeing statements from the Stock 

Growers, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that these are important 

markets for us to be accessing. 

 

We are a resource-rich province. We have such agricultural 

strength. We provide some of the absolute best agricultural 

products to the world, and we need to make sure that we’re 

finding the markets that we should for those producers and for 

the foreign investment. 

 

When we take a look at the piece, I mean certainly I respect the 

approach taken by the member from Melville-Saltcoats here 

today because it put forward a very reasonable motion that is 

the sort of discussion that should be had in this discussion, not, 

you know, not playing political games with sort of this sort of 

important and historic trade deal. And that’s why I really value 

the approach taken by the member from Melville-Saltcoats here 

today. 

 

I was disappointed, to be frank, Mr. Speaker, with the approach 

that we saw last week in this Assembly where it seemed that 

government was more interested in political games than they 

were to have the kind of solid and rational and substantive 

discussion that we could as an Assembly about the deal with the 

European Union about . . . with CETA. 

 

So as I say, as the official opposition, we see a lot of promise in 

this deal. We certainly believe there’s value in ensuring that 

legislators follow due process and due diligence in making sure 

that all the details are well understood. But certainly the 

information we have available, although somewhat limited by 

way of the information that’s been put on the table, but the 

information that we see here for Saskatchewan is extremely 

promising. 

 

That being said, you know, there’s a place and a time for proper 

review of these deals, all the details to be on the table. And any 

legislator that’s been entrusted to serve on behalf of the public, 

worth their salt, knows that that’s an important review and 

process for all of us, but particularly for federal legislators, to 

be able to engage in. 

 

So certainly we don’t provide a blank cheque to government. 

What we do want to know is more details on this front. But 

certainly we support in principle CETA, and certainly we 

support in principle the motion that’s put forward here today, 

knowing what it means to so many across this province. You 

know, when you look at the uranium industry itself, it’s 

certainly an important industry to this province. It’s important 

by way of the investment that’s placed in this province. It’s 

important by way of the jobs and employment that it provides in 

northern Saskatchewan, many of whom are Aboriginal workers 

and many of whom are now multi-generations of families 

working within that industry. 

 

And if you look at the uranium industry in Saskatchewan in 

fact, it’s been many of these partners within the European 

Union that have helped invest and capitalize northern 

Saskatchewan and create those opportunities. And certainly this 

deal seems to work towards modernizing or building out a 

stronger relationship with a region, the European Union, that 

would seem to be a very strong trading partner, which is why 

we’re optimistic towards what we hear. 

 

I know when we were out at, of course, with meetings with 

some of the stakeholders in agriculture, we hear very favourable 

support towards CETA. That’s something we identify. Enjoyed 

being out at Agribition last week. Certainly a world-class show, 

second to none, international in nature, and really showing us 

how we, from a provincial perspective, and our agricultural 

producers and our entrepreneurs connect with the world. And 

certainly this deal itself builds upon that, and again that’s why 

we support this deal in principle. 

 

I understand that the deal itself brings forward many 

opportunities for many of our markets. We see that whether it 

relates to grains or barleys or rye. We see that with durum. We 

see that with oils, including canola. And this is important to 

support these producers here in Saskatchewan in ensuring that 

markets are expanded and that they can receive best value for 

their hard work, best value for their investment. 

 



4156 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

And as I say, for our livestock industry, for our producers, 

whether they be pork, whether they be bison, whether they be 

beef, this deal holds out a lot of promise for the producers here 

in Saskatchewan. And I’ll say some of the producers that are 

some of the finest producers in the world right here in 

Saskatchewan, some of the finest beef right here in 

Saskatchewan that we get to share in a more broad way with the 

European Union or get to share their bison product here, some 

of the best bison producers here and we get to share that with 

the world, and we get to share that with a level of pride as well 

because it’s not just about trade in dollars. It’s also about taking 

that proud Saskatchewan reputation and the proud history of our 

producers, the proud work they provide and investment they 

provide in this province, and sharing that with the world. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I see here today is a reasonable motion 

put forward by the member from Melville-Saltcoats. What I see 

is a more rational discussion that we should be having about an 

important trade deal, as opposed to the political games we saw 

from the government opposite last week. And certainly that’s 

why we certainly support in principle CETA and support in 

principle this motion, not to discount the due diligence that will 

be required at another level. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m really pleased this morning to be able to enter into 

this debate and lend my voice to recognize and support 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural and uranium opportunities as a 

result of the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement 

which has been reached in principle between our Canadian 

government and the European Union. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this agreement when 

implemented will be even more significant than the NAFTA 

agreement signed some 20 years ago. This agreement will have 

far-reaching benefits for so many of our Saskatchewan 

businesses and industries today. But today I would like to 

highlight some of the positive effects it will have on our 

agricultural industry. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my colleague from Melville-Saltcoats 

pointed out, last year we topped $11 billion in agricultural 

exports here in Saskatchewan. That makes us number one in 

this country, a position that we rightfully occupy. Put into 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, that is nearly one-third of our total 

exports. And as you know, we are of course a net export 

province here in Saskatchewan, so whatever actions that we can 

take to ensure access to and preference in more markets should 

be supported by all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Here’s an interesting statistic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think 

is very important to this proposed agreement, and that is that 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural land base is equivalent to 66 per 

cent of the EU’s cropland. So it’s easy to see how important this 

agreement will be to our agricultural producers, when one 

province, our province, has 66 per cent of the total ag land in 28 

countries in the EU. 

 

I think it’s also important in light of our plan for growth, the 

2020 and beyond, introduced by our Premier last fall. This 

growth plan outlined our goal of increasing our agricultural 

exports to $15 billion by 2020. This agreement will give us 

preferred access to a market made up of 500 million people 

hungry for our products. 

 

If I may, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote an article written 

by Murray Mandryk in The StarPhoenix, October 22nd, 2013. 

And I quote, “The Comprehensive Economic Trade Agreement 

(CETA) with the European Union is good for Canadians . . . 

and it’s especially good for Saskatchewan.” He goes on to say 

in that article that although we certainly value our trade with 

our greatest trading partner, the United States “. . . expanding 

our trading partnerships is critical.” 

 

He also described the federal NDP party’s criticism of CETA’s 

deal as telling. He concludes his article by saying this, and I 

quote, “. . . sometimes we do need to set aside political games 

and just look at the policy. Increased trade is always good 

policy.” Set aside political games and just look at the policy. 

We need to take a page out of his book. I think Mr. Mandryk 

has nailed it here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are the breadbasket of the world. We have more opportunity 

here to feed the world with our 33 million acres of crop 

production land than any other jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

This agreement will definitely open up new markets for our 

producers. For example, in 2010 Saskatchewan’s agriculture 

exports exceeded $100 million in a total of 19 different 

countries. However of those 19 countries, only one was in the 

European Union. Just think what this agreement to reduce or 

eliminate tariffs can do to open access to all of the EU countries 

and make our exported products more affordable. 

 

Presently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 9,000 European Union 

tariff lines, approximately 98 per cent of those will be duty free 

for Canadian goods. For example the oats tariff of $114 a tonne 

for oats increases the price to the purchaser in Europe by 51.7 

per cent — definitely a huge barrier to the EU countries buying 

our oats. 

 

And if I may, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a side note, I can 

sympathize with our agriculture exporters that are trying to get 

into the European market. For several years I’ve exported 

horses into the European market, mostly Germany, Belgium, 

and some to Italy. And I can tell you that if we were sending 

over a mare or we’re sending over a stallion, that was fine. 

There was no duty on those. But when we had a purchaser to 

buy a gelding, there was a 15 per cent tariff tacked onto the 

price of that horse. And that was on the delivery price in 

Europe. So if you took a 15 to $20,000 horse delivered in 

Europe, that added $3,000 to the value of that animal. So, 

needless to say, we didn’t send a lot of geldings to Europe. So I 

can certainly sympathize with our ag producers today that have 

been facing those kind of tariffs. 

 

Here’s some other facts, Mr. Speaker. Our annual average 

exports to the EU from 2010 to 2012 was $669.6 million. And 

the average tariff rate was 13.9 per cent, and that’s an average 

only. So imagine the impact when seven years after coming into 

force, 95 per cent of those tariffs will be eliminated. That’s a 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4157 

huge benefit to Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

further, with total European Union ag imports of $130 billion in 

2012, we can only imagine what this could mean to our ag 

producers. It will open up opportunities for our products that 

simply do not exist without this agreement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the CETA specifically will be of great 

benefit to pork, beef, and bison producers, but let’s not overlook 

the benefits to our crop producers. I just mentioned the oats 

tariff, but barley and rye producers presently face a 

$120-a-tonne tariff. Wheat, depending on the grade or variety, 

face up to $190-a-tonne tariff. These producers, under CETA, 

will have locked-in, permanent, duty-free access. 

 

Processed goods producers will also benefit, with tariff 

reductions amounting to as much as 14 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 

having duty-free access to the EU for 50 000 tonnes of beef, 

80 000 tonnes of pork and 3000 tonnes of bison is of great 

significance, especially at this time because of the 

non-monetary tariff created by COOL [country of origin 

labelling] in the United States. 

 

COOL is simply a protectionist, non-monetary tariff imposed 

on Canadian beef products simply to give the American’s 

producers an advantage by making it nearly impossible for 

packing plants to run two lines of packaging and labelling, one 

for US products, one for non-US products. I know that our Ag 

minister and other ag ministers from Western Canada have 

worked diligently to fight this restriction and try to block the 

new farm bill being proposed. There’s serious ramifications 

here, with millions of dollars at stake to our economy for ag 

producers and other, not just the beef and pork, it relates . . . It 

trickles on down to other things: poultry, fruits and vegetables, 

shellfish, nuts, eggs, everything. 

 

So I think it’s important that we recognize the value of this 

CETA agreement. This locked-in, duty-free CETA agreement 

will ensure our beef, pork, and bison producers a safe market 

for products into the future. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, this NDP party’s parent party in Ottawa, 

the big daddy, was critical of this agreement. And now the 

failed former provincial NDP leadership candidate is openly 

criticizing the CETA. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, as do most Canadians and Saskatchewan 

citizens, that safeguards have been built into this agreement to 

protect our public procurement contracts. We already have open 

and fair processes because of our New West Partnership 

Agreement. But in any event, CETA will only apply to 

high-value contracts, over 315,000 for goods and services and 

7.8 million for construction. Additionally we have some patent 

protection for pharmaceuticals and a commitment from Canada 

to address provinces’ high . . . any health-cost increases brought 

about by CETA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked in some length about the benefits to 

primary ag producers, but also included in this agreement are 

elimination on tariffs on our ag equipment exports. 

Saskatchewan farmers and entrepreneurs have long had a 

reputation for the ingenuity and skills in developing equipment 

for agriculture producers. This agreement will also open more 

markets for their products. 

With CETA, Mr. Speaker, Canada will be the only G8 [group 

of eight] country to have preferred access to the world’s two 

largest markets, the EU and United States, giving us access to 

800 million of the world’s most affluent customers. 

 

With built-in provisions to help eliminate or prevent non-tariff 

barriers or deal with them as they arise, this agreement will 

surely help avoid those non-tariff barriers that we see now with 

issues such as COOL. Because we now have earlier access to 

the complex and sophisticated regulatory development system 

in the EU, many of these problems can be reduced or 

eliminated. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the CETA agreement will 

bring great benefits to Saskatchewan exporters with our new 

locked-in, duty-free tariffs on ag products. With this preferred 

access to a market with over 500 million consumers and 17 

trillion dollars worth of economic activity in 28 countries, it is 

truly wonderful news for this great exporting province. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to rise and 

speak in favour of this motion today because it captures exactly 

what we, as proud Saskatchewan people, want. We want a 

playing field across the world where our good products from 

Saskatchewan can be traded in the European market. We know 

it’s about 500 million people, and I think the previous speaker 

just emphasized a number of the statistics around this. But the 

important part is that we, here in Saskatchewan, have many 

products that we want to make sure they have access into that 

whole European continent. 

 

We know that our trading arrangement with the United States 

provided all kinds of opportunities that were not fully 

understood when the whole agreement was entered into. But, 

Mr. Speaker, on this day of Saskatchewan green — and I see 

green all around this Chamber, Mr. Speaker — I also ask the 

question about why do people in the world want to trade with 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Well one of the reasons they want to trade with us here in 

Saskatchewan is because we are Saskatchewan green. And 

when I say that what I mean is that we have products that come 

from a part of the world that has many, many positive attributes, 

especially as it relates to agricultural products. But it also 

relates to forestry. It relates to some of the mining things we do. 

And part of our job as trustees and people taking charge of the 

assets of Saskatchewan that are to be traded in the world is to 

make sure that they are used and developed in the most 

environmentally friendly way possible. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

will continue to work and make sure that we can be proud of the 

products that we put out into the world market. 

 

Now one of the things that people see from other parts of the 

world when they look back at Saskatchewan is that we actually 

do have a place that’s quite far from lots of the concerns around 

pollution or other things that happen in the world and that many 

of our products then do meet some of these world standards in 

ways that are quite dramatic. And we should be quite proud of 

that. 



4158 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

One of the interesting things about the whole area of this 

particular CETA agreement relates to the livestock industry. 

And before I was here in this legislature, I had a number of 

Simmental cattle, which are cattle from the European Union. 

And, Mr. Speaker, those cattle were basically world-class cattle 

that were used for trading from Saskatchewan. And I know that 

many of my family who are ranchers across Saskatchewan 

continue to work very hard in making sure that the products that 

are produced are world-class products. 

 

Now one of the questions becomes, when we look at this kind 

of an agreement, is how are we going to get the most value out 

of those products on the livestock side as we produce this food 

for the world? And that’s a continual challenge I think for us 

here in Saskatchewan, to make sure that we get the most value 

out of that. 

 

Now also we know that this year we can see just an incredible 

wealth of grain and oilseeds and peas and all the things that 

come from our province, which once again are world-class 

products for two reasons. One, Saskatchewan green; they come 

from a very pristine part of the world. The second one is that 

they’re grown with water that comes from the skies, what’s 

called green water if you know some of the water economics 

theory of the world. And when you talk about green water, what 

you’re talking about is water that is not irrigation water. It’s not 

water that’s pulled out of rivers or lakes or deep aquifers. 

You’re talking about precipitation. And that’s another thing that 

we can be proud of because this particular agreement opens up 

broader markets for those kinds of products. 

 

Now the interesting part of our uranium industry in 

Saskatchewan — and I’ve had, I guess, about a 35-year 

relationship with the uranium industry in Saskatchewan in my 

previous professional life and in political life — what we know 

is that it was many of the European companies who brought 

their capital forward to work with the Blakeney government and 

others to get the uranium industry started in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we know also is that at that point there 

was a federal company, Eldorado. There was a provincial 

mining company, SMDC [Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation] working together with Uranerz and Areva and the 

other utility companies from especially Germany and France. 

And that capital that they brought forward opened the original 

mines at Cluff Lake and at Key Lake, and what it did was point 

out to people across the world that there was this incredible 

resource in Saskatchewan. But it also identified that this was a 

very, very capital-intensive, expensive job to do. And we have 

to say thank you as Saskatchewan people over the last four 

decades to our European friends, especially for the amount of 

money that they entrusted in our province to develop the whole 

uranium industry and other industries as well. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this CETA agreement is part of that 

opening up or the expansion of the markets for Canadian goods 

and Saskatchewan goods, and we are supportive of making sure 

that our good products in Saskatchewan are available for the 

people of the world. And we are, I know, happy to work with 

European partners like we have for many decades. But we’re 

also wanting to make sure that we will meet the standards that 

they have in Europe, whether it comes to labour standards, 

whether it comes to environmental standards, when it comes to 

food quality standards. All those things that they have 

developed I think will be of also assistance to us in Canada and 

in Saskatchewan as we make sure our products are available for 

the world. 

 

And so when we enter into agreements like this, those very 

technical details are important. And one of the challenges that 

we have so far is that we have the agreement in principle which 

sets out some of the broad pictures, but we all need to see more, 

more of the details as it relates to specific areas. But practically 

at this stage we need to be ready to go forward and develop that 

long-term trading relationship with all of the European Union to 

make sure that it will continue to provide a source of both 

capital but also a source of purchasing power for the products 

that we have here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s always quite curious that the 

government brings forward a motion that’s as clear and as easy 

to support as it is today, and so I want to thank the member 

from Melville-Saltcoats. He’s been around I think the same 

number of years as I have in this place and he knows that there 

are many things that we agree about, whether it’s Norwegian 

nationalism or agriculture. And we will continue to support this 

kind of work that’s being done. 

 

One of the things that we do ask is that the Premier and the 

ministers who are involved in this, if they actually have more 

information about this than what is public, that they give us as 

much information as they have as soon as they can so that we 

can all be part of the discussion, to make sure that the rules do 

benefit our livestock industry, our beef and bison and others, 

that it does benefit the grain industry the way we all want it to 

do. 

 

I have a lot of faith in the negotiators that operate for Canada 

and for the provinces, but I know in this particular one there’s 

been a strong provincial support to the national negotiators. 

And so at the appropriate times — maybe it’s not quite yet — 

we need to have all of the details about what the province’s 

position has been. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The 75 minutes for debate has 

expired. Questions? I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — As it relates to an important industry in 

Prince Albert, my question is to the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote: how do tariffs currently apply and impede dissolving 

pulp or the reuse of the pulp mill, and how does CETA apply to 

the pulp mill? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today the 

NDP supports CETA, this very important trade agreement, and 

by extension the uranium industry. However the current 

opposition leader fails to set policy. This failure by the 

opposition NDP is a great way to hide their 2011 election 

promises to dramatically increase royalties in order to fund their 

irresponsible 2011 election promises. 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4159 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — CETA will provide new market access 

opportunities for key Canadian agricultural exports — beef, 

pork, and bison. CETA establishes tariff rate quotas for each 

product, giving Canadian farmers yearly duty-free access for up 

to 80 000 tonnes of pork including consolidation of the existing 

quota of approximately 6000 tonnes, 50 000 tonnes of beef and 

3000 tonnes of bison. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: just like on Keystone, 

will you stand up against your federal leader and tell him to 

support CETA and the important new market access it will 

provide to our Saskatchewan producers? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I would like to thank the member opposite for 

reading from a long list of things that we’re not really all that 

. . . I can’t think of the word. They’re not in dispute. I think 

we’re totally onside with what he’s saying about those 

producers and the items that were produced. We certainly 

support the bison, beef producers. 

 

I’m interested to hear that we have nut producers in 

Saskatchewan. I’d like to hear more from the member opposite 

about that industry here. But generally we support the trade and 

economic development of all those things. And I think the 

member opposite needs to reread some of the comments from 

the national leader for the NDP on that as well. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yesterday the 

Premier made it very clear that he needed to see the federal 

legislation around the anti-bullying project. He wanted to see all 

those details before he made any comment. And I would ask the 

member from The Battlefords: does that same thing apply when 

we’re looking at CETA? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you for 

the question. I think of importance here is that we’re agreeing 

with this agreement in principle and that’s what we’re talking 

about today. We’re talking about the principles that are 

contained in the CETA agreement that are going to help so 

many people in Saskatchewan. 

 

We talked about the wheat producers, we talked about the beef 

producers, we talked about the pork producers. And I think as 

this rolls out, we’re going to see that there are tremendous 

benefits to all of the ag producers, the uranium producers, and 

so many other industries, the ag products producers, that are 

going to benefit from this agreement as it rolls out. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, the CETA agreement will mean EU 

tariffs will be eliminated on grains, durum, and high-quality 

common wheat for which CETA will lock in permanent 

duty-free access; oils; processed goods including miscellaneous 

food preparations; and processed pulses and grains which 

include baked goods, pulse flour, meal, and powder. 

 

To the member from Regina Lakeview: thank you for your 

support. Will your caucus contact the federal NDP and their 

leader and ask for their support of the CETA, which 

undoubtedly creates opportunities for Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are very clearly in favour of 

this whole agreement and things that are going on. I know that 

the federal NDP is also in favour of CETA. They want to make 

sure this is negotiated so it provides the best agreement for all 

Canadians, including Saskatchewan people. 

 

Our job here as the Saskatchewan NDP is to make sure that it 

protects our people in the best way, but also gives them the 

access to the markets of Europe because we’re very proud of 

the products we have here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I guess a question to the member from 

North Battleford. Certainly we support, in principle, CETA and 

the motion that’s brought forward here today. Trade’s very 

important with good partners, and we stated that. Where this 

government’s agenda seems to be lacking is as it relates to the 

value-added initiatives and the value-added roles within 

agriculture and our resources. I guess I look to the member 

from The Battlefords to clarify this government’s plan as it 

relates to value-add in resources and the agricultural sector. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank you 

for the question. I think the CETA agreement outlines very 

clearly, in principle, that we’re not just talking about primary 

agriculture products. We’re talking about I think, I believe in 

here, frozen potato products, other frozen vegetables, and fruit 

products. These are value-added products that are being 

processed here in Saskatchewan. As well, I believe in here there 

was 15 000 tonnes of processed beef, frozen beef that can be 

exported. So we are in fact in this agreement, this CETA 

agreement, supporting value-added agriculture in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP is renowned for 

slamming government policies before doing all their homework 

to get the facts straight. A great example of this was on Tuesday 

when failed NDP leadership hopeful, Erin Weir, was featured in 

the P.A. Daily Herald, slamming the newly proclaimed CETA. 

He misled people by commenting that there was no 



4160 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

transparency in regards to uranium policy. I guess Mr. Weir 

didn’t quite do all his homework, as page 12 of the technical 

summary clearly states the government’s plan to make 

investment in uranium less restrictive. 

 

To the member from Regina Rosemont: when Mr. Weir writes 

his next article disparaging CETA, can your caucus be sure to 

speak out against him or did the NDP membership get the 

leadership vote wrong at their last convention? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I get a kick out 

of the backbencher opposite who I’ve known for some time, 

and I’m disappointed that he’d stand on an important 

arrangement like this and sort of politicize the whole piece. And 

it’s too bad that he’d read some sort of quotes that I guess have 

been provided him from the political caucus office opposite. 

 

But as we’ve put on the record, we’re not going to play 

political, divisive games on this. What we do is support good 

trade and deals that are good for Saskatchewan. That’s why in 

principle we support CETA. That’s why we support the 

reasonable motion that’s put forward today. And I’ll tell the 

member opposite that he should know any legislator worth their 

salt should not be afraid of the details and should be willing to 

engage in some due process. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We heard the Premier say yesterday in the House regarding the 

federally proposed law is he wanted to read it first. He wants to 

read and examine the legislation and then he said, “Certainly if 

it is, that’s something we would be open to. I think it’s 

something we would look at but it’s unclear at this point.” 

 

How can the member for Melville-Saltcoats constituency be 

ready to sign on the dotted line of this agreement without doing 

due diligence as the Premier said he would do for federal 

legislation? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 

interesting debate this week. Last week the NDP were dead 

against CETA. This week they’ve taken a complete one-eighty 

and now they’re in support of it, and they don’t even check the 

P.A. Herald. Mr. Speaker, they should check the paper in P.A. 

because one of their other leadership hopefuls is dead against 

this. The only difference, Mr. Speaker, was that last week it 

asked the federal NDP to support CETA, and now this week 

they don’t have to do that. Mr. Speaker, this NDP Party seems 

to be beating to the drum. Whatever Thomas Mulcair says, 

these guys do. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the completion of CETA will mean that Canada will 

no longer require EU investors to first seek a Canadian partner 

in order to receive approval for uranium production projects. 

This could mean up to 2.5 billion and 1,200 jobs over the next 

15 years. 

 

To the member from Regina Rosemont: it is encouraging to 

hear that you now support the investment in jobs that CETA has 

the potential to bring to this province, particularly the North. 

Will you agree to contact Mr. Mulcair, the federal NDP, and 

ask them to change their minds like the Saskatchewan NDP 

have? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Again we see opposite, another written 

statement from the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Members, the time has expired for 

the 75-minute debate. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 605 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Wotherspoon that Bill No. 605 — The 

Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and Accountability 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure today to enter into this very important debate on a 

private member’s bill my colleague has introduced, Bill 605, An 

Act respecting the Transparency and Accountability of 

Public-Private Partnerships. 

 

We think this is a critical, critical piece of legislation that 

actually we don’t think the government should be worried about 

at all, because from this past debate, just what I was hearing, 

they’re not afraid of facts. They want to do due diligence. They 

want to make sure they have the research, and that’s all this bill 

really asks for. That’s all it really asks for is to make sure that 

we protect the taxpayers and residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan and that they do get good value for their tax 

dollars. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And so I’m not sure what the reluctance is for this government 

to do that type of thing, but we know that a vote for this is for 

transparency and accountability. A vote against this is really 

about secret deals made in backrooms. And the stakes are just 

too high, just too high when we do have an urgent situation in 

our schools, in our communities where we do need more 

schools. And, Mr. Speaker, we think that’s what the plan is, that 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4161 

we should be going ahead and getting that job done and not 

trying to think of these, you know, potential boondoggles of 

what we’ve seen in other provinces. And we should be learning 

from other provinces — the experience in the Maritimes, the 

experience in Alberta — that it just doesn’t work when you 

bring a cookie-cutter approach to school construction. 

 

Our province is growing. Our population is growing, and many 

communities need, urgently, new schools. But they don’t need 

to be strapped with financial fiascos because we haven’t done 

our homework. We should do our homework. And I think 

people expect that when we’re elected that we will do our 

homework and we will get value for money and we will do it in 

a way that gets the job done quickly, but fair value. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what we need to do is take a moment to 

reflect on why schools are so important in our communities. 

They’re much more than just cookie-cutter buildings that will, 

you know, serve only a short period of time. They’re centres of 

our communities. 

 

And I think about my school that I grew up in in Mortlach, 

Saskatchewan, the Mortlach School. And we were proud to see 

how it developed really from, you know, a four-room school 

into a multi-room school as the town grew. And it continues to 

actually do well, but the demographics have changed a bit. 

 

But I think about Caswell School, where I had the pleasure to 

teach, and my kids go to school, in Saskatoon. That’s well over 

100 years old now. But it really was the centre of the 

community. It was really the centre of the community. And 

people were very proud of it, proud of their kids going to the 

school. And the kids when they graduated were proud of that 

school because it really met the needs of that community. And 

there was a sense of, let’s meet the community needs and let’s 

do this job right. Let’s do this job right. 

 

And I think when my colleague talked about this, and in fact 

even the Premier talked about . . . He has the story about — that 

he told the teachers, I think, in October at the luncheon — about 

how we should value all input in terms of how do we build 

great schools in our community. So when people come and they 

take a look . . . should we move here? Is this the kind of 

community we want to live in? They say, yes, and look at that 

school. That’s a great school, not just another one of those 

cookie-cutter schools. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we want to set the context that schools 

are important. It’s an urgent situation. We should get to work on 

it. The population is growing and more and more kids are there, 

and we should make sure we have the best schools. But this 

kind of approach, I think we can see, is just not the way to go. 

 

So I want to take a moment and take a look at the Act. I think 

it’s a well-written Act and it really speaks to how we should set 

out the process forward when it comes to making plans of how 

to build schools. 

 

I want to just take a moment to talk a bit about the preamble, 

because I think that really sets the stage. And there are six 

whereases, but let me go through them each. The first one: 

“Whereas the residents and taxpayers of Saskatchewan have a 

right to know how their money is spent.” And I just think we all 

have to agree to that. Everybody in this province has a right to 

know how their money is spent. That’s really the case, isn’t it? 

So this kind of bill sets, how will they know how their money is 

spent? Because they have a right to know how their money is 

spent. 

 

It goes on to say, 

 

Whereas it is in the best interests of residents and taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan to receive the best value for their tax 

dollars in the government procurement of Crown 

infrastructure, goods or services on their behalf. 

 

And I mean, that goes without saying. It’s a fairly obvious 

statement, but really this is, again, details. Often people use that 

code word, value for tax dollars or value for money, VFM, as 

some sort of . . . Well P3s are automatically in that camp. And 

we often say, well wait a minute, you know, we want to know 

more about that. Why is it that we seem to think that you get 

value for money from P3s automatically? Automatically. It’s an 

automatic fact. Well it’s not automatically in any circumstance. 

You have to do your due diligence and you have to get the job 

done right. And that means some bargaining and making sure 

it’s done right. 

 

So this really sets out, how will that happen? How will we 

know we’re getting the value for our tax dollars. And so this is 

why it’s so important to get that out there. That’s what we want 

to know, value for tax dollars. The next whereas says, 

 

Whereas cost savings or value for taxpayers’ money has 

not been realized or has been the subject of audit and 

dispute in other jurisdictions in public-private partnership 

projects. 

 

So it’s saying, you know, the history is not good for P3s 

particularly when it comes to school projects. And we know in 

the Maritimes or Alberta, it has a very checkered history in 

terms of even the auditor saying, you know, we need to really 

determine, are there the savings that the people are saying that 

are in favour of this kind of project? Are they really there? 

 

And again, and my colleague really went through so many 

examples of whether it’s in Edmonton or Calgary where there’s 

real questions about the savings, the cost savings or the values 

. . . you know, we have a situation in Calgary where there is 

apparently only one bidder on the contract. How can you think 

you’re getting the optimum cost savings when there’s only one 

bidder? So that’s an issue. This Act speaks to that situation 

where we might have only one bidder, actually talks about, 

minimum is three bids or else it doesn’t go ahead. Also talks 

about: 

 

Whereas public-private partnership arrangements generally 

require governments to both long-term use of a private 

facility as well as guaranteed-payment of contracts that last 

in the range of 30 years. 

 

People often don’t realize this. And when we have P3s and the 

kind of P3s that we’re talking about in this Act, these are long 

long-term commitments. And long after many of us in this 

House will be here and be gone. And people will just think, 

there goes the school. It’s up and the kids move in and it 



4162 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2013 

becomes the property of the school board. That’s not the case at 

all. That’s not the case at all.  

 

In fact the ownership could remain with a private company, and 

that causes all sorts of problems. And in fact some of them are 

kind of odd. I’m hearing stories about dilemmas about when the 

ball goes up on the roof, who gets the ball out? You know, you 

would think, well the janitor used to go up and get the ball. But 

now because it’s private property, the ball has to stay up there. 

That doesn’t make a lot of sense. Or even if you want to install 

some new wiring, because it’s private property, that may be a 

big deal. Not the school board’s property. So that’s a big, big 

issue.  

 

Another issue is, “Whereas up-front independently verified 

transparency and accountability ensure that public money is not 

used for contracts or arrangements that are kept secret from the 

public.” And this really is the crux of the matter before us, Mr. 

Speaker. We want to make sure that everything is transparent 

and accountable. 

 

We’re having this debate. We’ve had this debate about CETA, 

where, you know, we say, in principle we’re in favour. Of 

course we are. We’re a trading province. That only makes 

sense. But a good trading province makes sure that the deals are 

accountable and transparent, and that’s why we have a lot of 

questions about that deal. And we have questions about P3s. It’s 

just the way we’ve done that in Saskatchewan. It’s been our 

way of doing things. 

 

And “Whereas the Government of Saskatchewan is pursuing 

the public-private partnerships method for major capital 

projects.” So this government has really announced its intention 

to go down this road and seriously take a look at . . . And 

they’ve announced nine school projects. Now there are actually 

18. They’re joint-use schools. And so they have made a major 

commitment to this ideology without laying out the process of 

how Saskatchewan citizens will be assured that they’re going to 

get full value for their money and that it will be done in an open 

and an accountable way and there won’t be secret deals. 

 

So this bill makes a lot of sense, and I think it’s only reasonable 

that this government get behind this and say, hey, good idea. 

There’s no problem. We’ll make sure that we are transparent 

and accountable, and there will be no secret deals. So as I said, 

a vote for this is for openness and transparency. A vote against 

this is for secret deals. I don’t know how else you can frame 

this. 

 

So you know, this bill is actually fairly substantive, and I think 

that a lot of credit goes to my colleague for doing this. This is 

not a small piece, but it’s an important piece. And he talks 

about and defines what public-private partnerships are, or what 

P3s mean, and lays that out. It’s an arrangement in which: 

 

the private sector entity assumes responsibility for all or 

substantially all of at least two of the following aspects of 

the project: 

 

its design; 

its construction; 

the long-term private sector financing for its 

construction; 

the activities related to its . . . operation; 

its long-term maintenance; and 

 

at least one of the aspects of the project for which the 

private sector entity assumes responsibility is its long-term 

operation . . . [and] maintenance, or the long-term 

financing . . . [of] construction. 

 

Because as you know, Mr. Speaker, it has been the practice that 

we do engage private construction companies to build our 

schools, to build our hospitals. But this is a little different 

because there’s a long-term commitment. And whether it’s the 

ownership or it’s the maintenance or the financing, that really is 

a critical difference. And that’s where we could see problems in 

the details. And this is where we had situations in Nova Scotia 

where they, in the end, had to cancel their long-term projects 

because they were just getting too expensive. They were just 

getting too expensive. And they found that, I understand, the 

savings was about $2 million a school, that when . . . the 

remaining schools to be built. 

 

It’s good to set out, what are we really talking about? And of 

course the public sector that would be the partner would either 

be the Government of Saskatchewan or some agent of it or 

universities or any institution or body that derives its funds in 

whole or a large part from the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the other parts I want to touch on quickly is talking about 

the independent accountability. And that’s what’s really key, is 

the Public Accounts Committee of the Legislative Assembly 

shall select by unanimous vote an external consultant who will 

do an independent . . . set up an independent accountability 

mechanism for each capital project. And it talks about what are 

the steps in the preliminary analysis and public consultation, 

and then how do we go back to make sure that that’s actually 

being carried out if the P3 model is selected. 

 

So there’s a continuous accountability process right off the bat 

where we’re saying we want to make sure we keep track. We 

want to see where the anticipated value for money is. Where is 

it really happening? And we want to set up a comparator. That’s 

important. We’re not just . . . It’s not just a theory that it may 

save money, but an actual model, and that there will be actual 

check backs as it goes forward. 

 

And again, one of the sections talks about procurement laws 

and policies. And there must be a minimum of three bidders on 

all three projects, and that’s hugely important. 

 

And the reporting out is important. The Provincial Auditor’s 

powers and duties are laid out in this Act. And that’s really key 

because we know that it’s important, not just by us saying so, 

but there needs to be a credible source who verifies the 

independent auditor’s work. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m just really pleased about this Act. I think 

it’s thorough. It makes a lot of sense. And it’s in the tradition of 

this government and this province for decades that we actually 

do work in an accountable and transparent manner. 

 

And we know that we’ve seen a government that doesn’t have a 

strong record in terms of contracting out. I just have to think 

about the portables. And often they talk about it as a bundle of 



November 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4163 

portables. We think it’s the bungle of portables. And we think 

this is a real problem. 

 

And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say no 

matter if this is a way to hide debt, this is just not on because 

we know debt is debt is debt. And that’s very important. So, 

Mr. Speaker, on that note, I would like to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 605. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 605. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m., Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4139, 4141 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4139, 4141 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4139 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4139 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4139 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4139 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4140 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4140 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4140 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4140 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4140 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4141 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4141 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4141 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Green is the Colour 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4142 

 High School Football Champions 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4142 

 Celebration in Rider Nation 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4142 

 Players Carry on Weyburn Football Tradition 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4142 

 Donation Supports Power Engineering Program 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4143 

 British Parliamentarians Visit Carbon Capture and Storage Facility 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4143 

 Go Riders, Go! 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4143 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Educational Assistants and Classroom Supports 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4144 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4144 

 Cyberbullying Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4145 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4145 

 Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4145 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4145 

 Funding for Care Facilities 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4146 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4146 

 Prince Albert Bridge 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4147 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4147 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4148 

 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4149 

 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4149 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Support for Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement 

  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 4149, 4160 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4151, 4159 

  Jurgens ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4153, 4158 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4154, 4158 



 

  Cox ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4156, 4159 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4157, 4159 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4159 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4159 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4159 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4160 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 605 — The Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and Accountability Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4160 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


