




















































Hansard: November 18, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 14A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4011 

 November 18, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, a couple of guests in your gallery. One would be 

new to the Assembly, one has been here many times before. 

 

The executive director for the Regina Chamber of Commerce, 

John Hopkins, is joining us today, Mr. Speaker. And we want 

to thank him for his continued leadership in terms of the local 

economy, most recently during the P3 [public–private 

partnership] debate here in the city of Regina. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Hopkins, along with the government, is always looking for 

opportunities to welcome new investment and investors to the 

province. And that’s part of the reason why I think he is 

accompanied, at least I hope that’s the reason he’s accompanied 

today by Mr. Brock Lesnar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lesnar is well-known to people across North America and 

the world as a multi-time WWE [World Wrestling 

Entertainment, Inc.] champion, a UFC [Ultimate Fighting 

Championship] heavyweight champion, and for a time I think 

in the mid-2000s — the mid of this last decade I should say, 

’04-05 — a member of the Minnesota Vikings, Mr. Speaker. He 

has family members who are here in the province and he was at 

the state of the province address as well. Mr. Speaker, I 

remembered him walking across the room to meet me and, as I 

tweeted out, I was just glad he wasn’t carrying a chair. But 

we’re grateful for his interest in the province and for the work 

of John Hopkins and the Regina Chamber of Commerce. 

 

I’d ask members to join me in welcoming these gentlemen to 

the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to join 

with the Premier and welcome these guests to our Legislative 

Assembly. John Hopkins, always a pleasure to have you here. 

And as well, John Hopkins was recently recognized as CEO 

[chief executive officer] of the year for the chambers from 

across Canada. And of course he’s always a strong voice to 

address labour force challenges across our province and a 

strong leader for the skills and trade centre here in Regina, 

among other economic matters. 

 

It’s also interesting to introduce Mr. Brock Lesnar to the 

Saskatchewan legislature, and certainly he’s a phenomenal 

athlete and somebody for whom we’ve kept track of to some 

extent. And I understand as well that we share another interest 

and that’s he’s a fellow hunter I believe. And certainly I was 

out in the field a little bit this weekend for opening whitetail 

season here in our province. But it’s my pleasure to welcome 

Mr. Brock Lesnar to the Saskatchewan legislature. Thanks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce several guests who are among the biggest 

supporters of multiculturalism here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Seated in your gallery — it’s a little difficult for me to see, so 

perhaps they could just give a wave — in your gallery today, 

Mr. Speaker, is Rhonda Rosenberg, the executive director of 

the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. Seated with 

Rhonda are several exceptional volunteers who do great work 

with the multicultural community, Mr. Speaker. Ms. Julene 

Summerfield with the Regina Multicultural Council; I’m 

hoping Julene is here. Julene is accompanied by her husband, 

Everett Summerfield. Priya Bilkhu, also from the India Canada 

Association of Saskatchewan, Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a young lady who I met on Saturday, Julianne 

Beaudin-Herney from the Sakewewak First Nations Artist 

Collective in Regina, Mr. Speaker. Ms. Beaudin-Herney won 

the award for multicultural youth leadership at the multicultural 

honours event this past Saturday. Mr. Speaker, these are 

exceptional volunteers. These exceptional volunteers were 

recognized for their contributions at a ceremony this past 

weekend at Government House hosted by Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their efforts and the efforts of many others who 

believe a multicultural province benefits us all deserve our 

thanks. Congratulations on the well-deserved recognition and 

thank you for all your hard work to help us build a flourishing 

multicultural province. Mr. Speaker, in recognition of their 

contributions to the province, I ask that all members please join 

me in welcoming these special guests to their legislature. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming this important delegation to the 

Assembly today, Rhonda Rosenberg and all of the volunteers 

who are participating with the multiculturalism council. 

 

We as legislators often say that people in the province are the 

greatest strength. And we say it because it’s absolutely true. 

And when we have representatives from different groups here 

in the legislature bringing in other concerns from Saskatchewan 

people to this Assembly, it’s always a good thing. 

 

So I want to thank all the individuals for the work that they 

have contributed over the years and thank them for the ongoing 

work they will do in the years ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 



4012 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

through you to all members of the House, I’d like to introduce 

two people that are seated in your gallery. They are in the back 

row. The younger looking one, I think he’s done better at hair 

retention than his grandfather, is Troy Buechler. He is a grade 

10 student at Warman High School. He aspires to become a 

lawyer or study political studies. I’ve cautioned him against 

both of those career choices. But in any event, Mr. Speaker, the 

unique thing I would offer about him that, in spite of his young 

age, his age has worked against him. He’s one year too old to 

have been able to be a student at the Warman Middle Years 

School which opened last week. 

 

He is joined today, Mr. Speaker, by his grandfather, Neil 

Buechler, a Saskatoon resident who is probably no stranger to 

most of the people here. Mr. Buechler is a retiree, having 

worked his working career with Marsh Canada an insurance 

company. He is a past board member of SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] and of 

Prairieland. He’s been active in food bank and a number of 

other volunteer activities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he is down spending time with his grandson, 

as grandparents should do, but I suspect that he is available for 

other tasks of a volunteer nature. So I make that offer on his 

behalf to all of the members of the House and would ask that all 

members welcome them to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to join with the Minister of Education in welcoming Neil 

and Troy Buechler to their Legislative Assembly. I’ve known 

Mr. Buechler through his great work for the province of 

Saskatchewan through the board of SIAST a few moons ago, 

Mr. Speaker, but that work certainly continued on past my 

direct association with it and certainly a great example of the 

kind of contribution that Neil Buechler has made to this 

province. And again it’s good to see him here with his grandson 

as well sizing up the great, great horizon of opportunities that 

are here in this province. So good to see Neil and Troy 

Buechler here today at their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you it 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce the board of 

directors for the Agri-Food Council to the Legislative 

Assembly. The council is the supervisory body for the 

province’s market development agencies. The council works 

with these agencies to promote and grow the province’s 

agriculture commodities sectors. And I’d ask if they wave as I 

introduce them. 

 

Today we have with us Dr. Robert Tyler, board Chair. Dr. Tyler 

is a faculty member in the University of Saskatchewan’s 

College of Agriculture and Bioresources, focusing on food 

processing. Board Vice-Chair Murray McGillivray: Murray and 

his wife Selena operate a cow-calf and yearling operation at 

Radville, third generation livestock producers who have been 

active in livestock and ag organizations for many years. Board 

member Hubert Esquirol: Hubert operates a grain forage and 

bison farm at Meota and has been involved in various industry 

organizations. Board member Richard Lindsay: Richard is a 

third-generation farmer with his family, operates a grain farm at 

Arborfield. Board member Maurice Berry: Maurice and his 

family operate a grain, pulse, and oilseed farm at Carievale. 

 

I would like to thank the Agri-Food Council board for their 

commitment and contributions to Saskatchewan’s agriculture 

industry and ask all my colleagues to join me in welcoming 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 

behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to rise and 

welcome the members of the board to this Legislative 

Assembly and want to offer our thanks for the work that you do 

to promote agriculture in Saskatchewan and develop our 

markets elsewhere. 

 

And we know that operating a family farm and volunteering 

your time in positions like this is incredibly important to the 

agriculture industry. And so on behalf of the Legislative 

Assembly and producers in Saskatchewan, I would just like to 

extend a warm welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you, I’d like to just mention specifically some 

attention to Dr. Bob Tyler. He is a campus leader and 

recognized across the country for his work in food security. 

Essentially Bob was doing food security issues long before the 

world was turning its attention to these issues. He offers 

tremendous strength, not simply in his research but in his 

connection to industry, which is invaluable. And so I’d ask all 

members to help just offer a little bit of an extra introduction to 

Dr. Bob Tyler and special thanks to his work on food security. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I was remiss earlier on not to 

introduce some others that have joined us in your gallery as 

well. My cousins in fact, Derek and Candace Paton have joined 

us in the gallery. They’re from Medicine Hat, Alberta, for now, 

Mr. Speaker. And I’m looking forward to having a chat with 

them a little bit later on this afternoon. But I would wonder . . . 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them to this 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would just like to take the opportunity to join with 

the Minister of Agriculture and the member from Nutana in 

welcoming the Agri-Food Council members, but particularly 

Mr. Murray McGillivray from the Radville district, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I first met Murray about 10 years ago 

and got to know him a little bit better, quite a bit better, a few 

years after that, Mr. Speaker. And we just want to put on the 

record how much I’m indebted to Murray for his guidance and 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4013 

wisdom. So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Murray McGillivray to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for support of anti-bullying 

initiatives. And we know that bullying causes serious harm, and 

the consequences of bullying are devastating, including 

depression, self-harm, addictions, and suicide, and that bullying 

is a human rights issue, one of safety and inclusion. I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives 

of young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the people signing this petition come from Saskatoon and 

Yorkton. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. 

 

The petitioners point out that the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School in north central Regina is now quite 

literally falling apart and has been closed indefinitely and is no 

longer safe for students or staff. There’s an interim solution, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the old sanctuary of Sacred Heart that 

has been refurbished as a temporary gymnasium, but these 

petitioners are calling out for a permanent solution. 

 

They also point out that enrolment at Sacred Heart has 

increased by 100 students over the past four years and that 

attendance and learning outcomes are steadily improving. They 

point out that Sacred Heart Community School is the largest 

school in north central Regina, with 450 students, 75 per cent of 

whom are First Nations and Métis. And they point out, Mr. 

Speaker, that as a matter of basic fairness and common sense 

that Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym. In the 

prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause this government to immediately replace the 

gymnasium of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, 

Carievale, and Kronau. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Roughriders Vie for Grey Cup 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If one ventured 

out last evening anywhere in Saskatchewan, they likely would 

have found the streets and stores deserted. Of course it’s 

because Rider nation was watching our Roughriders trounce the 

Stampeders 35 to 13 in the western division finals in Calgary, 

just in case you hadn’t heard yet. 

 

The green and white truly dominated the game yesterday to 

bring home the win at McMahon Stadium, evidenced of course 

by the score, but by the 31 first downs to the Stamps’ 10, over 

40 minutes time of possession on the Riders’ side. And of 

course the Stampeders helped out the cause by committing 

seven turnovers. 

 

The Riders will now be playing on home turf against the 

Hamilton Ticats in the 101st Grey Cup. I know this week’s 

lead-up festivities will put all other Grey Cup parties to shame. 

As Roughrider CEO, Jim Hopson, put it: 

 

We knew it was going to be a great Grey Cup regardless of 

who was in because our fans would come out and make it 

a fun week. This just puts it over the top. It will be special 

and there won’t be a person in the province that won’t be 

connected to this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know this is a big deal for the organization, the 

players, the coaches. But, Mr. Speaker, I can’t think of a fan 

base anywhere in sports that deserves this more than the Rider 

nation, Mr. Speaker. So I ask all members of this Assembly to 

join me in wishing the Riders good luck on Sunday. We’ve 

known for a while we’re going to host the cup. Now we look 

forward to the Riders hoisting the cup this Sunday right here at 

home at Mosaic Stadium. Go Riders. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we were all watching 

yesterday as our Riders advanced to the Grey Cup with a huge 

35-13 win over the Calgary Stampeders in the west division 

final. Hamilton punched its ticket with a win earlier in the day. 

Mr. Speaker, this sets the table for the 101st Grey Cup to be a 

truly classic battle here in Saskatchewan — home field 

advantage, the last Grey Cup to be played on Taylor Field at 

Mosaic Stadium, some familiar faces with the Ticats, a rematch 

of ’89 cup opponents. Yes, this is indeed a special week and 

game for Rider nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s time to kick off the celebration with the 

opening ceremonies in the Mosaic Festival Village as we 

officially commence our 101st Grey Cup Festival Week. This 

free event welcomes all ages and will feature sport, culture, 

dance, and entertainment. We are all looking forward to 

participating in the week’s events and to know the pride of 

Rider nation will be on full display. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 101st Grey Cup Festival would not be possible 

without the support and passion of all of those festival partners 

and our team. I’d ask all members to join with me to thank and 



4014 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

recognize the festival committee and volunteers, our players, 

coaches, president, board of governors, and staff, and of course, 

every last fan for their effort in making this celebration in Rider 

nation one we won’t soon forget. 

 

And I know we’re all big Rider fans, but please, Mr. Premier, 

keep your banjo in its bag. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Bullying Awareness Week  

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to recognize Bullying Awareness Week. As we know, 

bullying is a societal issue that has tremendously harmful 

effects on our youth. 

 

Last week, I presented my report entitled Saskatchewan’s 

Action Plan to Address Bullying and Cyberbullying. And over 

the consultation process, over 1,000 Saskatchewan residents 

took the time to share their stories, experiences, and truths 

about how bullying is impacting the lives of our children and 

youth. And, Mr. Speaker, during the consultations, we heard 

over and over again that it takes a community to raise a child. 

 

Mr. Speaker, students need the support of schools and 

communities to create spaces where they feel respected and 

accepted so they can achieve to the best of their ability. We’ve 

listened to students and are working to find ways we can 

support them and develop real and relevant solutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2013 marks the 11th year of Bullying Awareness 

Week. This week is important because it recognizes that we all 

have a role to play in preventing bullying and it will take 

everyone — students, teachers, parents, schools division 

administrators, police, community organizations, and 

government — to find solutions to prevent bullying and 

cyberbullying so that our youth can learn in a safe environment. 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members to join with me in 

recognizing Bullying Awareness Week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Poetry Slam Team Places Third 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take a 

moment to recognize Brendan Flaherty, a Saskatoon Nutana 

resident and one of the organizers of Tonight It’s Poetry, a 

weekly poetry slam held at The Bassment in Saskatoon. 

 

Founded in April 2008, Tonight It’s Poetry has become a 

premiere performance destination for both Saskatchewan poets 

and those touring through the Prairies. It aims to create 

cohesion among emerging poets living in Saskatoon in a site 

that celebrates poetic and cultural diversity. 

 

I would like to congratulate Brendan and other members of 

Saskatoon’s poetry slam team from Tonight It’s Poetry for its 

third-place finish at the Canadian Festival of Spoken Word held 

in Montreal November 4th to 9th. This was the national 

festival’s 10th year and included over 40 events. Over 150 

poets graced the Montreal stages and showcases, workshops 

and panels. 

 

This year’s team, representing poets from Tonight It’s Poetry, 

was made up of Danielle Altrogge, Brent Chappell, Ahmad 

Majid, Francie Miller, and Brendan Flaherty. The team was 

coached and mentored by Charles Hamilton and Isaac Bond. 

 

I’d also like to congratulate Brendan on his recent Planet S 

award for the best Saskatoon poet. Runners-up were fellow 

Tonight It’s Poetry organizer Charles Hamilton and poet and 

performance artist Ryan Bradshaw. 

 

I ask members of this Assembly to congratulate Brendan 

Flaherty and the members of Saskatoon’s poetry slam team for 

their accomplishments and leadership in maintaining 

Saskatoon’s vibrant arts and culture scene. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford.  

 

Athlete Makes the Big League 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, not only 

has this been a great year for the Saskatchewan economy and a 

great year for our population growth, which has now eclipsed 

1.1 million people, but it has also been a great year for our 

young athletes on the international stage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recently I had the pleasure of speaking at the 

welcome home banquet for Battlefords resident Andrew Albers 

who last August fulfilled his dream of pitching in the big 

leagues. Mr. Speaker, Andrew is only the eighth player from 

Saskatchewan to make it to the bigs and the first in nearly a 

quarter century. Needless to say, everyone in The Battlefords, 

and indeed everyone in Saskatchewan, is very proud of this 

young man. 

 

Mr. Speaker, testimonials were given by several former 

teammates, former coaches, and former teachers, and the 

common thread in each of their toasts was Andrew’s 

tremendous work ethic, his perseverance, and his complete 

devotion to the game. 

 

From the time he was 10 years old, he was not only the best 

player on the team, but he was also the hardest working player, 

both at practice and in the game. Mr. Speaker, this perseverance 

paid off for Andrew as he faced setbacks with Tommy John 

surgery and subsequent rehab. He then had to become a road 

warrior, making the 30-hour drive to Florida for just a major 

league tryout. Mr. Speaker, what impressed me about this 

young athlete was his modesty, his faith, his great love and 

appreciation for his family and his community, and just his 

warm and caring attitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Andrew Albers on his accomplishments and 

thank him for being such a great role model and ambassador for 

our province, and wish him all the best as his pro career unfolds 

and then skyrockets. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4015 

Louis Riel Day Features Bell of Batoche 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

happy to rise in the House today to recognize that the famous 

bell of Batoche was the guest of honour at the Louis Riel Day 

in Saskatoon this past Saturday. Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon’s 

Métis community celebrated with city leaders at a ceremony at 

Friendship Park and then at the Central Urban Métis Federation 

Centre with fiddle music, home-cooked food, and a traditional 

lunch. 

 

Louis Riel Day celebrations were held across the country, but 

Saskatoon’s ceremony with the bell was extra special because 

the artefact is a symbol of hope and inspiration for the Métis 

community. Throughout the day, dozens of people flowed in 

and out for a chance to get up close and personal with the 

historic relic. The famous bell of Batoche was taken by soldiers 

during the North-West Resistance in 1885 and kept in 

Millbrook, Ontario until 1991 when it disappeared. The 

whereabouts of the bell remained a mystery until it was 

presented to the bishop of the diocese of Prince Albert during a 

historic mass this past July. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing Louis 

Riel Day and Saturday’s festivities in Saskatoon with the bell of 

Batoche. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

November 16th to 24th marks the 39th annual Saskatchewan 

Multicultural Week. This is a time to celebrate the rich and 

growing cultural diversity of the people of this province. To 

mark this anniversary, the Multicultural Council of 

Saskatchewan is highlighting our provincial motto “from many 

peoples, strength” to emphasize that multiculturalism enriches 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is growing and people from all over 

the world are coming here. Between 2007 and 2012, nearly 

43,000 people from 178 different countries decided to call 

Saskatchewan home. This represents a significant portion of our 

historic population increase to 1.1 million people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when these people come, they bring with them 

their unique cultures and traditions. They also bring new ways 

of thinking, a determination to succeed, and a sense of the 

possibilities Saskatchewan has to offer. They contribute to our 

growing economy and they help strengthen our ties to nations 

all over the world. This creates trade opportunities and raises 

Saskatchewan’s profile on the world stage, all contributing to 

our admired quality of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask everyone to join me in celebrating 

Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 2013. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Access to Emergency Rooms in Regina 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We learned late last 

week that the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region will likely be 

forced to reduce emergency room hours here in Regina because 

there are apparently too many patients and not enough doctors. 

And what Regina residents, Mr. Speaker — and really people 

across the province — cannot understand is how it is that an ER 

[emergency room] here in our capital city has to have its hours 

scaled back at a time when our province’s economy is strong. 

To the Premier: what is his answer to this question? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Leader 

of the Opposition for the question. This is a very important 

issue for our province and significantly here in this particular 

health region in our capital city. It’s worth noting, Mr. Speaker, 

that there is a shortage of ER docs right across North America, 

so to single out this city or this province as the only place where 

this is happening I don’t think would be fair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That notwithstanding, the issue is very important, Mr. Speaker. 

There are currently negotiations under way, so we won’t get 

into the details that go to some recruitment issues and certainly 

retention issues, Mr. Speaker. Since coming to power we’ve 

worked hard to deliver on our promise to actually have more 

doctors practising in Saskatchewan than was the case when we 

took over. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know now there are 300 more doctors 

practising in the province today. Part of that is because of 

deliberate decisions we’ve taken in terms of increasing training 

in-province. Part of it’s because we’ve expanded the number of 

countries from which we can accept foreign-trained doctors, 

Mr. Speaker, as well as aggressive recruitment and retention. 

We’re now bringing that innovative approach to bear on this 

particular issue, which is important, Mr. Speaker, and I know 

the Minister of Health and the health region is making this a top 

priority. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Regina’s two ERs should have 30 

full-time resuscitation-capable physicians on the roster. Yet 

there are just 20 ER docs available in our capital city. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these 20 physicians are going above and 

beyond in filling the shortfall that we are experiencing here in 

our capital city. In fact the VP [vice-president] of the health 

region has this to say, “It’s been a really big stress on them.” 

“They’ve been really supportive of the situations that we have, 

but we know they can’t hold out forever.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, ER docs in Regina are doing their part but this 

government isn’t doing its part. My question to the Premier: 

how did the government allow this situation to reach a crisis 

point where ER hours in our capital city are likely being scaled 

back? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the Leader of the 



4016 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

Opposition to explain what he means by the government’s not 

doing its part. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when Regina patients are told that 

they should not be going to the ER, they should instead be 

going to a family physician, Mr. Speaker, this government is 

not doing its part because people do not have access to the 

services that they expect, especially when the economy is doing 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is telling 

people to visit their family physicians instead of going to the 

ER, Mr. Speaker. But as Naomi Kral wrote in a letter to the 

paper, that’s challenging. Naomi’s letter said, “As a volunteer 

immigrant tutor for the public library, I tried to help my student 

find a doctor for her family. Boy, did I get my eyes opened!” 

Naomi found that there are only 12 clinics in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, that are actually accepting new patients. 

 

So ERs are cutting back on hours, Mr. Speaker, because of a 

shortage of doctors. Patients are told to visit their family doctor, 

Mr. Speaker, but patients can’t find a family doctor because of 

the same doctor shortage. My question to the Premier: what’s 

the government doing to address this crisis? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

was unable to answer my question because he simply doesn’t 

have an answer himself for it. The facts of the matter are this, 

Mr. Speaker: while this remains a very serious issue, the facts 

of the matter is that the ER docs in this particular city are 

funded to the tune of 26 positions; 26 positions are fully funded 

today. There are only 20 doctors practising, Mr. Speaker, and it 

speaks to a shortage that’s not just in effect here in Regina, but 

an ER doctor shortage that you could really see right across 

Canada and all over North America, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Again we ask the Leader of the Opposition what specifically is 

the government not doing, knowing that we’ve doubled the 

number of residency positions, knowing that we’ve doubled the 

number of training seats since taking office, knowing that 

we’ve expanded the number of countries from which we’ll 

accept foreign-trained doctors, Mr. Speaker, that we are 

investing resources in recruitment and retention. 

 

And with respect to ER docs in particular, we’re going to be at 

that table with innovative ways, we think, that will help deal 

with this situation in the long term. In the short term there are 

issues — there’s no question about it — that have been 

experienced here and again, as I’ve said, right across North 

America. But the fact of the matter is this. There are 26 fully 

funded positions, unfortunately only 20 doctors practising. And 

for the member to discount the fact that there are 12 clinics that 

are welcoming new patients today, I think does a disservice to 

what the health region’s trying to do. 

 

Fifteen to 20 per cent of the cases that present themselves in 

ER, according to that same doctor, could be dealt with at a 

walk-in clinic. Mr. Speaker, there’s space available there. I 

hope the Leader of the Opposition will join with us in 

encouraging people to make full use of those walk-in clinics. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that used to 

say, ready for growth. But what we’re hearing today is that 

they’re simply ready for excuses. 

 

It’s under their watch, Mr. Speaker, that the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region is likely scaling back the hours of the ER. As it 

is reported, Mr. Speaker, there ought to be about 30 ER 

physicians in Regina. There are only 20. The government is not 

doing its part in order to ensure that there are enough ER 

physicians to meet the needs of patients here in Regina. 

 

When patients are told that they shouldn’t go to an ER, Mr. 

Speaker, that is concerning, especially when the economy is 

strong. My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how many 

more ERs will see their hours and services cut back before this 

government actually addresses the problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would also point out that the 

Meadow Clinic, just across the street from the Pasqua, received 

provincial funding so we can in part deal with this situation. 

Again it’s a very important message from this legislature, 

beyond the politics we get from the Leader of the Opposition, is 

to encourage people who are seeking ER care to, if they can, 

use the health line, and then to determine whether or not they 

can be dealt with at a walk-in clinic. Again we have the health 

region estimating that 15 to 20 per cent of ER cases can be dealt 

with at a walk-in clinic. 

 

He says, what is the government doing to ensure that we 

mitigate against this problem? Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell him. We 

will, Mr. Speaker, continue to have more doctors practising 

here than ever was the case under the NDP [New Democratic 

Party]. We have 1,000 more nurses available here than we did 

under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. We’ll expand the number of 

countries from which we’d accept doctors, unlike what the 

NDP did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s what we won’t do. The NDP from ’01 to ’06, 1,160 

fewer health care workers under their regime, 450 fewer RNs 

[registered nurse] from ’01 to ’06, 173 less doctors practising 

during their last five years, 155 less pharmacists, and 95 fewer 

physios, Mr. Speaker. We’ll take no lessons from the NDP on 

this matter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we see that the Premier came 

ready for excuses today. My question to the Premier: if 

everything is as wonderful as the Premier just stated in that 

response, Mr. Speaker, why is it that the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region will likely be scaling back hours for the ERs 

here in Regina? Why is that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4017 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as is usually the case, the 

Leader of the Opposition did not come to question period with 

any answers for his own part. Mr. Speaker, again, I would state 

for the record again, and to my hon. friend, there are 26 fully 

funded positions today in terms of ER docs in Regina. The 

challenge here is a North America-wide challenge. It’s a 

national challenge in terms of the number of ER docs that are 

available, frankly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we need to do for our part as government, 

working with the health care region, is make sure that we have 

the proper negotiations, the proper deal in place. We’re going to 

work diligently at that. We need to make sure we’ve funded the 

proper complement of positions. We’ve done that. 

Unfortunately there’s a shortage. We need to make sure we’re 

looking beyond the countries that the NDP looked at when they 

were in office to determine whether or not we can have more 

foreign-trained doctors come. We’re doing that. We need to 

continue to invest in training seats to train people right here in 

the province, not just for the medical school but also for 

residency positions, Mr. Speaker. And we’re doing that. Mr. 

Speaker, those are a series of very specific actions that are 

being taken on this side of the aisle to deal with a national 

issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what solutions does that member come with to 

this Assembly, from a party that cut doctors, that cut nurses, 

and that closed 52 hospitals, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the Premier comes ready 

for excuses. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, under this 

government’s watch, the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is 

looking at scaling back the hours in the emergency rooms in our 

capital city. And this is compounded, Mr. Speaker, by the many 

scale-backs we’ve seen in rural locations under this 

government’s watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about being a North 

American problem. Well, Mr. Speaker, I thought that 

Saskatchewan can lead on these issues. I thought we could be at 

the top, Mr. Speaker. And now the Premier is using this as an 

excuse, Mr. Speaker. Why can’t we be creating a culture here in 

Saskatchewan that attracts enough emergency room physicians 

here to serve the patients’ needs? 

 

Again, my question to the Premier: if everything is as 

wonderful as he claims it is in his response, why is the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region looking at scaling back the hours of 

the ERs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

the question because we just had the Speech from the Throne 

debate in this Assembly and what was pretty clear from that 

speech is that this province is determined to lead with respect to 

the issue of ER, with the overuse of ER, with ER capacity 

issues that we experience here in Regina and across the 

province. That’s why we’re expanding Home First, Mr. 

Speaker. That is also why we’ve introduced hot-spotting in the 

Speech from the Throne. I think members were in favour of 

that. I think that member that just raised the question, that said, 

why aren’t you doing something about it, spoke in favour of 

hot-spotting. I think he did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So between the very specific initiatives to deal with the issue 

now, between those, between those real measures and the fact 

that this government has spent six years fixing the mess left by 

that member and his party that cut doctors, cut nurses, and 

closed hospitals, between those two things, I’m hoping in the 

next question the Leader of the Opposition will stand up and 

say, well that’s actually pretty good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

School Infrastructure 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, existing education 

infrastructure in our province requires a lot of attention. There’s 

demand for new schools and huge need for renovations and 

repairs to existing schools. But the government isn’t holding up 

its end of the deal. They have no plan or commitment to repair 

the schools we need. 

 

In a report published by the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association, school boards said major changes are needed to 

the way government funds infrastructure renewal. One school 

board in the report said, “The current level of funding is not 

sufficient, contributing to an infrastructure deficit.” 

 

To the minister: why does that government not have a 

long-term plan to address the infrastructure deficit in our 

schools? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve got a relatively good 

answer for the question. During our time in office, we’ve built 

20 brand new schools, 23 major renovations and additions, 900 

smaller capital projects. Over 65 per cent of all schools have 

seen upgrades and improvements. And, Mr. Speaker, most 

importantly, we’ve announced nine new joint-use schools 

which is the equivalent of 18 separate schools. Mr. Speaker, 

what more could the members want than that for a long-term 

plan? We are doing it and doing it now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that answer entirely 

dismisses the reality of school boards across Saskatchewan. 

According to the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association], 75 per cent of roofing systems in our province’s 

schools will fail in just the next five years. Let me repeat that 

because it’s astonishing. Three-quarters of the schools’ roofs 

will fail in the next five years. Currently that government has 

no plan on this front. To the Education minister: what is this 

government’s plan to address this urgent need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 



4018 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

opposite that by announcing the joint-use schools, it has had the 

effect of catapulting Sacred Heart School to the top of the 

capital priority list. Mr. Speaker, that’s something that is 

important for all of us. They’re using a temporary facility. We 

very much want to see that rectified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of the issues that exist in our 

province. We inherited a $1.2 billion deficit in capital in our 

school system when we took government. In our first six years 

in government, we did more than the opposition did in 16 years. 

We have increased infrastructure spending, Mr. Speaker, by 

some 264 per cent since we’ve been in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the very first money that we allocated 

was towards completing projects. Mr. Speaker, over 70 per cent 

of the schools in our province are at least 40 years old. We’re 

making up for years and years of neglect but one of the best 

ways we can do that is by building new schools, and we’re 

doing it. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we proceed, we’re getting a little bit 

of argy-bargy here on either side. And just tone it down please, 

a little. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — For that minister to seriously suggest 

that somehow if the public wants schools repaired that they’re 

going to have to accept private schools as the only option is 

nonsense and an entire false choice to the people of this 

province. 

 

Many school divisions have major concerns about this 

government’s approach to existing education infrastructure. The 

South East Cornerstone Public School Division’s director of 

education says, “As we learn more about the capital funding 

model, I get quite concerned as to how small urban and rural 

boards are going to get a piece of the construction, maintenance 

pie.” He also says, “So far we haven’t seen a lot of transparency 

in regards to how the funding is calculated so we just keep on 

asking.” 

 

To the Education minister: when will this government bring 

forward a transparent, long-term capital asset plan for our 

students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of 

transparency and openness when we had the media at a school 

adjacent to the Leader of the Opposition’s riding so that we 

could announce a new joint-use school facility in that area. Mr. 

Speaker, that was a lot of openness and accountability. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the members opposite that 

there is a lot of public support and a lot of school board support. 

And I want to read a little bit about that, Mr. Speaker, regarding 

the announcement. “To say that I am pleased to be here today 

for this announcement would be a serious, serious 

understatement” — Saskatoon Public School Board Chair, Ray 

Morrison. Vicky Bonnell, Chair, Regina Catholic, “As long as 

we have schools to accommodate our students’ needs, we’re 

happy.” Mr. Speaker, Larry Pavloff, board Chair, Prairie Spirit 

School Division in his scrum said, “We are very happy to hear 

this announcement.” 

Mr. Speaker, we’re very pleased with where we’re going on the 

new schools. Better than the 176 that the members over there 

closed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 

weighed in on this in her most recent report. The auditor found 

that “The Ministry of Education did not have effective capital 

asset planning processes for facilities to house and support 

educational programs and instructional services for students in 

school divisions.” 

 

And with three-quarters of the schools’ roofs failing over the 

next five years and a whole range of other urgent repairs 

needed, this government has to stop delaying meaningful 

action. The government needs to establish an effective capital 

asset plan and repair schools in need. To the Education 

minister: when will this government do just that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we go through a budget 

cycle every year. The members opposite should stay tuned to 

see with that. They’ll know that because of the P3 

announcement that was made earlier, that a lot of the things that 

were further down the list all of a sudden will magically have 

risen to the top. And I ask the members opposite just to wait 

and see. This is far better than when they were in government 

when we inherited a $1.2 billion deficit. 

 

The school roofs that they’re talking about failing, the failure 

means that they’re likely to leak. We do not want to see that 

happen either, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you because of the 

announcements that we’ve made, there’s every likelihood that 

we’ll be able to address some of those things in the next budget. 

And I would urge those members to wait for that and see where 

things go. And I’d also like to urge them to come out when we 

announce joint-use facilities because, Mr. Speaker, their 

constituents will be happy with that as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister was quoting some people 

here today. We’ll also quote some people that’s representing all 

the school divisions in the province, that being Janet Foord, the 

president of the SSBA. And Janet Foord says: 

 

We can’t continue to react to growth pressures in the 

province. We must become more proactive by developing 

a long-term plan to ensure students have safe, healthy, and 

vibrant learning communities now and into the future. 

 

We don’t see any plan from this government. The reason the 

SSBA is issuing that statement is there’s no plan and no 

commitment from that government. When individual school 

boards, when the Provincial Auditor, when teachers and 

students and families say that education in the province is being 

neglected, that government can’t simply stubbornly dismiss 

those concerns. 

 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4019 

To the Education minister: when will this government bring 

forward a long-term capital asset plan for education that builds 

and repairs the schools this province needs and that students 

deserve? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just ask the member to 

read the newspaper and keep an eye on the TV. It’s been an 

ongoing thing for quite a while. We have built, since we formed 

government, 20 new schools. We’ve announced nine new joint 

school facilities. The members opposite closed 176 schools. Mr. 

Speaker, since we formed government, we have spent $600 

million in education capital, a 264 per cent increase over the 

NDP. Mr. Speaker, over 65 per cent of the schools have seen a 

major upgrade since 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re not going to be taking any lessons from the members 

opposite. We’re going to be going forward and we’re going to 

be doing what the citizens and students of our province need. 

We’re building new schools. We’re repairing new schools. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no lessons from the members over 

there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Combatting Bullying and Provision of Information 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday the 

government released its anti-bullying report, and after reading 

it, we welcome some progress in certain areas. Six months ago 

the Premier had a difficult time even saying the word gay. And 

now we have the government release a report that includes 

some discussion about gay-straight alliances. So that’s a good 

thing. 

 

But the general consensus on this report, it’s far too light on 

details and far too light on action. To the Education minister: 

why are there so few immediate steps being taken by this 

government to combat bullying and cyberbullying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I take the issue of bullying 

very seriously on this side of the House, both cyberbullying, its 

impact on our students, and on the facilitation of GSAs 

[gay-straight alliance] right across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

and we hope the NDP do as well. 

 

I’m in receipt of this letter that I think was sent to you, Mr. 

Speaker, where the NDP are raising a point of privilege on this 

particular issue. Mr. Speaker, the facts around this case are 

interesting. They’re saying that because the report was released 

at a school in Regina, that the privilege of members opposite 

have been violated in terms of accessing the information even 

though the critic who was just on his feet knows full well that 

the minister phoned him the night before, offered him a private 

briefing, offered him a copy of the document, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition will clarify what kind 

of an outfit are they running over there, Mr. Speaker, when that 

offer was made to NDP members on the opposite side and then 

the next day, the next business day of the House, to play 

politics, they raise a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

cyberbullying is a major problem in our province, and yet this 

government simply says it will assess the implications of 

upcoming federal cyberbullying legislation. Other provinces 

have taken this issue seriously and have brought in their own 

cyberbullying legislation. When we raised this issue last 

November, the former minister of Education said he’d been 

monitoring other jurisdictions and released public reports on 

what they found. Mr. Speaker, it’s been a full year and yet this 

government has taken so little action. 

 

To the minister: why, over a year later, has this government 

done so little to actually address bullying and cyberbullying in 

this legislature? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, cyberbullying is 

something that we should take seriously, more seriously than 

other types of bullying because it’s particularly insidious. It’s a 

type of thing that follows a student home. A student can be 

cyberbullied while in their bedroom, while in what should be 

the comfort and security of their own home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Justice has met with his federal 

counterpart and counterparts from other parts of the country, 

and we are working with them towards establishing appropriate 

federal legislation. Mr. Speaker, this is the type of things that 

falls within the federal criminal purview, and we look forward 

to seeing how it fits with the processes and procedures that 

we’re following in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise that there are steps that we are taking 

that will dovetail well with that, and we look forward to 

working with the federal government to have something that’s 

appropriate and meets the needs of our students well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

government’s report acknowledges that over half the young 

people that identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual seriously 

consider suicide. Around 37 per cent of young people that 

identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual have actually attempted 

suicide. 

 

And while we welcome the fact that this government finally 

recognizes the value of gay-straight alliances — or at least the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview does — we had certainly 

hoped to see concrete help for establishing GSAs in schools. To 

the Education minister: what is the government planning to do 

to actually implement GSAs in our schools? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We want to 

ensure that the availability of gay-straight alliances are 



4020 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

available in all schools in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and, you know, we’re confident that that’s the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I misspoke earlier on with respect to my 

comments on the NDP frankly playing some political games on 

this very important issue on the question of privilege. Mr. 

Speaker, my understanding is it wasn’t a phone call but rather 

there was a face-to-face discussion between the Minister of 

Education and the critic who just spoke on Wednesday of last 

week, where there was an offer for a full disclosure of what was 

in the plan, and I think even a meeting with officials so that he 

and therefore all of his colleagues would have access to it. Mr. 

Speaker, he knew that, and still this day the Leader of the 

Opposition authorizes a motion of privilege to play games with 

the issue, to say, well members over there didn’t have 

information before it hit the public and before it was raised at 

Arcola School, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is going on over there? Who is providing leadership? Mr. 

Speaker, this is an important issue for the province. What we 

don’t need is NDP political games, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that when we’re 

talking about something as serious as gay-straight alliances, 

talking about suicides of youth, Mr. Speaker, attempted 

suicides, that we’re entering into a discussion here about what 

House leaders sort out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all members of the Assembly have the right to 

have information as it is shared so that everyone can do their 

jobs, Mr. Speaker. House leaders will carry on this discussion 

through the points of privilege, Mr. Speaker, but my point is, 

these are serious matters, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’re 

asking the serious questions on behalf of youth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these are very serious issues. 

And what we do not need is the NDP opposition playing games 

with motions in the Assembly. The Leader of the Opposition’s 

right, Mr. Speaker. In fact the Minister of Education offered all 

of the specifics to the critic on Wednesday before. The Leader 

of the Opposition’s relatively new as a leader in this Assembly. 

Mr. Speaker, someday I think he’ll learn that at some point in 

the life of this job — and I have certainly done it — you just 

have to stand up and apologize, apologize that these were the 

wrong tactics, apologize that they minimized the important 

issue of bullying in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Provision of Information 

 

The Speaker: — At 10:55 a.m. today, in accordance with rule 

12(1), the Opposition House Leader gave notice that he 

proposed to raise a question of privilege. I thank the member 

for providing notice pursuant to the new privilege rules. 

 

In his case, the Opposition House Leader stated that at 

approximately 8 a.m. on the morning of Thursday, November 

the 14th, 2013, Executive Council staff provided members of 

the media with embargoed copies of Saskatchewan’s Action 

Plan to Address Bullying and Cyberbullying prepared by the 

member for Saskatoon Eastview and Legislative Secretary to 

the Minister of Education responsible for the anti-bullying 

initiative. However the opposition was not provided a copy of 

the report until the press conference held at Arcola Community 

School on the afternoon of Thursday, November the 14th, 2013. 

The decision not to also provide a copy of the report to the 

opposition, in the opinion of the Opposition House Leader, 

constitutes a breach of members’ parliamentary privilege. 

 

The basis of the member’s case are rulings by Speaker 

Kowalsky in Saskatchewan on April the 11th, 2005, and 

Speaker Milliken of the House of Commons made March 19th, 

2001. Speaker Milliken found that the denial of members or 

their staff to an embargoed technical briefing for media on a bill 

constituted a prima facie contempt of parliament. The ruling on 

October the 11th, 2005 by Speaker Kowalsky found that 

previous Speakers had consistently ruled that the denial of 

information members need to do their work, while at the same 

time providing such information to the media, was not an 

acceptable practice. 

 

In Saskatchewan, Speakers have admonished the government 

for releasing bills to the public before their introduction to the 

Assembly, although infractions were not considered a breach of 

privilege. In Speaker Kowalsky’s ruling, he stated that whether 

it is a bill or a report, the principles remain the same. That 

principle is that nothing should be done that disadvantages or 

impedes members from carrying out their parliamentary 

functions. Speaker Kowalsky’s ruling was supported by 

Speaker Milliken who ruled on March 19th, 2011 that the 

practice of media lock-ups and embargoed technical briefings, 

whether they be on bills, budgets, or auditor general reports, are 

successful and useful when members and their staff are given 

access. 

 

Given the ruling by Speaker Kowalsky in this House and 

Speaker Milliken’s ruling in the House of Commons, I find that 

when embargoed papers are provided to the media in advance 

of release to the public, these documents must be provided on 

the same embargoed basis to the opposition. The advanced 

release of the embargoed papers must occur so that members 

have the same opportunity to better understand and respond to 

the issues. 

 

The Opposition House Leader has made a sufficient case for me 

to find a prima facie case of breach of privilege. Before 

recognizing the Opposition House Leader, I would also like to 

draw your attention to the new rules relating to privilege. First I 

will recognize the Opposition House Leader and invite him to 

outline his case and, at the end of his remarks, move his motion. 

 

I would also like to note that pursuant to rule 12(6), there is 

now time limits on debate on the motion of privilege: 

 

The mover of the motion shall speak for not more than one 

hour, and is permitted 15 minutes to close debate; and 

 

No other Member shall speak for more than 45 minutes. 

 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4021 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the Government House Leader’s 

point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I believe in past practice 

the government has the opportunity to put on the record their 

own position prior to the Speaker making a finding on an issue 

of such gravity. 

 

I haven’t even had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to put the 

government’s arguments on the record as to why this shouldn’t 

be a prima facie case. I can’t think of any, any situation in the 

past where a government or opposition have not had an 

opportunity to make their submissions to the Speaker prior to 

him making a decision. This would be akin to in a court of law 

only having one side of the argument put onto the table and the 

judge rendering a decision without the defence being able to put 

their case forward. 

 

I think it’s completely inappropriate, frankly, Mr. Speaker. And 

I think this is something that’s very much unprecedented. 

 

The Speaker: — Under rule 12(4) of the new rules that were 

just adopted by this House: 

 

12(4) The Speaker shall determine if a prima facie case of 

privilege has been established but, without unreasonable 

delay, may defer the decision to another sitting day. The 

Speaker shall advise the Assembly thereof by making a 

statement at the conclusion of Routine Proceedings and 

before Orders of the Day. 

 

12(5) When a prima facie case of privilege has been 

established, the Member who raised the case shall move 

the question of privilege motion, and it shall be taken into 

consideration immediately. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What’s the Government House Leader’s point 

of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, when you read those 

rules — and I’m very familiar with them; I, with the Opposition 

House Leader, helped draft them — those rules don’t preclude 

the Speaker recognizing the Government House Leader and the 

Opposition House Leader or any other member prior to 

rendering a decision on whether it’s a prima facie case. 

 

The fact that Mr. Speaker has seen fit to do so I think is entirely 

inappropriate. And like I said, akin in a court of law to having 

one side of the argument laid on the table with the defence 

having no opportunity to put forward a case. This is contrary to 

the entire traditions of our system, of our parliament, of our 

legislature. It flies in the face of centuries of tradition, Mr. 

Speaker, and I can’t see how it would have been inappropriate 

for me or my colleague opposite to put their arguments on the 

table as to why this is a prima facie case in the House. 

 

You rendered a decision on the basis of a letter which was 

never tabled in this Assembly, submitted to you by the 

opposition, with me having seen it about an hour beforehand 

and having prepared arguments to put on the table as to refute 

the arguments put forward. I think this is entirely inappropriate 

and contrary to the entire traditions of this Assembly. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader on the point of 

order. The debate which will take place is the government’s 

opportunity to answer the charge by the opposition. That’s the 

way the rules are laid out. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the Government House Leader’s 

point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I ask for leave of the Assembly to put 

on the table the government’s arguments as to why this is not a 

prima facie case, and for the Speaker to then re-examine his 

decision on the basis of having both sides before him prior to 

making a determination. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to present a case against the proposition by the 

Opposition House Leader of a motion of privilege. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 

like to thank my colleagues opposite as well for allowing me to 

put forward these submissions, and hopefully for the Speaker to 

re-examine his decision in light of the submissions that we’re 

making. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that if you review the 

case you will find that members’ privilege has not been 

breached and a prima facie case does not exist. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Action Plan to Address Bullying and 

Cyberbullying was a report from the Legislative Secretary 

making recommendations to the Minister of Education 

regarding an anti-bullying plan. Mr. Speaker, the transmittal 

letter on page 3 of Saskatchewan’s Action Plan to Address 

Bullying and Cyberbullying clearly states that this report was 

for the minister’s consideration. To quote from the letter, and I 

quote: 

 

To: Hon. Don Morgan, Q.C. 

Minister of Education 

 

From Jennifer Campeau, MLA 

Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education, 

Responsible for the Anti-Bullying Initiative 

 

The letter of transmittal concludes by saying, “I humbly submit 

our findings and our recommendations to you,” meaning the 

minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that members’ privilege does not extend 



4022 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

outside of the Assembly to reports of executive government or 

to ministerial advice. This has been the understanding for 

centuries in Westminster parliaments. This report is clearly 

property of the member for Saskatoon Fairview which was 

provided to the Minister of Education. The fact that these two 

members decided to share the report with media is irrelevant in 

this case because it was not a report to the Assembly. 

 

In the Opposition House Leader’s notice of this question of 

privilege, he references a ruling from March 19th, 2001. This 

case references a technical briefing on legislation that was to be 

tabled in the House of Commons. I would like to quote from 

Speaker Milliken’s statement on the March 19, 2001 case that 

the member opposite references: “However, with respect to 

material to be placed before parliament, the House must take 

precedence.” I stress his words: “to be placed before 

parliament.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this item has not and will not appear on the Orders 

of the Day or the agenda of this legislature. This is not a report 

to be placed before the legislature. By raising this point of 

privilege, the member opposite is attempting to extend 

members’ privileges outside of this Assembly into the realm of 

executive government. Mr. Speaker, this is not how our system 

works. 

 

Further than that, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier referenced, I’m 

told that the member from Saskatoon Centre was verbally 

offered a briefing on the material by the Minister of Education 

on Wednesday, November the 13th and that he declined. What 

was the minister to do, Mr. Speaker? Was he to hand him, make 

him take the report? I just don’t see how that could be possible. 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is important to note: although the 

minister was not required to provide a briefing to the 

opposition, the member was offered a briefing and he declined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe in cases of legislation, annual reports, 

or any business that is to be placed before this Assembly, it is 

imperative that members’ privilege is respected. Because this 

was a report to the minister and not business before the 

Assembly, and because the member from Saskatoon Centre was 

offered a briefing on the material by the Minister of Education, 

I firmly believe that the member’s privilege has been respected. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to thank the Government House 

Leader for his comments, and I would like to refer him to 

Speaker Milliken’s ruling of March the 19th, 2011 regarding 

the practice of media lock-ups and embargoed technical 

briefings, whether they are bills, budgets, or auditor general’s 

reports. 

 

The ability of members to carry out their functions in the 

Assembly is relevant whether they have the information. The 

question of whether or not a member was offered is to be 

determined here in this Assembly. That’s what the question is 

about. 

 

I maintain my earlier position that a prima facie case, based on 

the evidence presented by the opposition, is in place. This does 

not judge whether or not their case is valid, but rather whether 

or not there is a question that needs to be determined here. And 

I rule that there is a question to be determined, and I recognize 

the Opposition House Leader. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

remarks this afternoon will be relatively brief. This is a 

straightforward case and the remedy is simple. The government 

needs to respect the rights and privileges of all members of this 

Assembly, and that means, going forward, this government 

should commit to ensure that official opposition members and 

staff are privy to any and all embargoed information provided 

to members of the news media. And members on that side of 

the House have argued this very point in the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Southeast seconded a motion 

regarding a point of privilege on April 11, 2005. In that debate 

the member said: 

 

This goes to the very fundamentals of our democratic 

process, Mr. Speaker. And I think if the members opposite 

step back and just consider who is paying for this, they 

would give it some thought and they would say, 

absolutely. As soon as we’re going to give it to the media, 

we should give it to the members opposite. They sign the 

embargo agreement the same way that the media does, and 

deal with it in the same fashion. 

 

And he also said: 

 

It’s imperative that all of us as MLAs are going to have . . . 

full, complete, frank, and open access to all information 

that’s prepared by . . . [and] for any government official 

when it’s being presented to the media. 

 

Those are the words of the current Minister of Education, the 

member for Saskatoon Southeast, from page 2456 of Hansard 

from April 11th, 2005. Those same words could apply to the 

situation before us today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last Thursday, November 14th, 2013, Executive Council staff 

provided members of the media with embargoed copies of 

Saskatchewan’s Action Plan to Address Bullying and 

Cyberbullying prepared by the MLA for Saskatoon Fairview in 

her role as the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of 

Education responsible for the anti-bullying initiative. Yet the 

official opposition was not provided a copy of that report until 

the press conference held at Arcola Community School later 

that afternoon. By doing that, by denying members of this 

Assembly access to the same kind of information in a timely 

way as is provided to the media, the actions of Executive 

Council staff members constitute contempt of this Legislative 

Assembly. I quote from Speaker Milliken’s ruling from March 

19th, 2001: 

 

The issue of denying members information that they need 

to do their work has been the key consideration for the 

Chair in reviewing this particular question of privilege. To 

deny to members information concerning business that is 

about to become before the House, while at the same time 

providing such information to media that will likely be 

questioning members about that business, is a situation the 

Chair cannot condone. 

 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4023 

We know that the Speaker found a prima facie breach of 

privilege in that case. The matter was debated in the House and 

it was referred to the Standing Committee on Procedure and 

House Affairs which reported as follows, and again I quote: 

 

The major difficulty in this case arises from the fact that 

the pre-introduction briefing was offered exclusively to 

representatives of the media. Not only were members of 

the House of Commons not offered or invited to such a 

briefing, their staff was explicitly denied entry to the 

technical briefing that was given. Members were therefore 

predisposed to disadvantage and embarrassment in that 

they could be questioned about business to come before 

the House or be just introduced without being provided the 

same information as those asking them had. 

 

The committee’s report went on to say: 

 

Such an action impedes, obstructs, and disadvantages . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There seems to be a fair number of 

members who wish to enter the debate. If you wish, I can keep 

track of a list for you and invite you to speak later, but please 

let the current member on his feet have his debate. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To return to the 

quote from the committee’s report. It stated: 

 

Such an action impedes, obstructs, and disadvantages 

Members of Parliament in carrying out their parliamentary 

functions. In all of these circumstances, the Committee has 

come to the inescapable conclusion that the privileges of 

the House and of its Members have been breached in this 

case. 

 

The case that we have before us this afternoon is highly similar 

to the particular case out of Ottawa. I’m sure that all members 

will agree with me, especially after listening to the words of the 

current Minister of Education from 2005, that it is unacceptable 

to provide embargoed information to the media but not to 

members of this Assembly. And I’m sure that all members will 

also agree with me that it is imperative to remedy this situation 

and to have government make a public commitment to ensure 

that official opposition members and staff are provided with the 

same access to information that is provided to the members of 

news media. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly finds Executive Council staff members 

in contempt of the Legislative Assembly in that they failed 

to provide the official opposition with the same access as 

the media to the report entitled Saskatchewan’s Action 

Plan to Address Bullying and Cyberbullying; and 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to respect the 

rights and privileges of all members of this Assembly by 

ensuring that official opposition members and their staff 

are privy to any and all such embargoed information 

provided to the members of the news media. 

 

I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 

some degree of sorrow that I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Just a second. I forgot to read the motion. It 

has been moved by the Opposition House Leader: 

 

That this Assembly finds Executive Council staff members 

in contempt of the Legislative Assembly in that they failed 

to provide the official opposition with the same access as 

the media to the report entitled Saskatchewan’s Action 

Plan to Address Bullying and Cyberbullying; and  

 

That this Assembly urge the government to respect the 

rights and privilege of all members of this Assembly by 

ensuring that official opposition members and their staff 

are privy to any and all such embargoed information 

provided to the members of the news media. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

speak to two elements on this very briefly. Firstly on process, 

you, Mr. Speaker, referenced the new privilege rules which we 

put in place. I’ve reviewed them again and, as I mentioned in 

my previous remarks, along with the Opposition House Leader, 

I drafted these rules. Nowhere in these rules does it indicate that 

the Speaker can’t hear submissions on whether he’s going to 

make a prima facie finding of privilege. This is one of the most 

serious matters you can have in front of the House, and to not 

be able to provide a submission, from a purely process point of 

view, I think is absolutely wrong, absolutely contrary to the 

spirit of how we operate in this Assembly, contrary to the spirit 

of hundreds of years of traditions. 

 

This is a big deal, Mr. Speaker. And how we were not able to 

make our case prior to the decision being rendered, I think is 

frankly inexcusable. I have never seen that in any other 

parliament. I’ve never heard of that occurring in any other 

parliament. You look at kind of the underpinnings of how our 

legal system work — which frankly this is a court of law in 

addition to being a place for debate — parties that are either 

charged or brought before a court have an opportunity to defend 

themselves. That is an absolute cornerstone of our system, and 

not being able to do that I think is a travesty. 

 

[14:45] 

 

In terms of the substance of the ruling, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre was offered a briefing. He was offered this 

the day prior to the report being released. What are we 

supposed to do, Mr. Speaker, if the opposition don’t avail 

themselves of the opportunity? The precedent that’s been set is 

essentially that any report that’s going to be publicly released, if 

they don’t agree to get the briefing in advance, then we can’t 

release it. It’s a question of privilege. This is a very, very 

dangerous road that we have embarked upon here. 

 

And secondly, on the substance of the motion . . . or substance 

of the decision, to have the extension of members’ privileges 



4024 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

recognized into the realm of executive government — meaning, 

what if a deputy minister writes a report to a minister? We have 

to tell the opposition that? — is that what the ruling is? I mean 

we’ve been very careful in crafting walls between the 

executive, the legislative, and the judicial, and we’ve struck that 

balance. And I don’t just mean us in this Assembly. I mean our 

predecessors who have sat here, who have sat in Westminster, 

who have sat in the House of Commons and found that balance 

between the legislative, the executive, and the judicial. This 

ruling today greatly upsets that balance. What the Speaker has 

ruled is that the privileges of members are now deemed to 

extend deep into the realm of executive government, contrary to 

literally hundreds of years of development of our system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this ruling was wrong, absolutely wrong, 

creates an incredibly dangerous precedent going into the future, 

not to mention the process aspect which I’ve already talked 

about. I have very, very serious concerns about this. And like I 

said, Mr. Speaker — it pains me to say this; I have great respect 

for you — but I think you got this one wrong. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier and the Government House Leader ought to check their 

facts before they put out specific claims. The Minister of 

Education offered to tell me a few details about the report. That 

was at 4:25 on Wednesday afternoon. It was not a briefing, and 

it was not a copy of the report. The minister simply said he 

would share a few broad details with me, as we often do behind 

the bar. And many of us do that as a collegial thing on the floor 

here, but it certainly did not meet the requirements of the 

government to provide equal information to the opposition as it 

does to the media. 

 

So this is a straightforward case and the remedy is simple. The 

government needs to respect the rights and privileges of all 

members of the Assembly. This means going forward this 

government should commit to ensure that official opposition 

members and staff are privy to any and all embargoed 

information provided to members of the news media. 

 

And the members on that side of the House have argued this in 

the past. The member for Saskatoon Southeast seconded a 

motion regarding a point of privilege on April 11th, 2005. In 

that debate the member said, and I quote: 

 

This goes to the very fundamentals of our democratic 

process, Mr. Speaker. And I think if the members opposite 

step back and just consider who is paying for this, they 

would give it some thought and they would say, 

absolutely. As soon as we’re going to give it to the media, 

we should give it to the members opposite. They sign the 

embargo agreement the same way that the media does, and 

deal with it in this same fashion. 

 

And he also said, and I quote: 

 

It’s imperative that all of us as MLAs are going to have . . . 

full, complete, frank, and open access to all information 

that’s prepared by or for any government official when it’s 

being presented to the media. 

 

These are the words of the current Minister of Education, the 

member for Saskatoon Southeast, from page 2456 of Hansard 

from April 11th, 2005. These same words apply to this situation 

that we have before us today. To offer an informal chat is not 

the same as an embargoed briefing. The Minister of Education 

ought to know that, and the Premier ought to know that, and the 

Executive Council staff ought to know that as well, Mr. 

Speaker. So I will be supporting the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve heard the member’s opposite remarks and comments and 

don’t wish to take a great deal of exception with the facts. But I 

can tell the House, Mr. Speaker, that over the last number of 

weeks, I had had discussions here or there with the member 

opposite about where we might go or what we might do with 

the bullying issue, it being a very important issue to all 

members of the House. 

 

I made a point of going over there knowing full well that we 

would be releasing the report the following day. I asked the 

member what he wanted to talk about or would he want to have 

discussion with it. He said he wanted to have no discussion 

about it. I knew at that point in time, Mr. Speaker, that it was 

the member’s intention to raise the issue again at question 

period the following day, which in fact he did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to be quite blunt, you can’t have it both ways. 

You can’t sit and say, I wish to have all the information, but 

then that I don’t wish to have it so that I can raise the matter in 

question period. Mr. Speaker, at that point in time, I contacted 

my staff and indicated that the member opposite did not wish to 

have a further meeting, further discussions with it, and that we 

could anticipate the matter coming up in question period the 

following day. 

 

I had indicated to the member opposite that the report was 

going to be released the following day. I did not, Mr. Speaker 

— and maybe it is to my error — did not say, would you like to 

have an embargoed copy the following morning? I took it at 

that point in time that it was full stop — the member did not 

wish anything else on it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to clarify a couple of things I think that 

. . . not only for the members in this Assembly but also for 

people that are probably watching this debate and are 

wondering what is really going on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had mention of previous rulings by 

Speakers, both here in this Assembly and by a Speaker in the 

House of Commons. Mr. Speaker, in both cases, there is 

reference to report, a report. The report is always, Mr. Speaker, 

a report that has to be laid before the Assembly on the 

Speaker’s table or the Clerk’s table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Hansard of April 11, 2005 — and the 

members opposite have made reference to this — and this is 

right directly from Hansard, it says, “Earlier today, SaskWater 

officials were holding an embargoed technical briefing on the 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4025 

2004 annual report for members of the news media.” That’s the 

end of the first quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s a report that has to be tabled in this Assembly. It goes 

on, Mr. Speaker, to say: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the official opposition sent a staff member to 

that technical briefing, requesting that they be in 

attendance, and a member of Executive Council told him 

he was prohibited from attending at the meeting. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that in Speaker Kowalsky’s ruling, 

we have a report that was to be laid before the Assembly, and a 

member of the opposition was not allowed to see it at the same 

time as the media. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the case of the federal parliament when Speaker 

Milliken ruled, he says this. I would like to quote from Speaker 

. . . And I’m going to quote from Speaker Milliken’s statement 

on the March 19th, 2001, case that the member opposite has 

referenced: “However, with respect to material to be placed 

before parliament, the House must take precedence.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s pretty clear language. That’s pretty clear 

language that says if there is a report . . . And he goes on to use 

the word report as you have, Mr. Speaker, in your ruling that 

says, that the report. In all cases, Mr. Speaker, these reports are 

reports that have to be placed on the table here in the 

Legislative Assembly, both provincially and federally. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to go beyond that to deal with reports, as my 

colleague has indicated, where we have reports prepared by a 

deputy minister, by someone else, that are directly to the 

minister, that have . . . will not be laid on the desk, that will not 

be tabled in this Assembly, to extend this now to every report 

including this one . . . I mean I think the Minister of Education 

followed a process of saying, listen, we want you to understand 

what’s in this report. And on the day before, he puts the 

information before the member opposite to say, do you really 

want this? The member chose not to. Didn’t have to do that, 

Mr. Speaker, didn’t have to do that because this is not a report 

that is to be put before this Legislative Assembly. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think you have to consider that in terms of dealing 

with whether or not this indeed was a prima facie case. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, your prima facie ruling this 

afternoon and the point raised today goes to the heart of what it 

means to be a member of the legislature. And so the previous 

minister who just made some comments here, and the House 

Leader of the government earlier, goes to some of the technical 

issues around the documents. But the real issue, Mr. Speaker, is 

the fact that we as legislators have a job to do in this place. And 

there is a fundamental rule which has been developed over the 

decades that says that when you give information to the media 

in an embargoed fashion, it should immediately trigger that you 

should give that to the members of the legislature — all 

members. It doesn’t just mean opposition. It means all members 

in this place. And, Mr. Speaker, that fundamental point is the 

issue today, and I thank you for your prima facie ruling on that 

point. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader for 

closing remarks, no more than 15 minutes. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

invoking my right to close debate, as per the rules, I just want to 

point out a couple of things. I’d attach myself to the comments 

made by the Opposition Deputy House Leader who’s talked 

about points raised by the Minister of Finance, the Deputy 

Leader of the government, and by my respected colleague, the 

Government House Leader, who have both said a variation of 

the same thing which is: if a government official is going to 

brief a minister, then if this ruling is found that that will 

somehow trigger the need to provide an embargoed briefing or 

some kind of briefing to a member of the opposition, to a 

member of this Legislative Assembly, that is clearly not what is 

under consideration here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

What is under consideration is whether or not, if an embargoed 

briefing is being afforded to the members of the media, which 

again in terms of informed comment and making sure that the 

media can do their job, well surely to goodness that same 

courtesy, that same privilege, Mr. Speaker, should be afforded 

to the members of this Legislative Assembly whose job it is, if 

you’re in the opposition benches, first and foremost is to hold 

that government to account. 

 

And again in terms of the words that we’ve referenced on the 

record from 2005 from the Minister of Education in terms of 

what that individual said about making sure that work that is 

prepared for the government and ensuring that if it’s going forth 

in an embargoed briefing that that same privilege should be 

afforded to members of this Legislative Assembly, we stand 

with that edition of what the member had to say then. And we 

stand with the notion that if these embargoed briefings are 

going to take place with the media, then that privilege should be 

afforded to the members of the Legislative Assembly. It’s as 

simple as that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If it was on any other subject, Mr. Speaker, that point would 

stand. But here today, arguing that we have all of the 

information provided to the media, to the public’s 

representatives in the official opposition benches, that that 

information is afforded in a fair and timely manner, that’s what 

we’re arguing for here today, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that 

you have found a prima facie case points to the seriousness of 

this point, and of course the remedy before us is a vote of this 

Legislative Assembly. And again, the point would stand, Mr. 

Speaker, that if that embargoed briefing is going to be afforded 

to the members of the media for any matter of government 

policy, then the same privilege should be extended to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, that we’re here today arguing about the 

privileged release, a question of privilege as it relates to a 

document prepared in hopes that it will inform government 

policy in the critical work of anti-bullying, I think underlines 

the gravity of what we’re trying to communicate here today, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is, it’s a very serious matter. It’s a matter 

of life and death, and we take the work that has been done very 

seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 



4026 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

And we want, as is part of our job, as is part of the trust that has 

been extended to us by the people of Saskatchewan, we want to 

be able to provide that full and informed accounting and 

demand for account that the people have sent us to this 

legislature to perform. And when we stand up in defence of 

those privileges, Mr. Speaker, when we stand up in defence of 

that practice in this Legislative Assembly, and when the 

reaction is for certain of the members opposite to try and shout 

us down, Mr. Speaker, I think it points out the lack of 

seriousness that certain of the members are approaching the 

duties with which they have been entrusted by the people of this 

province. 

 

And I also find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that, you know, 

there’s a government with a great majority over there, a strong 

majority. And how you use those powers, Mr. Speaker, tells us 

a lot about the character of an individual and it tells a lot about 

the character of a government. 

 

And I am again, Mr. Speaker, grateful that you have found a 

prima facie case in regards to this question of privilege that has 

been brought before you, because again it points out the 

seriousness that when government policy is brought before the 

media, that that same privilege should be extended to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly. And the members 

opposite can argue technicalities about whether it’s a report or 

they can raise specious arguments, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

situations that don’t apply. But if the situation raised by 

members opposite, if the case has been raised before by a 

deputy minister to a minister that a privileged briefing should 

be provided to members of the legislature, that’s not what we’re 

arguing, Mr. Speaker. But if that communication triggers an 

embargoed briefing to the members of the media, Mr. Speaker, 

then absolutely that’s what we’re arguing. 

 

Information in a democracy is vital, Mr. Speaker. It’s what 

serves these issues that we try to address on this floor. And the 

seriousness of this, Mr. Speaker, again is underlined by the fact 

that we’re here today considering a principle and a process that 

is triggered by work around anti-bullying. Serious stuff, Mr. 

Speaker. That seriousness has been underlined by the fact that 

you found a prima facie case, a case on the face of it that 

demanded consideration by this Assembly. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, to do the job that we have been sent to 

this Legislative Assembly is something that we take very 

seriously. We take that trust very seriously. We take the 

precedents that we have marshalled today in support of our 

arguments, we take them very seriously. We’re coming to a 

vote, Mr. Speaker, where with its majority the government can 

very easily come up with the finding that they want. But I think 

the fact that the Speaker has found that a prima facie case 

existed speaks for itself, and that if that government is going to 

be affording embargoed briefings to the media on matters of 

government policy, then that same privilege should be extended 

to the members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to do 

my job as a member of this Legislative Assembly, and I’d 

invite that the question be now put. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question, I would like to 

respond to some of the comments and questions that were 

asked. The question of holding a debate prior to the debate, 

prior to the determination of the speaker of a prima facie case, 

is to actually hold the debate twice. That issue was discussed 

and debated over a period of time prior to the implementation 

of the new rules, and it was determined at that time that the case 

needed to be presented as part of the motion. 

 

Secondly, the question is not about which government papers 

are released but rather the question of that information, those 

papers being provided in an embargoed sense to the media 

while withholding that same information from the members of 

the House before making it public. 

 

Thirdly, I do not judge the outcome of the debate. That is 

decided by the members of this House. Rather, it is my role to 

determine whether there is a question of privilege worthy of the 

debate. 

 

I will now call the question moved by the Opposition House 

Leader: 

 

That this Assembly finds Executive Council staff members 

in contempt of the Legislative Assembly in that they failed 

to provide the official opposition with the same access to 

the media to the report entitled Saskatchewan’s Action 

Plan to Address Bullying and Cyberbullying; and 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to respect the 

rights and privileges of all members of this Assembly by 

ensuring that official opposition members and their staff 

are privy to any and all such embargoed information 

provided to members of the news media. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. All those in favour 

say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:07 until 15:16.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 7] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Belanger McCall Nilson 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4027 

Sproule   

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 42] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Harpauer Huyghebaert Doherty 

Norris McMillan Heppner 

Harrison Wyant Tell 

Weekes Bjornerud Brkich 

Hutchinson Makowsky Ottenbreit 

Campeau Wilson Marchuk 

Ross Kirsch Michelson 

Doke Cox Merriman 

Jurgens Steinley Hickie 

Lawrence Tochor Moe 

Parent Phillips Docherty 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 7; those 

opposed, 42. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion fails. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I rise to speak about The Athletics Commission Act, 2013, 

which is a new Act respecting the Athletics Commission, 

professional boxing, mixed martial arts contests and 

exhibitions. 

 

Until recently, Saskatchewan was one of only three provinces 

that had not taken the necessary steps to sanction professional 

combative sports events, including mixed martial arts and 

boxing. Without a mechanism that sanctions and oversees 

professional combative sports events in Saskatchewan, 

promoters may stage unsanctioned events and hold them 

without appropriate standards or safety precautions that help 

protect participants and spectators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is not about promoting mixed 

martial arts as a sport, but about regulating it. By regulating this 

sport, we help eliminate illegal fights putting athletes and, in 

some cases, children, Mr. Speaker, at risk. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, amendments were made recently to 

the Criminal Code which had implications for Saskatchewan. 

Bill S-209 was passed in June 2013. This bill amends section 

83 of the Criminal Code, legalizing the sport of mixed martial 

arts across Canada under the authority of a provincial athletics 

commission or similar established body. 

Mr. Speaker, the changes to the Criminal Code provided our 

province with clarity and an ideal opportunity to put legislation 

in place to regulate the legitimate side of the sport yet shut 

down the unsanctioned events that put participants at risk for 

serious injury. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons, this government has committed 

to establishing a provincial athletics commission. The 

commission will hold the authority to sanction professional 

boxing and mixed martial arts events. This commission will be 

designed to ensure a consistent standard of qualifications, rules, 

regulations, and safety protocols for all participants and 

officials across the province. Furthermore, the commission will 

have the authority to provide protocols for licence applications, 

event permits, as well as the terms and conditions of a 

particular event. 

 

It also ensures that competitors participate in appropriate 

pre-fight medical testing such as blood tests, concussion 

screening, and eye exams. It ensures that qualified medical staff 

and event officials are hired, that promoters and competitors 

have the proper licenses, and that promoters have suitable 

liability insurance. 

 

The commission will also be responsible for tracking 

competitors’ fighting histories and ensuring safety protocols are 

enforced. The proposed commission will consist of five 

individuals, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport will appoint an athletics commissioner who is to be an 

employee of the ministry. The minister will also establish an 

advisory committee of three subject matter experts. The 

Lieutenant Governor in Council will appoint an adjudicator 

who will be responsible to consider appeals for administrative 

penalties, licences, and event permits. 

 

My ministry has been working with stakeholders to ensure the 

legislation and regulations have proper protocols and clauses in 

place to operate an effective and successful commission. 

Ministry officials have been working closely with the Ministry 

of Justice and stakeholders who are closely impacted by this 

issue. Other provincial jurisdictions and commissions have also 

been consulted with and primarily include individuals from 

British Columbia, Ontario, and Manitoba. 

 

Five of the seven provinces that regulate professional MMA 

[mixed martial arts] events have provincial commissions. From 

speaking with provinces across Canada, we know provincial 

commissions are proving to be the most effective governance 

model. According to provincial jurisdictions, establishing a 

provincial athletics commission provides a number of benefits 

including consistency in rules, regulations, and processes across 

the province; enhanced ability to hold large-scale events; 

potential overall cost efficiencies; and effective use of a limited 

group of individuals properly qualified and knowledgeable 

about the sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to provide an overview of what the 

legislation will outline. The legislation frames areas such as 

responsibilities and powers of the commissioner, licensing and 

event permits, security deposit, inspections and investigations, 

administrative penalties, appeals, and the regulations necessary 

for this Act. Within the legislation, the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport will also have the authority to apply for a 



4028 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

compliance order to prevent individuals from proceeding with 

an event contrary to the Act and regulations. We want to ensure 

illegal activity is prevented before occurring. 

 

Over the past 15 years, mixed martial arts has been one of the 

fastest growing professional sports across Canada and North 

America, due mostly to the Ultimate Fighting Championship, 

UFC. Growth in this sport and support for the provincial 

Athletics Commission in Saskatchewan has been demonstrated 

in recent months. The city of Saskatoon and the city mayors’ 

caucus formally requested that government establish a 

provincial commission. From their perspective, a commission 

contributes to part of the province’s growth plan through 

increasing economic opportunities. 

 

With the growth in the sport there has also been an increase of 

unsanctioned events in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I am 

concerned that without some type of mechanism that sanctions 

and oversees such events, these unsanctioned events may 

continue. 

 

To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second 

reading of The Athletics Commission Act, 2013. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased on behalf of the official opposition to stand today 

to give our initial comments on Bill 108. And I certainly want 

to point out to the folks that are listening, one of the values of 

the Assembly here is to be able to share information, via the 

official legislative channel here of course, and to the media and 

through the government press process to advise people what is 

being planned with the bill that’s before the Assembly today, 

Bill 108, The Athletics Commission Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister very briefly pointed out the 

process that he wishes to undertake to establish an athletics 

commission, in the sense of trying to make sure that one of the 

processes of putting a commission in place is to ensure that we 

have a way to monitor some of the mixed martial arts fights that 

may have occurred or will occur in Saskatchewan. And I think 

the notion, Mr. Speaker, is obviously on the unsanctioned 

fights. This is something that I think the people of 

Saskatchewan certainly don’t want to see occur. And of course 

when you have unsanctioned fights, there is a lot of illegal 

activities around those fights and we obviously, from the 

perspective of the opposition, want to make sure that we don’t 

allow that to continue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question as you look through the 

bill that the official opposition certainly want to know who the 

government consulted on this particular bill. I think myself 

being a fight fan, I watch a lot of the UFC fights. In fact 

Saturday night I attended a function where I seen our Canadian 

champ retain his title. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great opportunity for folks back home 

to fundraise and to see the sport at its best in terms of being 

legal, to see the sport at its best in terms of making sure that 

there’s no injury, to make sure that they’re properly monitored, 

and that there is some generation of wealth for the participants 

and of course for the promoters and for those that are hosting 

the events. So there’s no question that from our perspective we 

look at boxing as a sport. We look at the mixed martial arts 

venue, as we see on the UFC front, as a sport. And these 

sporting events certainly have the ability to draw some great 

crowds and some great groups and organizations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it really . . . pointing out that this move that 

we’re doing today, Bill 108, is actually a move that comes after 

the House of Commons motion, in which they passed a bill in 

June legalizing contact sports such as MMA, mixed martial 

arts. And certainly I think having a provincial athletics 

commission put in place to monitor that burgeoning opportunity 

in the sport field I think is probably pretty sound because you 

obviously want to make sure that that is done properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about boxing being only allowed under 

the old prizefighting law, leaving other combat sports such as 

karate, tae kwon do, and again mixed martial arts in legal 

limbo. And what you want to do is you want to refine and 

define those particular sports to make sure that it’s properly 

monitored and that there is a good process to oversee these 

particular prizefighting events. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand, just basically from the 

discussions that we had and some of the comments made by the 

government, that the proposed commission will consist of five 

people: an athletics commissioner, an advisory committee 

comprised of three subject matter experts, and an adjudicator. 

So obviously I’m assuming that there will be people from the 

karate and tae kwon do and mixed martial arts background that 

would be part of the three people that are on this new 

committee. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s also important is that they do 

the medical exams, the pre-fight and the post-fight, because 

obviously the mixed martial arts contests are very, very, are 

very tough on the performers or the participants. And we all see 

the fights on television, and there’s a lot of violence of course. 

But the amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, is you watch that particular 

UFC fight — and again I admit that I watch a number of them 

— but you notice before the fight and after the fight there is a 

lot of respect between the participants. 

 

And I think that we notice that as a fan or somebody just simply 

observing the fight, that they know that these participants view 

this as a sport and that they don’t view this in a negative way, 

that clearly that there are some that have really bad attitudes 

after a fight, of course, but the vast majority of the participants 

in mixed martial arts competition, you will notice that they 

abide by the rules. They abide by the process in terms of exams. 

They abide by the decisions. Sometimes they don’t like the 

choices that the judges make, but by and large after the fight is 

over they generally have a lot of respect for each other. They 

shake hands and they often hug each other because the bottom 

line is that they look at this as not a violent act against each 

other but more or less a combative sport event that they are 

trying to excel at and be good at. 

 

And there’s no question, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 

incredible fundraising opportunity that many organizations 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4029 

could participate on or can participate with when it comes to the 

mixed martial arts opportunity, that this could be certainly a lot 

of opportunity for different groups in different organizations. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Obviously I think the government has the same train of thought 

and certainly the same manner in which we hope that the 

Athletics Commission would operate, in the sense that health 

and safety must be a top priority. 

 

Obviously we see in hockey lately there’s been a lot of 

discussion around injuries to hockey players. And obviously 

concussion is one of the biggest things that people are worried 

about. And we see some great athletes over the years become 

injured. We obviously . . . It’s big business, and I think business 

wants to ensure that their athletes are not being hurt needlessly. 

And they need to have this kind of oversight. 

 

So I think safety and health of the participants ought to be a top 

priority, and also protection in the long run. Because obviously 

you look at some of the NHL [National Hockey League] 

players, as I give you the example of hockey, professional 

hockey’s very fast. It’s very hard-hitting. It’s very competitive 

and there’s a huge, huge fan base. But obviously as you play 

hockey and you begin to get subjected to some of the hits and 

some of the pressures and some of the challenges of being a 

professional hockey player, over time your body does pay a 

price. 

 

So I think a lot of the players recognize that and that’s why you 

have the NHL Players’ Association to look after their members. 

And you would assume and hope that a commission of this sort 

that looks after the mixed martial arts fight contests, that they 

also look after their participants as well. I think that goes 

without saying that it’s something that’s really, really important 

when it comes to this particular art itself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of different things that we need to 

be aware of when it comes to this particular bill. We want to 

see more of the information and the details around what the 

legislation involves. Obviously the minister gave a very brief 

synopsis of what they would like to do, and we want to see the 

detail. There’s a lot of detail that we need to look at. And some 

of the things that we want to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

things like who they consulted along the way. 

 

I know that other provinces have different or individual 

municipalities that oversee a local athletics commission. Was 

this taken into consideration? Obviously being a five-member 

commission, you’d obviously want to consult with the different 

municipal structures throughout our province to see what kind 

of advice that they may offer. And was SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] and was SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] advised? 

Did they participate in the discussion of this particular event? 

 

Obviously we talk a bit about the potential for injury or worse, 

brain damage, as we unveil this sport and as more and more 

venues provide this fundraising opportunity, that you obviously 

have to make sure that the combatants are properly insured and 

that there is careful consideration for their current health. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier at the outset, the brain 

injuries in sport is something that we ought to be careful. I’m 

sure that the minister’s aware of that particular concern that we 

all have. There’s a number of people out there in the province 

that can attest to some of the challenges when it comes to 

concussions in different sports, whether it’d be hockey or 

football or now MMA. So it is certainly something that we 

ought to be concerned with. 

 

And again I know that people could legally protect themselves 

by having the participants or the combatants sign a waiver and 

full well know what they’re getting into. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

think it’s incumbent upon the higher supporters of this 

particular sport, and that being government, that they put the 

proper protection in place to ensure that if a fighter gets hurt, or 

worse, gets brain injury, then that there is provisions to ensure 

that they have a decent income after if they get injured, and that 

there’s provisions that would care for them following their 

career if there is some MMA event in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now a lot of people would certainly point out that if you look at 

the brain injury itself, the particular field of brain injury, it’s 

really not understood to the extent that it should be understood. 

We have a lot of experts indicating that over time. And you 

look at some of the football players. You look at some of the 

hockey players, MMA players, or participants rather. These are 

some of the folks that would certainly have a lot of experience 

in the industry, would know exactly what are the latest trends in 

brain injury. 

 

So we want to make sure that if we embark on this particular 

trial run of MMA in Saskatchewan, that safety and certainly 

health concerns are a huge part of our effort to try and legalize 

this particular sporting event, and to make sure that the 

participants and the public know that these participants are 

insured and cared for, and that there are stringent rules to 

ensure that they aren’t hurt any more than they have to be hurt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of questions we have. 

Obviously when people want to fundraise . . . And we see this 

happen on a number of occasions where you have alcohol 

served at some of these events. Is that part of the overall 

process when we look through this particular bill, Bill 108? 

What kind of venues would be allowed? What organizations 

can host some of these venues? How would you consider the 

class of fighters? How many events can a five-person Athletics 

Commission really sanction and monitor? What’s the number 

of staff dedicated to this? These are some of the specific 

information that we would want as an opposition, because it’s 

important that we get that information. 

 

Because as we mentioned at the outset, there are hundreds of 

groups and organizations throughout the province that might 

look at this particular bill as an opportunity for them to bring a 

MMA fight to their community and to determine . . . You 

know, it may be a great fundraiser, but how would they 

participate? Who would get priorities on some of the MMA 

fights? And these are some of the things that we need to find 

out, Mr. Speaker, as we begin the discussion of talking about 

this particular bill. 

 

And I know that there’ll be a lot of organizations, whether it be 



4030 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

municipal government, whether it be First Nations, whether it 

be community organizations, whether it be your local minor 

hockey association — these are some of the players that will 

probably apply for some of these MMA events. So how would 

that process work for them? How would they undertake an 

application process? How would they be approved? And where 

would they get the fighters from? Who would sanction these 

fighters? What’s the process to insure the fighters? What’s the 

process to making sure that there’s medical clearance? Like all 

this information, Mr. Speaker, is important that we know 

beforehand so absolutely everybody in the province is aware of 

how this MMA bill could possibly work to their benefit when it 

comes to fundraising in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, Saskatchewan 

is a vast province. There are events throughout the province that 

people do on a daily basis to try and fundraise for their various 

needs. And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, it could be an event in 

Black Lake. It could be an event in Swift Current. And there’s a 

wide difference in terms of the people. There’s a wide 

difference in terms of the venues and of course the extent of the 

venues in each of these communities. So there’s a lot of 

questions that we have as to how you would priorize these 

different venues based on the application process. 

 

So one would assume that basically that Bill 108 is to talk about 

setting up this MMA process, that they have an athletics 

commission that could approve these events. They have their 

strict guidelines, as the minister indicated. But we want to know 

as to, how would they priorize these fights? Where do you 

normally get some of the participants? Is there a provision for 

local combatants to be able to participate in some of these 

events, following a rigid process of course? So these are some 

of the things that we look at in terms of the initial blush or our 

take on this particular bill, and to point out to the folks that it is 

indeed a great opportunity I think for people that might want to 

use this event as a fundraiser. 

 

Saskatchewan I think has led the province . . . or the country in 

years as a province. We have led the country in years in the 

effort to be able to fundraise locally. The number of volunteers 

we have in our communities, that is something that 

Saskatchewan could be proud of. And we’re going to see a lot 

of that activity in this next week because obviously the 

Roughriders won, and we’re going to see Saskatchewan really 

burst at the seams in terms of having visitors. We’re all very, 

very excited about that, and we’re all of course cheering for the 

Roughriders. In fact we’re wearing Roughrider ties to make 

sure that, to give them as much support as we can. 

 

And it’s really, really important, as I mentioned at the outset, 

when you have a sport that connects with the people . . . And 

the Roughriders are one of the organizations in our province 

that has a really strong base of support. They’ve got a lot of 

fans all over the place, and some of them are rabid fans, 

including the member from Athabasca. And I’ll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Roughriders lose, I’m kind of cranky for a 

week because when I know they ought to have won that game 

and they lose it, then the whole week I’m kind of cranky till 

their next win. And I think I share that same sentiment with a 

lot of folks out there, that when you identify with a sport and 

with a team like the Roughriders, then you know that it’s a 

classy organization. They’re a successful organization. They 

have built up their organization over the years, and they 

represent our province. 

 

So obviously there’s a great deal of opportunity with this Bill 

108 when you look at MMA, to make sure that we have the 

same values, the same fan base, the same followers, and the 

same expectations of professional conduct that we have of the 

Roughriders be afforded to many other venues such as MMA. 

That’s a good example that I would say is important for folks 

out there to watch is, from our perspective, we look at MMA as 

a sport. And if you want to really set up MMA as a professional 

sport, then you need not look further than the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders as a team that shows you a number of values that 

the province of Saskatchewan love and like, and that of course 

being professional, being vigilant, being successful on the field 

and off the field and also, Mr. Speaker, showing their fans a lot 

of support over the years. 

 

And this weekend I think is going to be a great event and a 

great celebration of the Roughriders, something that any 

aspiring group and organization such as MMA wants to 

emulate. Then the benefits are there because the Saskatchewan 

people will certainly embrace your sport and your industry 

much like they have the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 

 

So I think there’s a lot riding on this particular bill, Mr. 

Speaker. We see the economic value, there’s no question, that 

local fundraising perspective. Recognizing it as a sport, taking 

care of the potential health threats and safety, making sure 

there’s no unsanctioned fights — all the value points as you 

look down this particular bill. There’s a lot of good value to 

what is going on. 

 

And we would just basically point out that it’s important that 

perhaps they should have afforded the same opportunity to the 

arts, the same opportunity to the film and employment tax 

credit, Mr. Speaker, because much of that industry was shut 

down by this government. And they bring along MMA in the 

hopes of trying to match the lost revenues of the film 

employment tax credit. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, imagine for a moment if the province not 

only had MMA, but also had the film employment tax credit to 

continue bolstering our local economies and supporting the 

working families out there that are impacted by these industries. 

Then that’s our point from our perspective as the opposition, is 

that you should not have done that to the employment tax credit 

when it comes to the film industry. You should have kept that 

because it was working. You should have, if you wanted to 

refine it and make it better, you should have kept it and not 

simply thrown it away. And now has the same minister 

bringing in the MMA bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they should have kept both of those 

particular perspectives as a revenue generating opportunity for 

the province to strengthen our economy, and that’s exactly what 

we mean on this side of the Assembly when we talk about 

smart growth. The film employment tax credit was a great 

opportunity for a province and to continue building that 

industry in this province, and the Saskatchewan Party destroyed 

that industry. And they’re bringing MMA in, Mr. Speaker. We 

hope that it pays off in dividends in terms of the economy. It’s 

something that our leader said that we ought to support when it 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4031 

makes sense. We’ll continue keeping that. 

 

And I can tell you if the MMA, through this particular bill, is 

successful in Saskatchewan, something that the NDP will not 

do is throw it out when we assume government, whether that be 

in a couple of years, Mr. Speaker. And from our perspective, if 

it works, the groups that are organizing it want that continued 

support, then I think from our perspective we wouldn’t throw it 

out because it wasn’t our idea. We would support it because it’s 

good for the province. And I think that’s a message that we 

want to continually press on to the people of Saskatchewan as 

per our new leader’s directives. If it makes sense for the people 

of Saskatchewan, then we will support that initiative. 

 

However it’s incumbent upon us to make sure we get all the 

detail to make sure exactly what is happening with this 

particular bill or any other bill, that we do two things: that we 

watch very carefully what’s in the bill to make sure we invite 

the public because that’s our job as MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] in opposition; and the second thing is we 

invite people in the province to participate in this particular bill, 

that if you have a concern or a question that you want the 

opposition to raise or you want to participate by giving us some 

letters or some feedback on this bill, then rest assured that that 

information is valued. And we would encourage you to 

participate in that process as well. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this 

particular bill, but we have my colleagues who will be looking 

to the bill as we continue to seek more advice and more input 

on this bill from the different players that may be involved in 

our province. So again on that note, I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 108. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 108, The Athletics 

Commission Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Builders’ Lien 

Amendment Act, 2013. The primary purpose of The Builders’ 

Lien Act, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that those individuals 

involved in the construction industry get paid for work and 

materials while at the same time providing the owners of 

projects with security and predictability. 

 

The Act remains a careful balance between the rights and 

obligations of landowners and the building trades and 

professions that assist in construction projects. The protections 

offered through the Act are available to those trades and 

professions that perform services, including under the definition 

of improvement. One service that is not included as an 

improvement, Mr. Speaker, are the services of a land surveyor 

such as the preparation of a survey plan and the placement of 

boundary markers. Land surveyors often work side alongside 

other tradespeople and professionals that perform services that 

are recognized as improvements under the Act, such as 

architects and engineers. Accordingly this bill will amend the 

definition of improvement to provide that land surveyors and 

professional surveyors can utilize the process under the Act to 

recover unpaid fees for their services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will also increase the limitation period 

applicable to trust claims from one to two years. The Act 

currently provides that a trustee is discharged from its 

obligations on the expiry of one year after the contract is 

completed or abandoned. The limitation period is at odds with 

the general two-year limitation period in The Limitations Act. 

Additionally it often catches claimants by surprise, as a trust 

claim is usually brought at the same time as a lien claim, to 

which a two-year limitation period applies. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, this bill will update the section in the Act 

that determines when a contract is deemed to be complete. The 

current wording of the Act provides that a contract is deemed to 

be complete when the price of completion is not more than 1 

per cent of the contract price or $1,000, whichever is less. The 

reference to $1,000, which was established in 1986, no longer 

reflects current construction costs. By repealing the $1,000 

figure, a contract will deem to be complete when the price of 

completion is not more than 1 per cent of the contract price. 

This is viewed as a flexible benchmark that will adjust 

automatically with the scale of construction projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has enjoyed a number of years of 

incredible growth in many sectors, and the strength of 

investment in construction and the building trades is no 

exception. These amendments update The Builders’ Lien Act so 

that it can continue to serve builders and contractors alike. With 

that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

that Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to first of all point out that we have had a lot of discussion on 

this particular bill just as an opposition, and we want to . . . 

[inaudible] . . . It’s very minor in some of the changes, and we 

want to make sure that the impacts or effects of some of the 

plan of this bill are certainly supported by some of the people 

it’s intended to support. 

 

And obviously I will concur with the member opposite in the 

sense that Saskatchewan has enjoyed great growth for a great 

number of years, and we want to make sure that as a province 

we continue moving that growth forward for as many, many 

years as possible. The last number of years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

had great success in construction. We’ve seen certainly the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders playing for the Grey Cup here in 

their home province. And these are some of the things that 

obviously, from our perspective as the opposition, we want to 

see continue because there’s no opposition member on this side 



4032 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

of the Assembly ever wants to see Saskatchewan go through 

what we went through in the 1990s when we were so broke that 

we couldn’t do some of the things that we enjoy doing today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important to note that when you look at the bill, 

the Bill 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, it certainly, 

from our perspective at the outset, when you look at adding a 

new definition for the land surveyor, we think that if people 

have been consulted within the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors 

Association and they support this particular process, which I’m 

assuming that they do . . . And I underline assume because, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important that they know that if they do indeed 

support this particular amendment, then as I said at the outset, 

our leader, our current leader has indicated where it makes 

sense, where it makes sense, we want to make sure that we are 

supportive of some of the initiatives of the government as long 

as the prize is continuing watching Saskatchewan grow and to 

flourish and to prosper. That is currently what we’re certainly 

looking at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I look at the current bill, Bill 102, when they are 

actually including or adding a new definition of land surveyor 

and some of the subtrades that are involved with construction, 

that they want to expand and support as many of those business 

people as possible, Mr. Speaker, we think it makes sense to do 

so. And that’s why the Bill 102, no matter how minor in some 

of the changes that they want to make, it’s always important to 

pay attention to these bills because these bills certainly are 

going to support a continued growth of Saskatchewan if they 

have the proper consultation and if they have the proper 

endorsement of some of the players that are out there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we obviously need a bit more clarification 

and information around the one section which is section 4 

which removes the $1,000 and leaves just 1 per cent in the bill. 

Mr. Speaker, we need to know what the impacts of that is. And 

obviously the point that the minister raised when he says 

obviously it adjusts automatically with higher priced projects, 

we need to find out what impact and what effect it has on a 

number of projects throughout the province. Because obviously 

there are some really big projects out there, and there’s 

obviously some minor home projects out there. How does this 

bill affect that? Does it deviate in terms of the strength of the 

contractor versus the homeowner? Is there a court process 

involved? Is there some discussion involved? We need to find 

out all that information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know that as you look at, by and large, the industry itself, 

that there are by and large most of the folks out in the province 

of Saskatchewan, when they have a project in place, whether 

it’s a new home build or a major build, usually the contractors 

are taken care of. There is a process to put a lien if someone 

doesn’t pay their bill or there is a discrepancy or there is an 

argument over the value of that contract versus what was 

delivered. 

 

You obviously want to find a balance. You want to find a happy 

medium between the contractor and the proponent of the project 

or the homeowner, Mr. Speaker, because obviously, as you 

would know, there is a lot of opportunity for disagreement 

when you contract a worker to do a certain amount of work in 

your home or on a bigger project and it doesn’t get done to your 

specifications. What happens then? And obviously on the flip 

side, if the contractor delivers the services and feels that he’s 

completed the services and the project manager or the 

homeowner doesn’t want to pay them, then obviously it works 

both ways. 

 

So we need to find out basic information as to how big of a 

problem is this throughout the province. Is there more problems 

within the homeowner and contractor relationship or is there 

more of a problem between the contractor and large company 

builds? Is that a problem area as well? These are some of the 

questions that we need to find out when you look at some of the 

changes and modification on that particular bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective, looking at trying to 

include all players, whether they’re architects or whether 

they’re land surveyors or whether they’re inspectors versus 

whether they’re electricians or plumbers or framers, Mr. 

Speaker, when you build a house, all those costs should be 

involved. When you have a major project, all those players are 

involved. So certainly from our perspective we understand that 

when you build a house it’s not just your lumber and your nails 

and your roofing. It has everything involved right from the 

surveyors to the architect. These are all fees that are 

incorporated in building a new home and when you have the 

process that includes all the players and defines the process of 

each of the players then that, Mr. Speaker, I think from our 

perspective would make sense. 

 

So I think I would certainly want to have more information, as I 

mentioned earlier, about whether there are certain problem 

areas that we need to be aware of as an official opposition. We 

would encourage folks that are out there, whether they’re 

contractors or homeowners, that if you ran into a problem that 

this Act doesn’t really resolve or doesn’t address, then we need 

to know about it as well. So I think it’s important that we let the 

people of Saskatchewan know that any of these bills that you 

see on this channel or hear about through government, the 

government process, then let us know and we’ll certainly raise 

those questions. Because they have the opportunity during 

committee and you’ve certainly got the opportunity during QP 

[question period] and you’ve got the opportunity through some 

of these reading speeches to bring up some of the concerns that 

the people of Saskatchewan may address. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a lot more to say about 

this bill as we go through the process of researching the bill, 

analyzing the bill, and getting information from different 

groups and organizations. So I think it’s important for the 

people of Saskatchewan to know that there’ll be much more 

debate on this bill and more presentations by my caucus 

colleagues as we continue to assess this particular bill. On that 

notion, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 102, The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4033 

Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Mr. Speaker, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 governs the 

operation of the maintenance enforcement office. Established in 

1986, the MEO [maintenance enforcement office] is 

responsible for recording and enforcing registered support 

orders. The MEO continues to have one of the highest 

collection rates in Canada. In 2012-13 fiscal year, over 91 per 

cent of payments were collected, resulting in a record-setting 

amount of over $39 million in collections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the MEO regularly reviews and suggests updates 

to the legislation to ensure that it’s offering the public the best 

possible service in the enforcement of support orders. One 

critical purpose of the Act is that it provides the MEO several 

enforcement mechanisms to help ensure that the support 

payments are complied with. Currently the director may place 

garnishments on wages or other income, suspend driver’s 

licences, apply for the denial of federal licences such as 

passports, and place garnishments with the federal government 

in order to intercept funds such as GST [goods and services tax] 

refunds and income tax refunds. The director may also attach 

and collapse pension entitlements and RRSPs [registered 

retirement savings plan]. Ultimately the director may apply for 

seizure of a payor’s property. 

 

The amendments before the Assembly today will provide a 

further enforcement tool, Mr. Speaker, as they will permit the 

director of the MEO to direct the Minister of the Environment 

to prohibit a hunting or angling licence from being issued to a 

payor who is in arrears on support payments by at least three 

months. Restricting the ability of an individual to secure a 

hunting or angling licence is an enforcement tool that will 

complement the MEO’s existing enforcement tools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the intention is that this new tool will only be 

utilized where other enforcement actions aimed at the financial 

resources of the payor prove unsuccessful. Accordingly, these 

amendments require the MEO to take all reasonable steps to 

enforce the order prior to restricting the payor’s ability to 

secure a hunting or an angling licence. 

 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, the director will need to provide the 

payor with at least 30 days notice of his or her intention to 

restrict the payor’s ability to secure a hunting or angling 

licence. Mr. Speaker, these amendments provide the MEO with 

an additional enforcement tool and confirm the government’s 

commitment to the timely payment of support for children and 

families. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading 

of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2013. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

quite pleased to be able to once again stand up on behalf of the 

official opposition to talk about this particular bill and The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act which primarily is an 

Act that’s designed to try and get as much support, financial 

support from some of the parents of some of the children, who 

may not be in a relationship with their spouses, to be able to 

force them to make their child support payments, whether it’s 

the mother that’s forced to make child support payments or the 

father is forced to make the child support payments. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, where the partner is forced, you know, 

to do these child support payments, I think it’s important to 

note that, from the opposition perspective, we need to do all we 

can to strengthen the families. And sometimes when you have 

the opportunity to keep the family together, you do all you can. 

I see a lot of folks in my community doing what they can to 

support the families, and they certainly contribute their part to 

strengthen the families as a community and as concerned 

citizens and as extended families. 

 

But when there’s a situation where the families are no longer 

able to stay together, then you have the separation. The last 

people you want to hurt — and obviously it’s the first people 

they hurt — are the children that are involved. And despite 

some of their best efforts, some families do break up. And what 

you have is you have an enforcement order against a particular 

parent that does not want to pay child support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And over the years, over the years, what you want to do is make 

sure that there is some obligation, and to strengthen the 

legislation to ensure that the parent that is not making those 

payments is forced to make the payments as often and as 

regular as they can. And I was quite pleased, Mr. Speaker, that 

the rate for some of the collection of those child support 

payments from the spouse that has custody of the children is at 

91 per cent. So obviously I think the office that’s enforcing the 

maintenance order is doing a remarkable job in trying to make 

sure that the parents do not skip out on their obligations, and 

that they’re able to do all they can to either voluntarily work 

with the family or the member that’s supposed to be making 

these payments, or to force them to make those payments 

through various measures. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I would point out is that on Bill 103, 

that obviously before this, you couldn’t get your driver’s 

licence if you had an outstanding child support payment in the 

province of Saskatchewan, that a lot of times they wouldn’t 

renew your licence if you had a number of payments that you’re 

missing for the child enforcement order. And one of the things 

that’s important, Mr. Speaker — child support enforcement 

orders rather — one of the thing’s that’s important is that you 

want to make sure that you force some of these parents that do 

not want to pay up, that there has to be mechanisms to force 

them to pay. Now what this government is doing with this 

particular bill, Bill 103, it gives them another tool to go after 

the parents who do not pay their child support, as the minister 



4034 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

spoke about, and now they won’t give them a hunting licence. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what I want to point out is that we 

obviously are going to be very supportive, as our leader 

indicated from time to time, is that we need to support things 

that make sense, things that support the family, things that 

support the continuing growth of Saskatchewan, things that 

recognize the senior care issue, things that recognize the 

challenges within education, within the health care. If there are 

things that are being done properly by this government, our 

leader has clearly instructed us to be supportive of those 

measures because in the long run, Saskatchewan families win. 

 

And I think that some of the things that we want to do as an 

opposition is to make sure that people are consulted and that the 

value of some of these programs are intended to go to the 

families that need the help the most, and in this case the 

families of parents that may not be paying child support to the 

successful parent that has the custody of the children. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important now is that under 

Bill 103, they had their enforcement orders, whether it’s to the 

income tax process, some of the parents that weren’t paying up 

for the child support couldn’t get their driver’s licence. And 

now the Bill 103 that’s being brought forward now is talking 

about telling some of these parents that aren’t making their 

payments, or aren’t meeting their obligation to the children, that 

you now can’t get a hunting licence. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, whatever effort is there to 

strengthen the families and provide as many support 

mechanisms for the children who are going through a family 

breakup, we obviously support. Why wouldn’t we do some of 

the things that is necessary to strengthen our families? So I 

think some of the intent of this is to hold those family members 

that are not meeting their obligations on a financial basis to the 

children that they may no longer have in their custody, we need 

to hold them to account. And certainly there are measures out 

there, and we need to continue seeing the support mechanisms 

to make sure that the 91 per cent success rate at recovering 

some of the support payments that are needed for the families, 

we want to see that continue. We want to see it get better and 

stronger for the kids that are being impacted by separation, 

divorce, or whatever the case might be. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that when you look at some 

of the issues that we’re dealing with when it comes to hunting 

licences, now obviously, on our side of the Assembly, parents 

that aren’t meeting their obligations shouldn’t be getting a 

licence. I think that goes without saying and as I’ve said here on 

a couple of occasions. But what’s happening right now 

throughout the whole province, Mr. Speaker, is this government 

is boondoggled when they made the Tennessee-based company 

begin to issue our hunting licences. 

 

Now obviously I don’t know . . . I’m sure that the government 

has consulted with the Privacy Commissioner in terms of 

corroborating the evidence if there is a parent out there not 

meeting his or her obligation, that is there information being 

shared with that Tennessee-based company that this 

government contracted to do up the hunting licences? Is there 

corroboration on that front? Well we don’t know that, Mr. 

Speaker, so maybe somebody could inadvertently get a hunting 

licence even though they may be in arrears for their child 

support payments because there isn’t that collaboration by the 

government. I would hope, I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that two 

things would happen, is that there is that collaboration and 

secondly that the Privacy and Information Commissioner has 

been a big part, an integral part of the discussions with the 

government because obviously there is another company in 

another country that’s issuing hunting licences and does that 

add to the logistical challenges of this bill? 

 

And that’s kind of what our role is in the official opposition, is 

to ask those questions and to certainly to try and get the people 

in Saskatchewanland to give us some of the questions that they 

may have. Now obviously we know from our perspective that, 

from our involvement, that people are very, very upset. People 

that want to see hunting and fishing actually increase, a lot of 

them are very, very upset that we’ve seen the changeover from 

some of the local, small businesses that used to be able to issue 

hunting licences and fishing licences. And some of the offices 

and the co-ops and the gas stations that used to be able to sell 

licences, these organizations are upset because this government 

has chosen in their limited wisdom to contract out that service 

to a company from Tennessee. 

 

And then they come along with this particular bill, Bill 103, 

saying, look, we’re not going to give those guys that are 

missing their child support the opportunity to be able to hunt. 

And people at the outset will say, sure that sounds like a good 

idea because we obviously want to make sure that those that 

aren’t meeting their obligations are meeting their obligations. 

But the problem is it’s not just those guys that can’t get their 

fishing licence or hunting licence. There’s a great many other 

people in our province that can’t access the services to get a 

fishing or a hunting licence, and that’s because the government 

has outsourced that particular process to a company out of 

Tennessee. 

 

So it’s not common sense, not common sense from our 

perspective, and this is exactly our point in opposition. I 

mentioned earlier about our leader indicating that where it 

makes sense, we should be supportive of the government. 

Where it doesn’t make sense, we need hold them to account, 

and we need to tell the people of Saskatchewan what they’re 

doing wrong. 

 

So on this particular bill, going after parents who are not 

meeting their obligation for child support payments by denying 

them a hunting licence is probably the right thing to do, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s probably the right thing to do. But what these guys 

are doing wrong, the current government, is that they’re 

denying a lot of other people hunting licences because they 

agreed to contract this service of issuing licences to a 

Tennessee-based company. Now does that make any sense, Mr. 

Speaker? Absolutely not. 

 

So again from our point, on one hand we see them doing 

something that may be valuable to strengthening families but on 

the other hand they do actions like contracting out to a 

Tennessee-based company for issuing hunting licences, which 

many people in Saskatchewan are absolutely upset about and 

very angry about. 

 

Now we know that in the province, whether it’s the Wildlife 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4035 

Federation, whether it’s different rural groups, or even northern 

Aboriginal people, they are trying to support and promote 

hunting in a safe, safe way. And they know that a number of 

younger people are not participating in hunting like they used to 

in the older days, Mr. Speaker. We all know that trend is going 

downward. So we obviously want to encourage more young 

people to handle firearms safely, but to be able to hunt safely, 

and to encourage that kind of lifestyle because many, many 

young people would need those skills certainly I think in the 

future when it comes to providing for their family off the land. 

So I think a lot of people overall are very supportive of the 

notion of encouraging young people to take up hunting as long 

as it’s responsible, it’s legal, and it’s safe. 

 

Now what’s happening on this particular bill is that those that 

are doing it properly but aren’t paying their child support 

payments, well we need to catch those guys and make sure it’s 

done properly. But those that might be able to slip through the 

cracks because the company that’s issuing hunting licences are 

coming out of Tennessee and . . . Is there a problem in making 

sure that we hold groups to account that aren’t making those 

child support payments, to deny them the hunting licence, when 

a company in the heartland of the US [United States] is handing 

out these hunting licences? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the business people that had the 

ability to hand out hunting licences in the past were doing a 

good job. They were supporting and promoting hunting. They 

were doing it safely. The people that were issuing hunting 

licences and permits were doing a very responsible job of doing 

that. And the government comes along and says, well thank you 

for all your service, but we’re now going to get a company out 

of the States to do that. It’s all going to be online. And our 

question is, with this particular bill, are you able to catch those 

that may be applying under their names without making their 

child support payment obligations? Can they actually sneak 

through the system? And from our perspective these are some 

of the things we have to question, challenge, and to watch. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, there’s a lot of 

things we want to talk about when it comes to this bill. We’re 

asking folks that have any advice, asking folks that may want to 

have some input on this particular bill what they think is in 

some of the issues that need to be raised because our job as the 

official opposition is to hold the government to account, and we 

invite those comments. 

 

So again there’s a number of my colleagues that are going to be 

speaking on this bill, and we will certainly take the next two or 

three months to research it and to talk to people out there and 

bring back some common sense solutions. If there are some 

solutions in there that are worthy . . . And, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to make sure that the intended target of this bill is those 

people that are not meeting their child support payments, not 

the people that really want the licence, a hunting licence to 

develop their hunting skills. And I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, as a 

result of their decision to relocate that service to Tennessee, that 

many of our families that want to responsibly hunt are being 

denied the accessibility to buy a permit locally, an opportunity 

had before until the Sask Party government messed that up. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on  

 

Bill 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment 

Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Mr. 

Speaker, the sole purpose of this bill is to make an English-only 

consequential amendment to The Fisheries Act (Saskatchewan), 

1994. That is necessary on account of the provisions of The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013, 

which is a bilingual bill. 

 

This amendment adds a section to the fisheries Act, 1994 that 

will require the Minister of the Environment to publish . . . or to 

prohibit a person from applying for or obtaining an angling 

licence where directed by the maintenance enforcement office. 

This action will only be taken where the individual is in arrears 

on a registered support order by at least three months. The 

direction to the Minister of the Environment would only be 

provided after other enforcement actions aimed at the financial 

resources of the individual prove unsuccessful. Additionally the 

individual would be provided a 30-day notice prior to the 

enforcement activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new enforcement tool will assist the 

maintenance enforcement office in its mandate to collect 

support payments for children and families. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to move second reading of The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I once again want to stand on behalf of the official opposition 

and give our brief explanation of this particular bill and to point 

out that this bill is much similar to the previous bill in relation 

to hunting licences, and now they’re expanding it to fishing 

licences. So generally from both bills that folks that aren’t 

making their maintenance payments on a child enforcement 

payment obligation, that they’re now going to have difficulty in 

getting their fishing licences and their hunting licences, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



4036 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

And as I mentioned on the previous bill, from our perspective, 

as our leader has indicated that it’s important that we support 

the bills that make sense, but we’ve also got to make sure that 

we hold the government to account. And once again we’re 

seeing evidence that this particular government has not done 

enough consultation on a couple of fronts, not so much on the 

child enforcement orders in terms of what the bill’s intending to 

do, because we agree that those parents — as I said time and 

time again — those parents that don’t meet their obligation for 

child maintenance ought to be tracked down and that 91 per 

cent of the enforcement rate of tracking down parents that 

aren’t meeting the obligation is something that we as a province 

should be proud of, but a need to move that number up to 95, to 

99, and hopefully to 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we think that some of the bills to deny some of those 

parents that aren’t meeting their obligations fishing licences and 

hunting licences can indeed help. They can indeed help, 

because obviously there may be parents out there that are avid 

fishermen or avid hunters, and that if they’re not meeting their 

obligation they could be denied the right to hunt and fish. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of people in northern 

Saskatchewan. This is why it’s important that we take a special 

interest in this particular bill as well, because we need to find 

out who they’ve consulted. Have they consulted the Outfitters 

Association? Does this affect the Outfitters Association? We 

don’t have that information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if we have an outfitter that may have had a separation from 

his or her spouse, and they’re given an outfitting licence, does 

that affect the outfitter? Because the outfitter could be a hunter. 

It could be a fisherman. How about the commercial fishing 

industry, Mr. Speaker? Does that affect the commercial fishing 

industry? If we have a particular member that could be involved 

with both industries, whether it’s wild rice and hunting and 

fishing, that could be where their income is derived from. Now 

if they have an outstanding child maintenance order, are we 

now denying them the ability to fish, to hunt, and to live off the 

land from that perspective? 

 

And that’s why I think it’s important, this bill and the bill 

previously, that you have to take the time to consult. And that’s 

why I am asking my colleagues after I’m done my initial 

discussion on this bill and the previous bill, that we’ve got to 

make sure we contact organizations out there like the Outfitters 

Association to say, how does this bill affect your members? 

 

We want to do the responsible thing. We’re not taking our eye 

off the target here in the sense of making sure that parents out 

there that aren’t meeting their obligations, do meet their 

obligations. And I want to say that a number of times, so the 

Sask Party doesn’t misrepresent what we’re saying. 

 

We are saying that there ought to be every effort to go after 

those parents that aren’t meeting their obligation. Denying them 

a fishing licence and a hunting licence may be good proactive 

steps, but we have to make sure that the intended targets are the 

ones we’re hitting and not hurting a wide variety or a bigger 

industry than what we hope to do on this bill and the previous 

bill. 

 

That’s some of the things that we have, as the official 

opposition, the right to do, Mr. Speaker, is to hold this 

government to account in some of these bills that they’re 

bringing forward. 

 

Now the question I’m going to ask the minister on this 

particular bill at the initial outset and his explanation of this 

bill: does that affect the commercial fishing industry? 

Obviously we would assume that the sport fishing industry is 

also involved. Does that affect the outfitting industry in terms 

of the licence to hunt, a licence to fish, and to trap? These are 

some of the questions that we have to ask the minister at the 

outset. And while this bill is introduced at this fall sitting, I 

want to tell the people that are back home, this bill is being 

introduced this month and it’ll be passed probably in May or 

earlier than that in 2014. So it gives us a few months. That’s 

basically my point. It gives us a few months for us to go out 

there and talk with different groups and organizations that may 

be impacted. 

 

So to those in northern Saskatchewan and to those in southern 

Saskatchewan who make a living, who make a living on fishing 

or trapping or hunting, we have to make sure that they know 

this particular bill, Bill 104, which the bill is all about going 

after parents who are not meeting their child support payments. 

I don’t think anybody could defend those parents because it’s 

difficult to defend parents. We know the difficulty of going 

through the separation is traumatic enough for the kids, but we 

still have to find the ways and means in which the children are 

cared for. And that’s kind of what the focus of any bill on this 

front should be. 

 

But is this bill going to hurt their ability to earn income? That’s 

the big question I have, Mr. Speaker, on any of these bills that 

the Sask Party government is bringing forward. And those that 

have typically earned a living all their lives, I know many 

people that fish and trap and hunt; they sustain their families 

and many times, Mr. Speaker, you have extended family. If you 

go through a separation, you find another spouse and then you 

have children with that spouse and that goes on. And then the 

big question always comes into play, which children should be 

cared for properly and which children . . . How should you 

divide up the income of a parent when they have two or three 

children from a couple of partners? 

 

And that’s kind of what the question I have as well, Mr. 

Speaker, in this bill. That if you have a parent, whether it be the 

mother or the father and they have this child or a couple of 

children and then they have a separation, and then the mom or 

the dad leaves and then they separate and they find their own 

partners later on in life, and then as you find another partner 

then you have children with that partner, and then where does 

the first family versus the second family rights begin to 

intersect? Is there a lot of friction? Is there a lot of argument 

there? 

 

I don’t know that answer, Mr. Speaker. That’s why some of 

these bills are so important. All I know is that the current bill 

we’re dealing with, Bill 104, really has . . . The big question is 

that if you have arrears in the child maintenance enforcement 

office, that this government is now saying that they’re going to 

deny you the right to hunt and to fish by not giving you the 

licences that are required for that. 

 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4037 

And we need to know, we need to know, does this affect the 

commercial fishing industry? Does this affect outfitting? And 

how much? How many people out there are impacted by this 

bill? We don’t have that information. So we encourage people 

to participate. We encourage people to contact our office and 

we encourage people to go online or to email a letter or to fax a 

letter and give us all this information so we can ask the 

appropriate questions of the minister and of this government on 

this bill. That’s the important part of democracy. 

 

As I mentioned at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that we want to see 

as many people participating in this consultation process 

because they’ve only got three or four months at the outset 

before the government proclaims this bill as law. And that’s 

why they’re presenting this bill this fall. 

 

So I think my colleagues will have a lot of questions on this 

particular bill. As I mentioned, who did they consult with? How 

many people that do have a licence is based on their history? 

They have a lot of information, the government does. So if they 

have 15 or 20 per cent of those that have hunting licences and 

fishing licences that have child maintenance enforcement order 

problems, we need to have that information in front of us. And 

that’s the crucial information that the official opposition needs 

as we go through some of these bills. 

 

So a lot of questions, a lot more questions on consultation. And, 

Mr. Speaker, on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 104. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Informal Public 

Appeals Act. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have a long and proud history of 

rallying together to assist those in communities who need a 

helping hand. This was true in the pioneer days and continues 

today in the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Members of this Assembly will know that informal appeals to 

the public for donations are made on a regular basis. Unlike 

campaigns by established organizations, spontaneous appeals 

are usually initiated by private individuals without first 

obtaining legal advice. Mr. Speaker, The Informal Public 

Appeals Act is intended to facilitate and enhance this practice 

by addressing some of the unintended consequences that can 

arise for well-intentioned members of the public. 

 

In 2011 the Uniform Law Conference of Canada recommended 

that The Uniform Informal Public Appeals Act be adopted by 

Canadian jurisdictions to govern the operation of such appeals. 

The Informal Public Appeals Act is based on that uniform Act. 

This Act addresses spontaneous appeals made to the public, for 

example after a fire or flood, or to assist a bereaved family with 

future education costs. It does not address professional 

fundraising by established charitable organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Informal Public Appeals Act will define 

public appeal for the purpose of the Act to limit the scope to 

sporadic and informal appeals, confirm that funds raised 

through a public appeal are held in trust, and establish a default 

scheme that will apply only where a public appeal is not 

regulated under legislation or a formally created trust. 

 

It will establish a mechanism for disposal of surplus funds or an 

ability to provide refunds where needed. It will create a power 

for the courts to direct the application of surplus funds. It will 

set out the powers and duties of trustees, including investment 

of funds, further public appeals, and the transfer of funds to 

another body. And it will provide for regulatory authority to set 

out user-friendly forms with examples to be used by members 

of the public. 

 

This bill is careful not to create hurdles for those with good 

intentions. Individuals who choose not to use the forms to 

establish a public appeal can proceed without them. The bill 

will still protect these people, but to a lesser extent. 

 

Rather than hurdles, Mr. Speaker, this bill seeks to remove the 

traps that have evolved so that the well-meaning trustees who 

commence an appeal are not made victims of their own good 

intentions. These forms will be available online and we plan to 

make them broadly available through local lenders and other 

community locations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a community made up of people 

that have shown time and time again that they will step up to 

help each other. This bill was intended to ensure that they can 

continue to do so without risking unintended consequences for 

their good will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Informal Public Appeals Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the question? I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

quite pleased to stand today again to talk about Bill No. 105, 

The Informal Public Appeals Act. And just to explain to the 

public what The Informal Public Appeals Act, as indicated by 

the minister, is the government is now going to be monitoring 

how fundraising happens on a local basis for those families that 

are going through, as the minister made reference to, a fire loss 

or flood or bereavement, or in many cases you have different 

groups and organizations that’ll help a family fundraise for 

medical support. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister I think spoke a bit of confusing 

messaging in terms of the mechanism to deliver public funds; 



4038 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

they’re not intended to create hurdles; the court can adjudicate 

any leftover funds. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the public 

in general that this bill is really addressing all the local 

fundraising that can occur throughout all the province of 

Saskatchewan, and trying to put more regulations and trying to 

put more hurdles, in my opinion, to try and stop and curtail 

some of the help that local families want to offer a particular 

person or a particular family that may be going through some 

difficult times. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for the sake of trying to make sure that 

people understand what this bill is going to involve, I’m 

certainly calling it that when people fundraise locally to help a 

local family or a local person, this government wants to do 

more monitoring and have more control over that avenue or that 

venue of support that many of these families offer each other. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that when I travel into this 

Assembly, I drive through Kenaston. And the one time 

Kenaston had a really big . . . They called it the super draft in 

which they had entries from all over the world, literally all over 

the world, that entered these drafts, these hockey drafts to try 

and claim a top prize. And the prize money was good, Mr. 

Speaker, and Kenaston should be commended for that because 

Kenaston was raising great revenues, was raising great revenues 

from this draft. 

 

And obviously as time went on, we began embarking as the 

government of the day, we began embarking on a process to try 

and put gaming into a framework to make sure it was properly 

done and that there was some accountability to the province and 

to the government overall because of the gaming agreements 

that were initiated with a number of casinos, First Nations and 

non-First Nations throughout the province that wanted to 

formalize gaming agreements. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that a number of Sask Party members were complaining bitterly 

about that in terms of the government interfering with local 

fundraising and that is not the way to go and on and on and on. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, they have become government. And 

now they are going to put a new rule into place. Now we’re not 

only going to make sure that we monitor you when it comes to 

the gaming, we’re going to take it a step further. What the Sask 

Party is saying, the Sask Party’s going to take it a step further, 

saying all fundraising locally — for local causes, for helping 

families through fire, through flood, through bereavement, 

through illness, all that initiative to try and help these different 

families — the government wants to formalize that process 

now. And they’re even talking about, in this particular bill, 

mechanisms to protect public funds. They’re talking about 

court-ordered delivery of, or court-ordered determination of 

how some of these funds would be used as well. 

 

So I think a lot of organizations out there in the province of 

Saskatchewan, they ought to know that your work and your 

hard, hard work and good intentions to help a local family is 

now going to be monitored by the government of Saskatchewan 

through this bill, and that the government of Saskatchewan will 

determine how much you’re allowed to give that family. And 

that if they have to go through the court system, they’ll go 

through the court system to make sure that any residual money 

that you have left will be spent as they deem fit, Mr. Speaker. 

And I don’t think anybody in the province of Saskatchewan has 

asked the Sask Party government to get involved, nor to 

interfere in local fundraising to help local families. And that’s 

what this bill impacts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re all about responsibility. Obviously it makes sense to be 

responsible in the province of Saskatchewan. But there’s a little 

bit too much intrusion at times when the Sask Party . . . when it 

comes to fundraising and gaming in the province. And it’s 

another example, Mr. Speaker, of how they’ve taken the good 

intentions of Saskatchewan people — and they complained 

about this bitterly in the past — they’ve taken the good 

intentions of Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan 

communities in helping a local family or a local person with 

supports, how they want to then have that all reported. And they 

want to be able to control that, Mr. Speaker. What’s going to 

happen is you’re going to stop that activity because people will 

get frustrated, and many families will be left on their own. So I 

would point out that there is a lot of issues, there is a lot of 

issues on this bill that we in the opposition want to talk about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that the minister spoke 

about the goodwill and the hard work and the good intentions of 

Saskatchewan people. We see evidence of that all throughout 

our communities and our constituencies: the fundraising going 

on, the bake sales, the auctions. All these activities, Mr. 

Speaker, many, many towns and groups and villages do these 

kind of activities. They do it on one thing, it’s to help a family 

through some trying times. Through some trying times, they do 

this to help a family. And now this government, through this 

bill, want to begin to monitor that, have that activity reported. 

And if there’s any residual money left over from what they 

determine should be going to that family or to that individual, 

through the courts then they will determine how that money 

will be spent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a bit too much when it comes 

to interfering with Saskatchewan’s well- and good-intended 

groups and organizations that are out there. So if you’re sitting 

at home watching this and you probably know, you probably 

know that there is some activity happening in your community 

or some activity happening next week or in a couple of days or 

you’re going to go there and you’re going to help support a 

family in need. I think Saskatchewan families and 

Saskatchewan people overall have been renowned for not only 

volunteering but for donating, for going out there and making a 

difference in their community. This bill is beginning to interfere 

with that process, in my opinion. 

 

Again, we’re all for accountability, but there’s nobody out there 

that is ripping off the process. There’s nobody out there that is 

making money off other people’s misery. So why is the 

government all of a sudden deciding that they want to be a big 

brother and interfere and come in there and start monitoring and 

start fighting over local fundraised dollars, Mr. Speaker? I don’t 

understand what the intention of that is. And I think quite 

frankly the people of Saskatchewan, as we begin to look at this 

bill more and more and more, I think from our perspective as 

the NDP opposition, they should leave those families and those 

organizations and those communities alone when they begin to 

help themselves. 

 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4039 

If they’re helping themselves and they’re helping one of their 

own citizens or one of their own families, then leave that alone. 

Don’t go in there and be a big brother and insist on these forms 

being filled out, and then if there’s any money left over, start 

fighting with them in the court system over some of those local 

fundraising dollars. I think, Mr. Speaker, that is way too much. 

It’s over the top. And I’m going to make sure that different 

organizations and different families and different people out 

there and different communities are aware that this is what the 

government has intended and this is their plan of action, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So this bill, the question I have for the minister is, did they do 

proper consultation? Did they actually consult with different 

groups and organizations on this bill to get a good read, to get a 

good read as to how they felt about this particular bill? And 

who did they consult with? When did they consult with these 

groups? And did they get those groups’ support on this bill? 

Because as I mentioned at the outset, consultation is one thing, 

but agreement is a totally different thing, Mr. Speaker. When 

this government says they consult, we on this side of the 

Assembly don’t listen to any of that foolishness because we 

know that they never consult. They say they consult and then 

they do what they want, Mr. Speaker, despite the protests of 

some of the groups that they consult with. And Mr. Speaker, 

that’s why we say, in opposition, we’ve got to know who the 

government consulted on this bill and whether these groups 

really endorse what they’re trying to do. 

 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, there’s thousands of groups in 

rural, northern, and urban Saskatchewan that do a great amount 

of work. And there’ll be a lot of groups that will not be happy 

with the Saskatchewan Party government that’s going to start 

making them fill out forms and start fighting over some of the 

fundraising dollars that they’re intending to help a local person 

or a local family. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, when you have a 

consultation — this is what’s really important, I tell a lot of 

people in my constituency — when you talk about consultation, 

there’s a significant legal difference when governments say we 

consulted with so and so versus them saying we consulted with 

this group and the group agreed. You see the difference, Mr. 

Speaker? Because I know a lot of people don’t deviate the 

difference. 

 

Because generally when the government says they consult, they 

want people to be impressed that, okay, they went to consult 

with these four groups so these four groups must be supportive 

of what they want to do. That’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why the government uses the word, we consulted. They 

never use the word, we consulted and these four groups agreed. 

You’ll never see that particular wording, Mr. Speaker, in some 

of their language because, quite frankly from our perspective, 

we see that this government doesn’t consult. They are very 

dismissive of some of the concerns of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And they do a lot of secretive deals that people of 

Saskatchewan ought to know about, Mr. Speaker. We have 

been seeing this particular government hide a lot of facts. They 

have been hiding a lot of information from the people of 

Saskatchewan. And as I said at the outset, they’re being very 

secretive and dismissive. And that’s very unfortunate, it’s very 

unfortunate for the people of Saskatchewan because we’ve got 

to be able to know what this government’s up to. And when 

they dismiss our concerns, when they dismiss many of the 

groups’ and organizations’ concerns out there, Mr. Speaker, 

that creates a lot of animosity, it creates a lot of anger, and it 

creates a lot of confusion. 

 

And the big question is, why wouldn’t the government at least 

afford the people the decency to participate in discussions on 

this particular bill when it talks about helping families locally 

by fundraising locally? And this is exactly our point in 

opposition, that we need to hold this government to account. 

 

Now Bill 105 . . . And I wanted to explain to the families out 

there, and I think the minister indicated that there are forms 

online, if I’m to be corrected. There are forms online now. So if 

you have a local family or a local person that may have needed 

some help recently — whether it’s a fire loss or whether it’s a 

health concern or whether it’s just generally a lot of suffering 

for that particular person or that particular family — and you 

want to help out. And I tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, there 

are hundreds of thousands of people in Saskatchewan that 

would gladly help out some of these families. Now they’re 

required to fill out these forms that the minister says you can 

get them online. Why in the heck would you do that? Why in 

the world would you put another process in front of these 

organizations that they’ve got to fill out a form to be able to 

help one of their own? It just doesn’t make any sense at all, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And these are the same guys that were bellyaching and 

complaining about a gaming agreement that the NDP put in 

place to rationalize all the gaming in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

And they’re complaining about the half a billion dollars made 

to SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] when 

the gaming industry was regulated and that we did bring in the 

non-Aboriginal and Aboriginal groups all together to develop 

the gaming framework. 

 

Yes, there was a few fights here and there, Mr. Speaker, no 

question about that. But this government, when they were in 

opposition, they were complaining about that. Now they’re in 

government, now they’re trying to put in place more 

regulations, more forms, more forms, more interference, and 

more obstacles for local people fundraising for one of their 

own, and that person or that family has trouble health-wise or 

losing a family home or, worse, the sudden tragic death. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know a lot of communities, a lot of groups 

and organizations really help out their own. They really help 

out their own and they do their part. They do their part, and all 

of a sudden the government isn’t helping them on a number of 

things. We see this happen all the time. Some of these 

communities are left on their own. And I can tell you that 

governments don’t do a lot to help some of these organizations 

and groups out there, Mr. Speaker. They literally fund raise on 

their own, and they help each other with what they have. 

 

And that goes back to my earlier point, Mr. Speaker, is that 

people that operate these fundraisers are the salt of the earth. 

They’re the base of our community. They’re the ones that 

strengthen our families, that strengthen our community. These 



4040 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

are the ones that go above and beyond their own needs. They 

don’t just look at their own family needs; they go above and 

beyond that. And these people that run these fundraisers are 

legally minded people. They’re honest people. It’s for a good 

purpose. Now all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

government that’s saying, well we want more information. We 

want . . . You guys fill out this form, and if you guys make too 

much for health treatments, we want to be able to determine 

what is too much. 

 

And then there’s an argument over what you fund raise versus 

what is needed. We’re going to claw that money back. And if 

you don’t want to give us that money voluntarily, we’re going 

to go to court. And that’s exactly what this bill is. 

 

And I can tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan did not want this bill. They did not want this bill 

where you’re interfering with local fundraising. Yes, they want 

to make sure that people aren’t doing this dishonestly, but 

people aren’t — the vast, vast majority of people. 

 

I’ve yet to hear of families and organizations that are doing this 

illegally, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely every group has a legitimate 

case. Absolutely every group that I’ve bumped into that’s trying 

to help local families, the money goes to the local families and 

they use it wisely. And yet this government’s insisting that 

there are more, more processes and hurdles and obstacles that 

they need to put up to curtail that kind of support that these 

Saskatchewan families are offering to each other. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot questions we have on this bill, a 

lot of questions. We want to know what their plan is. We’re 

going to let the public know. We want to know who they 

consulted and got agreement from for this bill, not just consult 

but agreement from. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to take the 

several next few months to ask the groups and organizations out 

there . . . that this is going to affect you. This is going to impact 

you. You’ve got to let the Saskatchewan Party government 

know that any interference, any obstacles, any fight over local 

fundraising for helping families or an individual who went 

through a crisis, they are now going to be in your face asking 

all these questions because they don’t believe for one minute 

that all the work that you’re doing is work that is valued and 

proper. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of concern on this particular bill, 

and I’m sure we’ll hear those concerns. So on that note, I move 

that we adjourn debate on Bill 105, the informal public appeals 

bill, in which they want to see forms and documentation from 

all local fundraising submitted to them, the fundraising that 

local people do to help families that may be going through 

some tough and trying times. Thank you. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2013. Mr. Speaker, this bill is 

proposed at the request of the Law Society of Saskatchewan. 

These amendments will accomplish several things. 

 

First they will add a provision clarifying that in regulating the 

profession, the public interest is paramount over the interests of 

members being disciplined. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the society 

is being given more control over the number of elected 

members on its council to accommodate demographic changes 

and improve governance. The society is given the authority to 

regulate law firms as well as individual members. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of amendments to 

provide the society with the ability to recruit persons who are 

not members of council or lawyers to assist with investigations 

and hearings. This is designed to increase flexibility and avoid 

delays in proceedings. Mr. Speaker, we are proposing changes 

to the way that appeals are conducted from decisions respecting 

admissions of lawyers into the practice. Instead of an appeal to 

the full council of benchers, an appeal will be to a smaller panel 

known as the admissions panel. This will result in timelier 

decision making. 

 

The legislative time limit for issuing discipline decisions is 

being removed to permit flexibility. The time period of 45 days 

may be difficult to achieve in complex cases. The common law 

rules of natural justice require the decision to be delivered in a 

reasonable amount of time. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the statutory exemption from liability for 

good faith decisions is being extended to the Law Foundation 

and members of the Law Foundation to help encourage 

volunteers to undertake this very worthwhile activity. Mr. 

Speaker, there are also several changes in the rule-making 

power of the society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second reading of The 

Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m very pleased to be able to stand up and speak about 

this particular bill. And I know that in our caucus we have two 

or three lawyers that will be looking at this bill and to see 

exactly the impact it may have on their profession. 

 

Obviously the Bill 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act 

as was indicated, that there’s a number of issues that are made 

to clean up the language and to certainly look at things like 

allowing members from different backgrounds to be more 

representative on the board, to look at how they can recruit 

members at large, and to also indicate the appeals for lawyers to 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4041 

become part of the, I’m assuming, the Saskatchewan bar and in 

this case the admissions panel. And it talks about good faith 

provisions and so on and so forth. 

 

So I think that Bill 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

is something that we want to pay very close attention to as an 

opposition. And I’m sure my lawyer colleagues will have a lot 

more to say on this bill because they obviously have more of an 

impact, more involvement with the legal profession. And they 

will have a greater insight, Mr. Speaker, from their perspective 

as to what the changes are on this particular bill. 

 

We again want to make sure that I point out to folks that in the 

fall sitting as we sit here, the government’s role is to introduce 

some of their bills and some of the changes that they want on 

these bills. And I spoke to a number of bills already. And then 

what the process is, after they introduce the bills, we then have 

a break in a couple of weeks. Then we go back to our groups 

and back to our constituencies and back to organizations and 

ask and seek advice on these bills. And then of course, come 

March, we’re back in the Assembly and then we start going 

through second, third, and finally we start proclaiming some of 

these bills as we finish off the spring sitting. 

 

So what it does, it introduces the bills and then we take the time 

to consult with groups. And then the government of course 

wants to bring these bills into law in the spring, and that gives 

us time for us to consult with different groups and different 

organizations out there. 

 

So I think it’s important that we note to the people out there that 

may have an interest, the lawyers or the paralegals or people 

that are just involved with the court process, that we need you 

to participate in this because obviously we want to ensure that 

the government is to be held to account. And we obviously 

appreciate any kind of help to again to make sure the 

government is accountable for some of their activity. We want 

to make sure that when they make mistakes that we hold them 

to their mistakes. And anything that may make common sense, 

that is common sense for the people of Saskatchewan, we want 

to see put through the Assembly as quickly as possible so we 

can get on with the real fights of some of their mess-ups. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, we have seen a steady trend, a practice 

by this government to be secretive, to be dismissive, and to not 

do proper consultation and agreement with different groups. We 

want to find out where they are failing, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

finding a number of examples of that. 

 

So this bill, Bill 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, we 

obviously, we hear from the minister that they have some 

consultation. But we want to also talk to the Law Society, or 

have our members speak to the appropriate representative on 

this society to see what they think of the changes, to see if the 

changes are indicative of what they want, and receptive to the 

public. And what does that all mean? 

 

The one section I think is really important, Mr. Speaker, is I 

think there’s . . . well actually two parts that I want to pay a bit 

of attention to. One is to allowing members from different 

backgrounds to give a more representative view of the Law 

Society members out there. We think that that’s certainly 

something that should be advantageous overall because you 

look at the different make-ups of different boards in the 

province: you do want to see gender parity, you do want to see 

diversity, and you also want to see all kinds of groups and 

organizations involved. There’s nothing wrong with that, Mr. 

Speaker. And we want to make sure that that’s offered to a lot 

of different organizations and backgrounds and people 

generally to make sure that they’re fair. 

 

The other thing that seems important is the admissions panel. 

Who decides who becomes part of that admissions panel? Does 

the government decide on their own or is it totally the Law 

Society’s practice for them to determine who is on the 

admissions panel? Now I’m assuming the admissions panel are 

the ones that will allow a lawyer to operate within a certain 

jurisdiction or within that Law Society’s mandate area. But who 

picks these particular panel members? This is something that 

we obviously need to know and we need to find out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also the good faith provisions, what particular 

measure is that all about? We will need to find out what is 

intended by the good faith provision in this particular bill. Was 

there some problem that occurred and that this is intended to fix 

up? Is it more of a language issue? Where did the good faith 

section of the bill come from? We need to find that out and see 

whether there’s any underlying problems or anything that the 

Sask Party’s trying to sneak through or trying to hide, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This is important that we do that, and as I said at the outset, 

from our perspective where it makes sense for the continued 

growth and strengthening of Saskatchewan’s economy and 

families and people in our province, we will be very supportive, 

Mr. Speaker. Why wouldn’t we be supportive? 

 

And the second thing is where the government is making 

mistakes and errors, we need to point that out. That is our job in 

opposition, and we relish that role because this government is 

making many, many mistakes. 

 

So whether it’s on Bill 106 or any other bill that comes forward 

to the Assembly, we are going to take the time to make sure we 

research that bill and find out exactly what is in that bill and all 

the provisions that are in there. We’ve got to make sure we 

study them and we have collaboration from the players that are 

involved with that bill or the people that they’re intending to 

impact with that bill to make sure that they indeed support that. 

 

So I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan that this Bill 106, The 

Legal Profession Amendment Act, no matter how mundane a 

bill may appear by this government, we in the opposition are 

going to pay very close attention to that bill. We’re going to try 

and see if they’re trying to sneak something through, Mr. 

Speaker, because in our experience with this particular 

government, we have seen this government being very secretive 

and being very dismissive of some of the issues and concerns 

that people have brought forward to them. And that’s why it’s 

important we take the time to study these bills. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, also consultation. We mention that on every 

occasion. And when you have consultation . . . And this is 

where I think lawyers are excellent at explaining these things to 

people. And I’m not a lawyer, Mr. Speaker. I’m just a hockey 

player. But from my perspective I would point out that there is 



4042 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

a significant difference, a significant legal difference between 

consultation and agreement. And, Mr. Speaker, this is kind of 

where it’s important on some of these bills when they said, well 

they consulted with all the appropriate parties. And we on this 

side say, well the appropriate parties . . . Can we have a list of 

who you consulted with? And the appropriate parties you’re 

talking about, did they agree with the changes to this bill? We 

need to know that for sure. 

 

And then not only do they, the government, says yes, they’ve 

agreed. We’re going to check with those organizations and 

different groups that are involved to see if they did agree, 

because we don’t really trust this government based on some of 

their past practices for the last couple of months of trying to 

twist the truth and trying to misrepresent a lot of different 

groups and organizations and trying to manage the people that 

are involved with these issues as opposed to addressing the 

issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve seen that practice occur on a regular, continual basis by 

this government, and that’s why from the official opposition 

there is no trust on any bill they bring forward, no matter how 

mundane the bill appears to be or how minor the bill changes 

appear to be, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to make sure that we 

hold this government to account on every single change on 

every single bill that they bring forward, and something that we 

as the official opposition have made a commitment to do so, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s a lot of issues on this particular bill that I want to talk 

about. There are things that I’m sure that members on my side 

of the Assembly, especially my legal learned friends, would 

have more of experience on. But there are things that we are 

concerned about on this bill. I mentioned at the outset that 

we’re taking the time that is necessary to study the bill, research 

the bill, do the consultation, and get agreement from the groups 

that are being impacted by this bill. That’s a significant 

difference from the official opposition. 

 

And if there are some challenges to the bill — say there’s some 

lawyers or group of lawyers that don’t like some of the changes 

to this bill or see a problem with this bill — then we in the 

opposition, our job is to get up and tell the government, you’re 

doing something wrong on this bill. And this is what you’re 

doing wrong, so you either fix it or we’re going to hold you to 

account to the process of the Assembly or through the media or 

through our own campaigns to make sure you fight back and 

tell the people of Saskatchewan that they can fight back when it 

comes to the government that’s being secretive, that’s being 

dismissive, that’s being arrogant at times, and not paying the 

proper respect to this Legislative Assembly and to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is going to undo a lot of 

support that they had in the past because people are getting tired 

of some of their actions and some of their activity. 

 

So Bill 106 has a number of changes to it. We want to find out 

what those changes are. We’re going to take the adequate time, 

as I mentioned at the outset, and we’re going to make sure, 

we’re going to make sure that people know that they do have 

the opportunity to come involve themselves with this bill or any 

of the other bills that we spoke about earlier, and to tell them 

that this is a free, democratic society, that you have the right to 

voice your opinion, to present your views, and to participate in 

this whole process called the Legislative Assembly. So that 

offer is there, Mr. Speaker. We will take our time to make sure 

that people are consulted. 

 

And on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013. 

And I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being near the hour of 5 

o’clock, this House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4011, 4012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4011 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4011 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4011 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4012 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4012 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4012 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4012 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4013 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Roughriders Vie for Grey Cup 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4013 

 Bullying Awareness Week 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4014 

 Poetry Slam Team Places Third 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4014 

 Athlete Makes the Big League 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4014 

 Louis Riel Day Features Bell of Batoche 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4015 

 Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4015 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Access to Emergency Rooms in Regina 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4015 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4015 

 School Infrastructure 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4017 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4017 

 Combatting Bullying and Provision of Information 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4019 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4019 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4019 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4020 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Provision of Information 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4020 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4021 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4021 

PRIVILEGE 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4022, 4025 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4023 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4024 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4024 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4024 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4025 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 4026 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4027 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4028 

 



 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4031 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4031 

 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4033 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4033 

 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4035 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4035 

 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4037 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4037 

 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4040 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4040 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




