




















































Hansard: November 28, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 21A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 2013, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4297 

 November 28, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this morning to introduce a number of individuals that are 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And from time to time, all 

members of the Assembly have the opportunity to introduce and 

welcome their constituency assistants. And all members know 

the important role that constituency assistants play in serving 

the people of our province, in serving our constituents, and 

allowing MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] to do 

their jobs, especially when we’re here in Regina. 

 

And today in the Speaker’s gallery we have a number of 

constituency assistants from the opposition, working for 

opposition MLAs, Mr. Speaker. Deborah Aitken is here. Donna 

Rederburg is here. Erica Spracklin, Gloria Patrick, Vanessa 

Hyggen, and Colleen Smith. And I want to say, on behalf of all 

of the MLAs that these constituency assistants help out and 

keep in line on a daily basis, I want to say a huge thank you for 

the role that you serve, for the ways that you help us as MLAs, 

but most importantly for the ways that you help our 

constituents. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

CAs [constituency assistant] to the Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and all members of the House, I’d like to point out some 

guests in your gallery from the Saskatchewan Manufacturing 

Council, Mr. Derek Lothian and Ms. Melissa Fiacco. They are 

here to help celebrate Manufacturing Week here in 

Saskatchewan. Derek is based out of Ottawa, but he’s from 

Saskatchewan originally and gets back on a very frequent basis. 

And of course Melissa is from Regina here as many people 

would know. 

 

The manufacturing sector in Saskatchewan employs over 

27,000 people and ships some $14 billion worth of goods 

around the world each year. I’ve seen first regard, the very high 

regard internationally that the manufacturers of our province 

get. There’s been some talk about eggs in baskets and I don’t 

think it’s too much of a stretch to say that these are the people 

that make the baskets and deliver the eggs around the world. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the minister opposite and welcome these 

representatives from the manufacturing industry, from the 

Manufacturing Council here in Saskatchewan. Certainly we’re 

incredibly proud of the investments, the ingenuity of 

Saskatchewan manufacturers providing world-class 

value-added product to our world. And I thank Ms. Fiacco and 

Mr. Lothian for their leadership in representing Saskatchewan, 

Saskatchewan’s business interest. So thank you for being here 

today and I’m very pleased to welcome you to your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you and through you 37 grade 12 students from Winston Knoll 

Collegiate here in Regina. They’re accompanied by their 

teachers, Mr. Scott McKillop and Mr. Brodie Evenson. So if 

everyone would please kindly welcome them to their Assembly. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater supports for 

anti-bullying. We know bullying causes serious harm and we 

know that other provinces have brought forward legislation and 

various tools and programs that show swift and effective 

government action. But we also know this government is not 

doing enough to create safe spaces in our schools for gay and 

transgendered students or students bullied because of their 

sexual identity. And this government must act so that students 

have simple, easy-to-understand information about gay-straight 

alliances, GSAs, in their schools, how to form a GSA, and who 

they should talk to in order to form a GSA today. We know that 

bullying is a human rights issue, one of safety and inclusion. I 

would like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives of 

young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of very concerned residents from 

across southern Saskatchewan as it relates to the unacceptable 

potential closure of the emergency room at the Pasqua Hospital 

here in Regina. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to ensure our capital city has two 24-hour 

emergency rooms. 

 

 



4298 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These are signed by concerned residents from Regina, Earl 

Grey, and Southey. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of residents of Far Reserve Road. This road is used as 

the main road into the regional landfill which is operated by the 

tripartite agreement between the communities of La Ronge, Air 

Ronge, and Lac La Ronge Indian Band. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave Far Reserve Road, which has not 

been given the proper resources by this government. The 

dust on the road is causing respiratory problems for elders 

and community members. It also creates poor visibility for 

drivers. This is a safety issue, in that we have students 

walking along the side of a very dusty road to school. This 

road has a high volume of traffic in that it is the only road 

to the regional dump. 

 

It is signed by many Saskatchewan residents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out 

that the gym at Sacred Heart Community School in north 

central Regina is now quite literally falling apart, has been 

closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe for students or staff. 

There is a temporary solution that has been arrived at, Mr. 

Speaker, in refurbishing the old sanctuary at the old Sacred 

Heart Church, but that is hardly a satisfactory solution for the 

long haul. 

 

The petitioners point out that the gym at Sacred Heart has 

played an important role in the school’s efforts to become a 

literacy leader, having served as a gathering place for the very 

successful reading assemblies and reading nights. They point 

out that the Sacred Heart Community School is the largest 

school in north central Regina, with 450-plus students, 75 per 

cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. And they point out 

that as a matter of basic fairness and common sense that Sacred 

Heart Community School needs a gym. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to immediately 

commit to the replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred 

Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Celebration of Hanukkah 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday at sundown was the 

beginning of the celebration of Hanukkah, the eight-day Jewish 

festival of lights. Jewish families in Saskatchewan, throughout 

Canada, and around the world gathered with loved ones to light 

the first branch of their menorahs, to enjoy one another’s 

company, to eat some latkes and sufganiyot, and to celebrate 

their rich heritage and their tremendous faith. 

 

The Hanukkah story is the earliest recorded struggle for 

religious freedom. It’s an incredible story of the Maccabees 

who rose up, liberated their people from oppression, 

rededicated their holy temple, and witnessed a miracle when 

they discovered that the oil left in the temple, which was 

enough to last just one night, actually lasted for eight full days. 

So the Hanukkah story is about the miracles that come to those 

with great courage and faith, about peace and perseverance, and 

about light shining through darkness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to 

join with me in sending warm greetings to all those celebrating 

Hanukkah. To all Jewish families in Saskatchewan, I wish 

peace, joy, health, and happiness throughout the celebration of 

Hanukkah and throughout the coming year. Happy Hanukkah. 

Chag Sameach. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatchewan Employers on Top 100 List 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

2014 list of Canada’s top 100 employers has been released and 

Saskatchewan firms have a large presence on that list. 

 

Three potash miners have been recognized which includes 

Agrium, Mosaic Company, and Potash Corp. Two 

Saskatchewan IT [information technology] companies have 

made the list as well: ISM [Information Systems Management 

Corporation] Canada and Solvera Solutions. And two Crown 

corporations, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] and 

SaskTel, were also recognized. 

 

Bob Lane, who is the Solvera Solutions director of people care, 

stated one of his firm’s main tools is a strong focus on the 

people in the organization, which translated into good service 

and ultimately profitability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, several other employers on the list aren’t based in 

Saskatchewan but have a substantial presence in the province 

and I would like to recognize them as well. They include 

Aecon, Royal Bank of Canada, CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank 

of Commerce], KPMG, and Loblaw Companies Ltd. 

 

The 2014 list was overseen by Mediacorp and evaluations were 

based on physical workplace; work and social atmospheres; 

health, financial, and family benefits; community involvement; 

vacation and time off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

celebrating the great Saskatchewan employers who have been 

recognized on this list. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4299 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Movember Supports a Good Cause 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the joy of friends, 

family, and neighbours, the razors will be shaving off the 

moustaches in only two short days. That’s right. The end of 

November brings the end of Movember. But the fun had by 

everyone, as jokes have been made at the expense of our hairy 

upper lips, is all for a good cause, Mr. Speaker. Movember 

fundraising for prostate cancer and mental health is about 

supporting those among us who face these health challenges. 

 

Prostate cancer, the most commonly diagnosed cancer among 

men, is an estimated 25 per cent of all new cancer cases. In 

Canada alone, more than 23,000 men are estimated to be 

diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2013 alone. That means 

Movember is not only about growing of the best ’stache around 

or as in my case, Mr. Speaker, the worst ’stache around. It’s 

also about reminding the men in our lives to get checked. 

 

Movember has also raised awareness about testicular cancers 

and mental health, and I’m proud to say that our team, Team 

Jack, Saskatchewan NDP [New Democratic Party], has been 

able to raise some funds for the cause. And I salute as well the 

efforts of members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not too late for people to reach deep into those 

pockets and make a donation to the cause because the good 

news is in just two more sleeps those moustaches will see their 

end. Let’s work together to detect, diagnose, and cure prostate 

and testicular cancers and address the serious issues of men’s 

mental health. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Educator Honoured 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

immensely proud to rise today and share with my colleagues 

details about an individual in my constituency who has once 

again received well-deserved recognition for her work with 

children. Lucille Gilliland, the executive director of the 

Southwest Day Care & Early Learning Centre, recently 

received the Prime Minister’s Award for Excellence in Early 

Childhood Education. 

 

Lucille travelled to Ottawa and received this award directly 

from Prime Minister Harper for her facility’s dedication to 

working with children, including those with special needs and 

those who are medically fragile. This award was given to only 

60 early childhood educators and is truly suited to Lucille, who 

has an exceptional history of working with children. In 

2003-2004 Lucille also received the Prime Minister’s 

Certificate of Achievement at a regional level and now has been 

recognized nationally as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very familiar with the Southwest Day Care & 

Early Learning Centre, having toured their facility as well as 

having met with Lucille, her staff, children, and the parents on a 

few occasions. Twenty-five per cent of the children there are 

high needs, and they make amazing strides due to the detailed 

care, love, and support they receive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Lucille and her staff have a unique level of 

expertise with their ability to work with our kids, and I’d like 

my colleagues to join me in congratulating Lucille on receiving 

this much-deserved recognition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Collaborative Emergency Centres in Rural Communities 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

our government is following through on its commitment to 

improve access to health services for residents in rural areas. 

 

As of today, a new collaborative emergency centre is now open 

and operating in the community of Shaunavon. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to congratulate Cypress Hills health region, community 

partners, health providers, and STARS [Shock Trauma Air 

Rescue Society] for this outstanding initiative. Through the 

CEC [collaborative emergency centre], residents in Shaunavon 

and surrounding areas will have access to extended hours of 

primary health care and 24-7 emergency care. 

 

Collaborative emergency centres use an innovative approach to 

health care delivery. They provide access to stable, reliable 

health services for patients, particularly in rural areas. CECs are 

open 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Mr. Speaker, earlier 

this fall we marked a milestone for our province when 

Saskatchewan’s first CEC was launched in Maidstone. In the 

coming months, several other communities will open CECs. 

Mr. Speaker, our government is pleased to support this very 

important initiative. We believe CECs will improve access and 

stability of health care services in a way that’s unprecedented 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government remains committed to patient- 

and family-centred care. We’ll continue to put the patient first 

in all that we do in the health care system, and we’ll continue 

our efforts to provide the best quality care for people in our 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Improving Access to Housing 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday 

I, along with construction company representatives, city 

dignitaries, and ministry officials, gathered in the snow to do a 

sod-turning and the announcement of a new housing project in 

Moose Jaw. This housing project is the first of 91 new social 

housing units being built in Moose Jaw, with construction of the 

first 36 units expected to be completed by next fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the unprecedented growth of Saskatchewan, 

along with a growing economy there are challenges. One of 

these challenges is meeting the need for safe and affordable 

housing. In our growth plan, plan for growth, our government 

committed to addressing housing challenges. We’re meeting 

those challenges by transitioning close to 300 older 

single-family housing units in Regina, Prince Albert, and 



4300 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

Moose Jaw, and reinvesting the proceeds into new housing. 

 

Our government is also investing $18 million into the Moose 

Jaw housing project. We’re saving taxpayers’ money by 

creating more affordable, modern, and energy-efficient social 

housing. By doing so, this will make housing less expensive for 

the tenants. Current renters will also have the first option to 

purchase the home they are now renting if they so choose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a win-win situation. The Moose Jaw housing 

project supports our government’s goal of improving housing 

affordability and availability right across this great province. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Growth Plans 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all 

session we’ve been calling on the NDP to release their so-called 

smart growth plan, and they still haven’t released it. But earlier 

this week, the NDP member for Athabasca admitted what their 

plan would mean for Saskatchewan. He said, and I quote, 

“Smart growth from the NDP perspective means . . . you’re 

going to have some great years . . .” He also said, and I quote, 

“. . . you also have to anticipate some tougher years and some 

really bad years.” 

 

Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker. According to the NDP, smart 

growth means some really bad years. And he’s absolutely right. 

When they were in government, the NDP had lots of growth 

plans and they had a lot of really bad years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2000 the NDP released Partnership for 

Prosperity; Saskatchewan lost 8,000 people. In 2001, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP released Partnership for Prosperity Two; 

Saskatchewan lost 5,000 people. In 2002 the NDP released A 

Strategy for Rural Saskatchewan; we lost 2,500 people. In 2005 

the NDP released The Saskatchewan Action Plan for the 

Economy; Saskatchewan lost another 4,000 people. Mr. 

Speaker, the member for Athabasca is absolutely correct. A 

smart growth plan from the NDP perspective means some really 

bad years.  

 

Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, those years are behind us. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan has grown by 100,000 people in six 

years. We can’t afford any more smart growth plans from the 

NDP. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe just 

moments ago the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region put out a 

news release indicating that the Pasqua emergency room would 

indeed be open this evening, Mr. Speaker. I believe the news 

release was put out in the morning prompted by media reports, 

Mr. Speaker, to that effect. If this is the case, Mr. Speaker, of 

course we are relieved that this is occurring, as are people in 

Regina and area because it’s simply unacceptable that our 

capital city would only have one emergency room available 24 

hours a day. 

 

So my question to the Premier: could he please provide an 

update to the House with respect to what will be occurring at 

Pasqua ER [emergency room] this evening? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The RQHR 

[Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] will be releasing a full 

press release here, perhaps even as we’re meeting here this 

morning, and if not, then immediately after proceedings here in 

the legislature. 

 

But I can report to the Assembly today that the RQHR 

emergency department physicians have agreed to work 

additional shifts, Mr. Speaker, until a reliable and effective 

locum service is available for the operation, obviously at the 

Pasqua ER. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can also report to this House that we now have a 

deal, we have an agreement with ER docs across the province. 

They have ratified an offer. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all of 

the people involved to solve this problem today so the ER 

indeed will remain open regular hours, 24 hours. I want to thank 

the senior management at RQHR. I want to thank the ministry, 

Mr. Speaker, and I want to acknowledge the Minister of Health, 

who has made it his top priority to deal with this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s an interesting comparison here. When the 

ER in our Royal University Hospital was in crisis in 2004, 

here’s what The StarPhoenix reported: “Saskatchewan Health 

Minister John Nilson [I’m quoting] told reporters on Thursday 

that the region was responsible for settling the dispute with the 

emergency room doctors and that he wouldn’t get involved,” 

Mr. Speaker. We take a different approach on this side of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we’ve talked 

about, looked at the potential closure of the Pasqua ER, a reason 

identified by emergency room physicians, Mr. Speaker, was the 

fact that there were not enough ER docs, that they were 

working longer hours and that it wasn’t sustainable. 

 

So my question: with the approach that has been arrived at in 

order to allow for the Pasqua ER to stay open this evening, are 

more ER physicians actually being added to the mix, or is the 

agreement simply for the existing ER doctors to work longer? 

Because what we’ve seen, the cause for the problem, the cause 

for the possible closure of the ER was because the doctors were 

stretched too thin and there weren’t enough of them. So are 

more ER physicians being added with the agreement that has 

been reached? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, the doctors currently working in ER 

have agreed to provide full coverage for the ER. 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4301 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note what we’re confirming 

today is that we’re going to continue to work on locum 

coverage because, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve been saying all 

along is indeed the case, that there is a shortage of ER docs 

right across this country. The shortage has not changed in the 

last 24 hours obviously. And so the answer to the Leader of the 

Opposition’s question is we’re seeing coverage provided by the 

existing complement today. We’re working now on locum 

coverage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But here’s something more important that we’ve been doing 

since 2007 when we were first elected. When we were first 

elected, we inherited a situation where this province was 

training only two ER doc residency positions or providing those 

positions. We’re now up to eight, Mr. Speaker, up to eight in 

just those number of years. That’s an important development. 

Additionally we’re now training two additional Royal College 

ER doc residencies in the province of Saskatchewan, something 

that’s never happened before. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if it’s the same number of ER 

docs providing service tonight, the same pool of about 20 

physicians providing service tonight, which has been the case 

for the months leading up to the crisis that we’ve seen at the 

Pasqua ER, obviously increasing the supply of the ER 

physicians is what is needed to have a sustainable solution in 

this case. 

 

The Premier has mentioned the prospect and plans under way 

for locum relief physicians with respect to ER coverage. So 

what is the timeline with respect to securing these locum docs 

to cover the ERs so that we have a solution that is at least more 

sustainable than what we have seen to date? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the date that we’re looking at 

is 15 December. We have until that time to identify locum 

coverage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would point out that this is not significantly 

different than from what happens actually every year around 

Christmas where obviously there’s going to be scheduling 

difficulties, those difficulties exacerbated by the shortage that 

we’ve already discussed. But around about the middle of 

December, we’re working for locum coverage. Until that point, 

then we will be working with, the region will be working with 

the doctors to ensure appropriate coverage through the season, 

through the Christmas season, the holiday season. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that the agreement that now 

has been ratified by the ER docs ensures that we are 

compensating at a rate comparable to the province of Alberta, I 

believe comparable to the province of British Columbia and 

also Ontario, and a bit a better frankly than some other 

provinces. So will we be recruiting? Yes, we already are. We 

have been now for a number of years through the new Saskdocs 

agency that’s resulted in 300 more doctors practising in the 

province than when we were first elected. And additionally, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re training more ER docs, as we pointed out, 

providing dollars to be ready for growth, providing dollars to 

fund more residency training for ER docs. And that’s going to 

continue under our government as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the 

locums, how many relief physicians are being pursued in order 

to complement the ER docs that are already stretched thin, and 

from what jurisdictions are discussions occurring with respect 

to where the locum physicians are coming from? Are these 

other cities within the province or are these from other 

provinces or is this an international recruitment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we are looking outside of the borders of 

Saskatchewan, working with other medical agencies, 

associations that do have locum pools as well as outside of the 

country, Mr. Speaker. In terms of the out-of-country, we also 

have the ability through a special licence to be able to license 

locums, emergency room locums. So that is an option that 

we’re looking at. As well Saskdocs has reached out to the 

Alberta Medical Association that has quite a significant 

emergency physician locum pool, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already 

made contact with a number of physicians that have expressed 

interest to coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is the route that the region is pursuing, 

knowing that while a contingency plan had been put in place, 

Mr. Speaker, all during this time we had not given up on the 

Pasqua. And we’re very pleased with today’s announcement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Premier’s 

response he talked about a December 15th date as a target for 

having locum physicians secured for the emergency rooms. Of 

course over the Christmas season, it’s a very important time to 

ensure that the ERs do remain open. 

 

In the past few days as we’ve talked about this crisis situation 

and the potential closure of the Pasqua ER, it has been very 

difficult, Mr. Speaker, to receive timely information from the 

government on this problem, on this huge concern. Unless 

questions were being asked on the floor of the Assembly, 

information was not readily available. My question to the 

Premier: will he commit today to do a better job of keeping 

Saskatchewan people and keeping the media in the loop, Mr. 

Speaker, especially as we approach the December 15th date and 

the Christmas season? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind the 

Leader of the Opposition, several weeks ago when the region 

was first putting in place a contingency plan, they released that 

to the public, not as a result of any question asked in this House, 

Mr. Speaker, but in the sake of public safety and public 

awareness and public notification, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we’ve been describing over the last number of 

days, the plan has been evolving as they’ve been working on 



4302 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

the contingency, Mr. Speaker. And through the government and 

through the health region, we have done our best to 

communicate these changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the region will be notifying the public, as they 

have this morning with a full news release now that we can 

confirm, Mr. Speaker, that the emergency room will remain 

open at the Pasqua 24-7 so that the city of Regina will have two 

fully functioning emergency rooms 24-7. And we will continue 

to inform the public of this situation going on into the future, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As locums are 

pursued in order to secure coverage for the ERs, the December 

15th date is coming and not that far away, Mr. Speaker. My 

question to the Premier: can he guarantee that the Pasqua ER 

will remain open over the Christmas season? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what the region is now 

going to be doing is working to secure locums that can be 

brought into the province, into the city of Regina in a very short 

matter of time, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the region will also 

ensure that those locums are able to practise under existing 

physicians here within the city before going out and taking a 

shift on their own, Mr. Speaker. That’s why this window of two 

weeks is a pretty important time, Mr. Speaker, to identify those 

numbers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region is able to extend services to the 15th, Mr. Speaker. And 

I think, with a lot of hard work that we’ve seen over the last 

number of weeks by the region and by the ministry and this 

government, Mr. Speaker, and the emergency room doctors, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll be working very hard to ensure that we can 

continue services beyond the 15th. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important that this 

government is not just simply punting the issue down the road. 

So to the Premier: can he guarantee, can he guarantee that the 

Pasqua ER will remain open after December 15th? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty rich 

question coming from members opposite. Because when they 

faced ER hospital rooms in crisis, ERs in crisis around this 

province, what was their response? 

 

In 2004 when the Royal University ER was in crisis, here’s 

what the then NDP Health minister had to say as reported in 

The StarPhoenix, and I quote: “Saskatchewan Health Minister 

John Nilson told reporters on Thursday [and there he is right 

over there] that the region was responsible for settling the 

dispute with the emergency room doctors and that he wouldn’t 

get involved,” Mr. Speaker. 

Here’s why I am very hopeful, very encouraged that beyond the 

15th, that on a permanent basis, Pasqua ER will be opened 

24-7, Mr. Speaker. The reason I’m hopeful is that this minister 

is very much involved. This government is involved, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re going to make, we’re going to continue to 

make this particular situation and health care in general a top 

priority of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last few 

days as this government has scrambled to try to address this 

crisis, Mr. Speaker, we have seen poor communication with the 

general public. And without questions, Mr. Speaker, without 

pushing of this government, the information has not been 

readily available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s also other health care professionals who have 

been concerned about the approach that this government has 

taken with addressing this crisis. Mr. Speaker, yesterday the 

president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses said, “It would 

help if nurses were included in the conversation of plans 

because what we’re finding is that we’re being told what’s 

happening rather than being involved in the conversation at the 

front end.” 

 

My question to the Premier: why is it that the nurses have not 

been involved in addressing this crisis that we have been 

dealing with? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, they were involved. They 

were involved and they have already been involved this 

morning as well, as a result of the agreement that’s been in 

place. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, now we say to the Leader of the 

Opposition again, let’s make sure we’re dealing with facts on 

the floor of the Legislative Assembly. Because notwithstanding 

the comments that he’s quoted, the minister’s informed me that 

nurses indeed were involved up until today’s events and 

developments and then even earlier this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to private 

P3 [public–private partnership] school schemes, we’ve shared 

real and wide-ranging concerns from school board members, 

community groups, auditors, the tax federation, the construction 

industry, parents, and teachers. Those concerns have been 

arrogantly brushed off by that government. Now all the 

opposition parties in Alberta — the Wildrose, the Liberals, the 

NDP — have come together to fight against that government’s 

P3 school scheme. 

 

This week the Leader of the Official Opposition in Alberta, 

Danielle Smith, said, “. . . taxpayers are going to end up paying 

much more for these projects because they are debt financed by 

private companies.” What’s the minister’s response to that? 

 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4303 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

ministry’s response is, quite shocking that the NDP keep 

quoting the Wildrose party from Alberta. That’s my response, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a typical opposition, I guess perhaps in 

Alberta. We certainly see it in Saskatchewan. Any time we see 

growth and a government taking action to address that growth, 

Mr. Speaker, we see them oppose it. We see them beg and read 

petitions for schools, and when the government builds schools 

and commits to schools, they oppose it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that in Alberta they have seen great 

savings. They’ve seen savings in bundle number one. They’ve 

learned from them. Bundle number one, they’ve learned. And 

they have a stronger bundle on the second bundle, on the third 

bundle, Mr. Speaker. They are going forward because they have 

seen real savings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And talking to the Minister of Education in Alberta, they have 

saved millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, and it would be only the 

NDP that would be against that here in Saskatchewan. We’re 

going to move forward. We’re going to deal with the growth 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again we see here today 

more brushing off of real concerns from across the entire 

political spectrum, across community, and across business 

interests, Mr. Speaker. The minister always likes to point to 

Alberta as the model for his P3 school scheme and holds it up 

as some sort of shining example, although in that province the 

province is up in arms, including school boards, the tax 

federation, the construction industry, parents, community 

groups, and yes, all opposition parties. 

 

Alberta opposition leader Danielle Smith also had this to say, 

“All around, these . . . deals are absolutely the wrong way to 

go.” How does the minister respond to this statement, and why 

is this government ramming forward with a scheme seen by so 

many as absolutely the wrong way to go? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that parents 

and students have seen some of the growth issues and some of 

the crowding issues that we see in especially some of our urban 

schools in Saskatoon, Regina, Martensville, and Warman. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that parents have seen it. We know that 

teachers have seen it. We know that the school boards have seen 

it. In fact Prairie Spirit School Division, Mr. Speaker, is in 

favour of this moving forward. They know we need these 

schools, not only in Saskatoon, not only in Martensville and 

Warman, but also here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It would be only the NDP that has a record of closing hundreds 

of schools, Mr. Speaker, that would oppose a party and a 

government that is building schools, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Let’s be clear, Mr. Speaker, for the 

people of this province. And most would know, if they’d been 

watching the debate, we’ve been calling for new schools to be 

built for years in this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the 

question. 

 

But people aren’t gaining confidence in this government’s 

scheme, Mr. Speaker. In fact the more the people of 

Saskatchewan hear and learn about this government’s P3 school 

scheme, the less it makes sense. They’ve learned from the 

experiences of other jurisdictions that P3 schools cost more. 

They forfeit community control, and they delay getting shovels 

in the ground. Simply, P3 schools have too many risks and are 

too costly. They don’t make sense. 

 

My question to the minister: why is he unwilling to show some 

decency to Saskatchewan people and shine a light on his P3 

school scheme and support our call for upfront, independent 

accountability and transparency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it would only be the 

NDP that would claim they’re building new schools when, year 

after year after year, we saw population decline and student 

decline within our system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the NDP are claiming that they were the saviours of the 

education system. That is not the case. We have quote after 

quote, whether it’s Janice MacKinnon, whether it’s the 

politicians in Manitoba of the same stripe that are completely in 

favour. In fact, Mr. Speaker, even their famous leader in 

Ottawa, Mr. Mulcair, is in favour of P3s. It’s only the NDP 

across the way that’s opposed to growth and opposed to dealing 

with the issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government is dealing with the issues. This government is 

getting schools built, Mr. Speaker. We aren’t going to listen to 

the NDP that just want to go back to the dark old days of 

decline. We’re building for growth. We’re ready for growth, 

and our education system will be too. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

SaskPower Rates and Investment in Infrastructure 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we learned that public 

debt is supposed to increase a total 1.3 billion since March, and 

most of that new borrowing is for SaskPower. People are asking 

why. Why are huge rate increases needed, up to 40 per cent? 

And how much of those rate increases are going towards slick 

advertisements aggressively running on all sorts of different 

media across the province? And let’s not forget that another rate 

increase will hit hard on ratepayers, just to pay for the cost 

overruns at Boundary dam. 

 

To the minister: when one adds up the costs of these ads and the 

cost overruns at Boundary dam, what will be the total 

pocketbook hit to ratepayers for SaskPower? 



4304 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

question, particularly coming from this member, who when 

asked in the rotunda whether she supported the fact that 

SaskPower was reinvesting $9.8 billion in infrastructure, she 

said yes, she certainly does support it. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan is under incredible growth we 

are seeing across the province right now. We are seeing that the 

number of hookups at record levels here in Saskatchewan. 

We’re seeing the demand for power at record levels here in 

Saskatchewan. We’re also seeing that $9.8 billion deficit that 

was left by the members opposite in terms of infrastructure in 

SaskPower. So of course we are reinvesting through SaskPower 

into the infrastructure of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of course 

the minister is skewing what was said. Of course 

infrastructure’s important and that is always something that 

makes sense, Mr. Speaker. But when we have cost overruns and 

huge rate increases, we have to really question what’s going on. 

 

Yesterday we found out that after only six months after an 

increase of almost $1 billion in debt this year alone, we see an 

additional unbudgeted $230 million in debt. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

23 times more than what they allocated to their seniors’ care 

urgent fund, and they spend it like it’s candy in a candy store. 

How could this government budget so poorly while ratepayers 

have to pay up to 40 per cent rate increases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, just as an example there are 

over, there are more power poles in Saskatchewan than there 

are people. A number of years ago under the NDP, I remember 

seeing this, they went around the province. They had teams of 

people from around, I think they were from Alberta. They were 

contracted, if memory serves, from Alberta. They went around 

and they checked the soundness, they checked the soundness of 

those poles. And they checked the soundness of what they 

called the head mass at the top of the pole. And so they put a 

big X on them if they failed. 

 

Well the weather over the years wore those Xs off before they 

replaced the poles. And not only that, I remember the people of 

Saskatchewan saying when it came to the poles not only . . . 

They were NDP poles — hollow in the middle and absolutely 

nothing in the head. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting response 

and maybe an entertaining response, but it just shows how little 

with regard this member and this minister has for the impact 

that this corporation’s decisions are affecting the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If SaskPower’s latest rate increase is approved, it will mean 

power rates have gone up 40 per cent under this government. So 

no wonder people are frustrated when they see SaskPower ads 

on heavy rotation. We know the $150 million of cost overruns 

are not even included in the power rate increase, but we don’t 

know if the cost of this aggressive ad campaign are included. 

 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how much is this 

expensive and aggressive advertising campaign going to cost 

Saskatchewan ratepayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, through SaskPower, we are 

making sure that the people of Saskatchewan know that 

SaskPower is taking the infrastructure needs across the province 

very seriously. They want the people of Saskatchewan to be 

informed that they are growing and they are replacing 

infrastructure, the very aged infrastructure, that we inherited in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s $9.8 billion of reinvestment that’s going to take place in 

Saskatchewan over the next number of years. And I’m pleased, 

I was pleased to learn that the member at one point at least 

supported that infrastructure reinvestment. There’s a cost 

associated with this. We’ll get the information for the member 

opposite with respect to that. 

 

But the fact remains is that there was a huge infrastructure 

deficit here in Saskatchewan in SaskPower. SaskPower is 

undertaking through this government to make those 

replacements. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the earlier 

exchange in question period when we talked about the Pasqua 

ER and we talked about the involvement that nurses have had in 

the planning and in the discussions that occurred, the Premier in 

one of his responses as I heard it, Mr. Speaker, suggested the 

nurses have been involved all along in the discussions. 

 

From yesterday’s paper, Mr. Speaker, on A3, a quote from 

Tracy Zambory, president of Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 

said, “It would help if nurses were included in the conversation 

of plans because what we’re finding is that we’re being told 

what’s happening rather than being involved in the conversation 

at the front end.” 

 

My question to the Premier: why would he suggest that that is 

. . . that nurses have been involved from the very beginning if in 

fact the president of the nurses’ union is stating otherwise? 

Who’s correct, the president of the nurses’ union or the 

Premier’s analysis of the situation? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, over the last, over the past few 

weeks, there have been many discussions with front-line staff 

with respect to this particular issue. In fact on the 21st of 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4305 

November, the SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses ] local 

affected was part of the discussions, part of the planning, part of 

the contingency planning for what has happened. Mr. Speaker, 

RQHR has certainly reported that nurses were involved. The 

local executive met who were involved on the 21st of 

November and have been part of the process since. 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of the reason, part of the reason we’re able to 

provide some good news today is due to the efforts of the 

region and the minister and the front-line staff that are involved. 

Mr. Speaker, part of the reason we’re able to see shorter times 

for surgery, shorter wait times for surgery in this province, part 

of the reason why we’ve been able to make some successes in 

health care is because our government has consistently used the 

proceeds, the dividends of growth to be ready for further 

growth: to hire 300 more doctors seen practised in the province, 

or to have them practising here; 1,000 more nurses, Mr. 

Speaker; $1 billion in capital, Mr. Speaker, in health care; 

millions of dollars each and every year for the surgical wait 

times initiative. Mr. Speaker, this government has made health 

care a priority. 

 

The reason we’ve seen an expansion in these things is because 

this province is growing. We have the lowest unemployment 

rate in the country, Mr. Speaker. We’re solidly, and will be on 

into the future, a have province — record investment, great 

manufacturing reports. Mr. Speaker, this province is leading the 

country and because of that, we can ensure quality of life for the 

residents of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 125, 

The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I assume the minister moved what was on the 

order paper because it was impossible to hear. The minister has 

moved that Bill No. 125, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 

2013 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 198 through 209. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

198 through 209 inclusive. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Emergency Medical Services 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I will be 

moving a motion which was a very crucial motion when this 

was set up on Tuesday because it addresses that this Assembly 

should condemn the government for its failure to address the 

urgent health care issues in this province as it relates to Pasqua 

Hospital. But, Mr. Speaker, the Premier just gave me a reason 

to stand up here and explain why everybody that I talked to 

over the last seven days has said, what’s going on in this 

province? The Premier can get up and say the economy’s doing 

well, different things are happening, but our health care system 

is in disarray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what happens is every Grey Cup event I 

went to, people recognized me as a former Health minister, and 

they’re saying, what’s going on with the health system in this 

province? Why are seniors not getting proper care? And they 

would tell me stories about their grandparents, their aunts and 

uncles, and others. And they’re saying something is wrong here 

because this government has had more money than any 

government in the history of this province. And the Premier 

gets up and he makes comments like he just did at the end of 

this question period, crowing about how things are going here, 

when there are so many people that are being neglected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why the Premier got himself involved 

in this because he knew, and he was getting the same comments 

all week. And practically, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier 

doesn’t listen to the public, then that’s when there’s big trouble. 

We could see by the red face of the Premier and the Finance 

minister all week in question period that this was getting to 

them. And, Mr. Speaker, our motion today is another piece of 

the public’s response to what’s happening in this particular 

situation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you’re marching after the Grey Cup is 

won on Sunday night, and people walking down the Green Mile 

are coming up to me and saying, what’s going on with our 

Pasqua Hospital and the emergency room, you know that there 

is a concern. What happens if there’s some kind of an injury 

here tonight? Where do we go? And I know, Mr. Speaker, that 

what we will continue to have is this disconnection between 

what’s going on there and what kind of policy decisions they’re 

making. And, Mr. Speaker, emergency room care is a symptom 

of how they’re responding to the . . . 

 



4306 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I know it’s getting close to the 

weekend and people are anxious to get out of here, but please 

allow the member to present his arguments. I recognize the 

member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I talked with 

people at various of the Christmas receptions that we’ve been 

going to this week, the first topic of conversation was, what’s 

going on with the closure of the Pasqua emergency room? You 

end up talking to media people just in conversation, and they’re 

saying, what’s going on here? Why is the government so much 

bungling what’s happening here? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Premier and the Health 

minister and all the members on that side were getting the same 

kinds of comments as I was — you know, what’s going on 

here? We’ve got a booming economy, things are happening 

well in many, many areas. But there’s something wrong with 

how they’re managing what’s going on in health care, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s the communications issues where we’ve 

had to extract information about what was the announcement 

around Pasqua, to all of the discussions that happened. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we’re in a province where we have 

resources, they need to be used appropriately to meet the needs 

of the people. We know that there are a whole number of 

people, especially those people on fixed incomes, who are very 

concerned about utility rate increases, whether it’s SaskPower 

or SaskTel, SaskEnergy. We know that we have people who are 

having a great deal of difficulty dealing with their housing 

issues and the rental issues, and they get concerned when 

they’re put in a corner. 

 

So when this announcement came last week, after we were out 

of the session, that they were going to close the emergency 

room at Pasqua Hospital in a week, it was kind of like the final 

straw for many people who normally wouldn’t get too involved 

in making political comments. And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen 

the pressure building up all week, and that’s why I’m pleased 

that we’ve got a temporary resolution. 

 

The Premier and the Health minister would not give us a 

guarantee past December 15th, and we need to keep pressing 

them on that particular point. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s part of 

an overall sense of, well we’re going to try to control the costs 

of our health care system and let other people try to make some 

decisions to get the whole thing to work; and well we’re going 

to try to see how we can do things in a way that is supposedly 

leaner, cleaner, with better service. Well here’s a situation 

where we’ve got a service that the public expects and needs 

being challenged. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the announcement today is important as a 

step in solving this. But the confidence of the public in the 

Health minister and in the Premier in managing our health 

system has suffered a serious blow. Now we in this legislature 

know that there have been a number of issues where the 

government has not been very clear on how they’re going to 

manage the situation. And we’ve raised those issues, whether 

it’s the seniors’ care, whether it’s providing sort of personal 

care situations, and whether it’s providing services across the 

province. But this decision and this announcement around the 

emergency room at Pasqua Hospital has hit a nerve in the 

public, and clearly the Premier reacted. We can see him all 

week, as these questions were being raised, getting more and 

more agitated. 

 

And I’m not sure exactly what they’ve done. Now one of the 

questions here is whether they’ve provided some more money 

for this situation or what other accommodations they’ve made 

to deal with this particular thing. I think we’ll eventually get 

some of that information, maybe in the third quarter report from 

the government. But practically what we and what the public 

wants to know is that they will have the ability to go to the 

Pasqua emergency and get appropriate treatment. 

 

And so who are the people that were raising questions about 

this? It was people like young mothers with children, who 

would end up having to take their child to emergency for 

breathing problems in the middle of the night. And the sense 

that they would have to go over to the General and be part of 

that whole situation, which everybody knows has been 

overwhelmed in the use of, that scared many, many people. 

Others have, because of some of their chronic diseases, ended 

up in the night going to Pasqua emergency room on a relatively 

regular basis, and they knew the staff there. They knew the 

people there that could help them deal with some specific 

problems and keep them out of the hospital, hopefully. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s those kinds of people who were all of a 

sudden confronted with the possibility that there would just be 

one facility in the province, and it’s a facility that they knew 

was overwhelmed. 

 

It was quite curious to see that the response around what kinds 

of services were going to be provided in addition at the General 

when there was only one emergency was one additional staff, 

and that didn’t seem very plausible, along with a number of the 

other comments that were made. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government’s been here for six years. I 

think we turned over the reins of the government in 2007 right 

around the 1st of December, maybe a few days later. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there are choices that they have made on spending 

dramatically more money than was available when we were in 

government, and the public is starting to question those choices. 

Because government is always about choices. It’s about setting 

priorities and using money where it’s going to serve the people. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are a whole number of areas where that 

choosing, or that making of a choice, has been called into 

question. 

 

We know that there must be pressures on the Finance minister 

because he’s figuring out every way he can to borrow money in 

the long term and try to have it be hidden away on some of the 

things that he’s doing and the financing. They’ve been selling 

off some of the assets to try to balance the books. And we see 

that announcement yesterday. We know that they’re concerned 

about how the prices of resources are affecting their budget 

because unfortunately I think we’re now pushing up to 30 per 

cent of the money that we spend on a regular basis in providing 

the services of the government are coming from one-time 

resource, non-renewable monies. 

 

[Interjections] 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4307 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can see that the Minister of Finance is 

getting a bit excited about this. Because one of the things that’s 

always an interesting challenge in this legislature is when the 

Minister of Finance gets excited, there’s two things that happen. 

His face gets very red and none of us can hear what we’re 

talking about. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance will come forward 

and tell us exactly why he’s using a P3 system to build new 

schools when the public expects open transparency around how 

we can build schools . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I think that if the 

minister is borrowing money to build new schools, why doesn’t 

he do it in the cheapest way possible rather than going through 

some scheme that he won’t even tell us what the scheme is? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we’re also seeing is that because of how 

they’re running the books, they’ve cut back 45 million on the 

budget in health care. And guess what? That’s the place where 

people are saying, why are you cutting money back in health 

care when my parents or grandparents are not getting care, 

when the emergency rooms are being threatened, when there’s 

doctors who are wanting to work here and they can’t get places 

and positions in this system? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately for the Premier and for the 

government, this decision around the Pasqua emergency room 

has sent a chill right across the people of southern 

Saskatchewan. It sent a warning to people right across the 

province that there are certain basic services which we all 

assumed would be covered and dealt with in an appropriate 

fashion, that those services are going to be threatened and that 

the management of this government is unfortunately not 

fulfilling what they said, that they were ready to manage 

growth. 

 

All we are hearing is excuses. We’re hearing excuses. And at 

times when they should be stepping up and saying, look, we 

haven’t managed this appropriately, it’s very clear they are 

pointing all over the place at other people and blaming them for 

what’s going on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when this announcement around the 

emergency room happened last week after we were out of the 

legislature, there was a sense of, what’s going on here? Who’s 

in charge? What’s happening? Why, in an economy that is 

doing very well, with a government that has lots of money, why 

are these kinds of announcements being made? And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that the Minister of Finance has a lot of 

explaining to do. We’ll get a chance to deal with him when he 

goes into his budget, but I encourage him as we go forward into 

the next few months that this former teacher, this former school 

board member, this former minister of Education, that he should 

go ahead and tell us completely what he’s doing with the P3 

system because it maybe will take a lot of questions just like it 

has around the emergency room . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would recommend to the member to talk to 

the subject matter, not something else. You may move your 

motion now. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — So, Mr. Speaker, my motion is: 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its failure 

to address the urgent health care crisis resulting in the 

closure of the Pasqua Hospital emergency department from 

7:30 p.m. to 8 a.m., leaving just one 24-hour emergency 

department in our province’s capital city. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 

failure to address the urgent health care crisis resulting in 

the closure of the Pasqua Hospital emergency department 

from 7:30 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., leaving just one 24-hour 

emergency department in our province’s capital. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to start off by saying, what are you talking about? Mr. 

Speaker, our government holds health care as a priority. How 

dare they question the integrity of this side of the House, as the 

government, to handle the health care regards in this province. 

From a party that had such a dismal record in health care, both 

in facilities and for the care of the health care providers, how 

dare they question what we’re doing here when they’ve got 

such a dismal record, Mr. Speaker. They had the longest 

wait-list in Canada, the longest wait-list. They had critical 

shortages of nurses. They had the worst doctor and worst nurse 

retention rate in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they closed 52 hospitals including the Plains. Why 

they would close the Plains hospital? At the time it was the 

newest hospital in Saskatchewan, and they closed it. Well they 

could have, if they wanted to close a hospital, closed the one 

that has a very priority real estate value instead of adding on to 

it, making it one of the most inefficient hospitals in the province 

with all the connections. But they closed that and went on to 

make massive renovations in a place that has no parking and is 

hard to get to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government holds health care as a priority. 

We’ve reduced surgical wait times with a goal that no one will 

have to wait longer than 30 . . . three months rather for surgery. 

We’ve hired over 800 nurses, led by a hiring mission by the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle right after we were elected. 

The retention rates have improved, and there are more than 300 

more doctors practising in Saskatchewan. And they dare to 

question our record on that. Health care, Mr. Speaker, is a 

priority of this government. 

 

Historically Saskatchewan had trained two medical, family 

medicine, emergency medicine positions per year, just two. In 

2008 we increased that to four, then in ’09-10 to six. And in the 

’10-11 year, we increased that to eight. That’s just one section 

of the increase in surgical training we did, of this government. 

 

Our government added 40 medical training seats at the College 

of Medicine. We doubled the medical residency positions. We 

created Saskdocs to work with regional health authorities for 

physician recruitment, created an immigration program 

specifically to facilitate integration of internationally trained 



4308 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

doctors into practice in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have 91 

more doctors because of that initiative. 

 

We’ve increased the list of countries where we get the 

recruitment from. We’ve added 300 new RN [registered nurse] 

and RPN [registered psychiatric nurse] training seats in the 

post-secondary institutions, adding 28 operating room nurses 

training seats this year through the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiative. How dare they question what we’re doing in health 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government, health care is a priority. 

Improvements are continually being made, Mr. Speaker. We go 

on and try and do better and better every day. We continue to 

improve the work and the workplace for the health care 

providers. We’ve . . . [inaudible] . . . a patient-first priority 

concept in this province — something that they never looked at, 

something that they never did. That is why we invested even 

more in capital projects. We’ve announced the new psychiatric 

hospital in North Battleford, the new children’s hospital in 

Saskatoon. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m so proud to talk a little bit about the new 

hospital in Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, if I could take you back 

into the spring of 2007, when they were still in government, Mr. 

Speaker, Dr. Miller, who is very highly regarded as a health 

care professional in Moose Jaw, in the Five Hills Health 

Region, addressed the staff at the Moose Jaw Union Hospital 

and said the two members, the two NDP members, the two 

NDP cabinet members at that time couldn’t convince the Health 

department and the government to do an addition to the 

hospital. Mr. Speaker, they wouldn’t even give a paint job to 

the Moose Jaw Hospital when they were in government. 

 

When we took over in 2007, we started . . . And that was one of 

the priorities that I said in my campaign, that I would work with 

my colleagues and make this a priority. Mr. Speaker, early in 

2009, the government publicly committed to replacing — it 

wasn’t a wing; it was replacing — the regional hospital in 

Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, I can remember that day. It was a 

proud day for the people of Moose Jaw when this government 

said, we are going to replace the Moose Jaw Hospital with a 

brand new hospital. 

 

This new hospital, Mr. Speaker, has 115 acute care rooms and 

treatment spaces. This is going to be designed . . . It’s the first 

of its kind to be facilitated through a lean 3P [production 

preparation process] design. Mr. Speaker, when they started 

designing this, when they talked about it, they talked about the 

lean process and the 3P process. 

 

When they started talking, they rented a warehouse to start 

setting up all of the aspects of this new lean hospital in Moose 

Jaw. What they did was have professionals from the design 

concept. They had architects. They had doctors, nurses. They 

had patients that had come in and help give them advice on this 

as well as people from the public. What would work best? And 

they would set it up in this warehouse of the fashion of how the 

process of bringing patients in would work, where they would 

stay, how the medication would be given to them in a quick 

order so that the patients aren’t moved from all over the 

hospital. It’s the medical services come to the patient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you design a regular hospital, you may have 

40 beds in pediatrics. You may have 20 in ICU [intensive care 

unit], 40 beds in women’s health, and so on and so forth. But of 

those 40 beds in pediatrics, if only 20 of them are used, you’ve 

got 20 beds that are of little value to you. With this new design, 

that doesn’t happen. The beds can be rotated throughout 

wherever the need is, and that’s why it’s going to be so much 

more efficient. 

 

All the design has gone into this hospital and it’s started 

construction. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that it’s in a spacious 

area on the north side of Moose Jaw. A lot of design has gone 

into it, a lot of improvement. 

 

The other thing this government did was change the ratio of 

payment for the hospital. Going from what they had as a 35/65 

split, we lowered the amount so now the government provides 

80 per cent of the cost, and the other 20 per cent is brought to 

you by the local health region. And the city of Moose Jaw, the 

health region of Five Hills has made a commitment that they 

will have the money there, and the project is progressing. Right 

now it’s on budget. It’s on schedule. It’s fully enclosed as 

winter has approached. The hospital is going to be worked on. 

All the interior work can be started, and it should be open by I 

do believe it’s 2015 is when we’re looking at opening this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government cares about health care. This is a 

big project for the province. And we’re doing this all over with 

health care facilities all over as well as looking after our nursing 

staff, our medical staff, and all that goes with it. I’m so proud to 

be sitting on this side where we look at the province as 

somewhere that is growing, to be looked after rather than 

closing hospitals and laying off doctors and letting them move 

out of the province like we saw under the NDP for years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This is where we’re going. This is what we’re looking at as far 

as the future of Saskatchewan. And the Moose Jaw Hospital is a 

prime example, a shining example of lean, well-constituted, 

with lots of consultation, transparency from all sides of the 

public to come in together to put this all together to have a new 

facility in Moose Jaw and the Five Hills health care. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to make an amendment 

to the opposition motion: 

 

That the motion be amended to delete the words after the 

word “Assembly” and the following to be submitted: 

 

recognizing the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s 

continued effort to address the situation of emergency 

department care at the Pasqua Hospital and further 

supports the government’s actions to address the number of 

doctors in the province over the long term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the amendment to the motion. I’m so proud 

to present it on behalf of this government. Thank you. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw North has moved 

an amendment that reads: 

 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4309 

recognizes the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s 

continuing efforts to address the situation of emergency 

department care at the Pasqua Hospital and further 

supports the government’s actions to address the number of 

doctors in our province over the long term. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So I guess a 

disappointing motion that needs to come forward here today on 

an issue that’s really a huge concern to Saskatchewan people 

right across our province, certainly in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

The challenge and crisis facing emergency rooms in this 

province are unacceptable. The potential closure, the planned 

closure of the Pasqua Hospital here in Regina is nothing short 

of a massive failure on behalf of this government in meeting the 

needs of Saskatchewan families. 

 

Now today we understand that there might be a plan that’s been 

put together. Certainly we would commend any officials, any of 

those individuals that are working to maintain and ensure 

support and to ensure that that emergency room remains open, 

because it’s absolutely unacceptable for any closure of the 

Pasqua Hospital’s emergency room for southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now government has been scrambling on this front, on an issue 

that they’ve known for months, Mr. Speaker, an issue that they 

should have seen coming down the pipe but hasn’t taken it upon 

themself to make this a priority. And it’s absolutely incredible 

and a massive failure of this government to get to this point and 

to piecemeal together a plan to ensure the emergency room here 

in Regina at the Pasqua Hospital is able to remain open. But 

beyond that there’s a . . . which I’ll continue to speak to about 

the importance of that emergency room, the unacceptability of 

any closure of that emergency room here in Regina at the 

Pasqua Hospital. 

 

But what I find really strange, what I find really strange is that a 

plan that was put together here today, which we’re pleased to 

see a plan being put together to ensure that that Pasqua Hospital 

emergency room doesn’t close, what’s strange is this is an issue 

that is so critical to the safety and security, peace of mind of 

Saskatchewan families, that this government takes this crisis — 

and this crisis isn’t over yet — takes this crisis and turns their 

plan that they’ve put together into a great big back-slapping, 

back-patting episode in this Assembly of self-congratulation, 

political spin, political attack on an issue so important to the 

people of this province. 

 

Now when this announcement came out last Thursday, this was 

no surprise to government. Government knew the information. 

They knew the challenges that were there. And the failure of 

that government to be able to step up and make this a priority, 

to provide some peace of mind and security to Saskatchewan 

residents and Regina residents is incredibly, incredibly 

disappointing. We know that Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The Premier wants to shout across here. I’ll let 

him. Okay, say what you want to say. 

This is an issue. I wanted to hear . . . This is an issue, this is an 

issue that is of critical importance to the people of this city and 

of southern Saskatchewan. The Premier can heckle as long as 

he wants, and the rest of the crew can laugh and guffaw, as I 

say, Mr. Speaker, but the point of this is, this is an unacceptable 

crisis in our emergency rooms in this province. The potential 

closure of the emergency room at the Pasqua Hospital is 

unacceptable, and that Premier and that government will have 

known about this for some time. 

 

We’ve been raising the issues about the pressures in emergency 

rooms and in health care and in our hospitals, and we will not 

tolerate to see in our capital city the closure of one of our 

emergency rooms. Now we welcome a potential plan here 

today, as late as it is. We welcome that, and we thank any 

individuals that played a role in bringing together that plan. 

That’s important. But what we’re unwilling to do is to enter into 

the goofiness that we see from members opposite who go on to 

political attack and go into this self-congratulatory sort of 

back-patting that we saw here today and that we see here today 

on an issue that we’ve been raising day in, day out as the 

number one priority in this city and in this province. 

 

The lack of this government’s attention to deal with the 

pressures in health care, the shortage of emergency room 

doctors, the pressures of overcrowding that our hospitals and 

our emergency rooms are facing are a great disappointment to 

Saskatchewan people. This is a time of tremendous opportunity 

in our province, with a booming growth within our population, 

with a strong economy. And the fact that this government can’t 

secure the important services and supports and peace of mind 

that Saskatchewan people deserve is nothing short of 

disappointing. And this needs to become the number one 

priority for this government. And we see it right across health 

care. We see the challenges and the crisis in long-term care. We 

know the pressures and challenges where so many families 

can’t access a family doctor. And now we have the 

circumstances where families, in facing a crisis, may not be able 

to access the emergency services that they so deserve and that 

they need. 

 

And when we think about what this means and when 

individuals are going and when families are going to an 

emergency room, they’re going there in a state of crisis. They’re 

going there at a moment in their life when seconds mater, when 

seconds matter. And the kind of stuff we heard from the 

government this week about shuttling around patients and 

certain bits of triage . . . And dismissal of the importance of the 

issue from the Health minister yesterday was completely offside 

with the reality of how Saskatchewan people view the 

importance of emergency services.  

 

To not be able to operate the two hospitals we have in our 

Queen City at a time where they’re overcrowded, at a time 

where they’re overcrowded and they can’t keep those two 

emergency rooms open, Mr. Speaker, is, as I say, nothing short 

of unacceptable. I know that the health care workers have been 

speaking out, emergency room doctors have spoken out, health 

professionals have spoken out about the chronic shortage of 

professionals to fulfill these roles and the chronic understaffing 

by this government.  

 

And it’s interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, to look at the context 



4310 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

of the mid-year report and the actions of this government, Mr. 

Speaker. That despite a strong economy, despite growth in 

population, and with the current crisis in emergency rooms here 

in Regina, the potential closure of the Pasqua Hospital’s 

emergency room, the crisis in long-term care, the failures in 

education, that what this government’s actually choosing to do 

is to slash tens of millions of dollars directly out of front-line 

health care, millions out of education. That’s wrong-headed, 

Mr. Speaker. Instead of dealing with the crisis that has been 

built and that they’ve . . . had played a role in, Mr. Speaker, and 

the fact that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You know, 

members opposite can shout and heckle, Mr. Speaker, but 

Saskatchewan people deserve confidence in the emergency 

rooms that are there to protect their families. 

 

And it’s not good enough to have piecemeal communications 

throughout a week, to see a government that’s scrambling 

because it never should have got to this point. It never should 

have got to this point. Had this been so important to the 

Premier, that government, the Health minister months ago, this 

would have never been the case. Had they listened to the 

warnings from those that are working on the ground in those 

emergency rooms, had they listened to patients for interfacing 

with the emergency rooms, they would have been able to 

address this. So it’s a massive disappointment and represents a 

massive failure of this government to get to this point. 

 

Certainly when we have the opportunity that we have as a 

province from an economic perspective, when we have growth 

within our province, we need to see a government that has the 

wherewithal to make the critical investments where they matter, 

and few places matter more than an emergency room in a 

hospital in our Queen City. And you know, we’re getting 

heckled from one of the members from Regina. I hope that 

members from Regina, who are elected for Regina, are going to 

be speaking here today. I hope that the members are going to 

get up and speak, and I hope they’re not going to just shout 

from their seats. Because it was strange to some extent. So far 

we’ve seen the member from Moose Jaw speak. I hope to see 

that some Regina members will get up and speak to an issue 

that’s critical to this city and that’s critical to southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s little more important in the life of a 

community than ensuring the peace of mind for families and 

people that they can receive emergency services when they 

need it. At a time when they’re going . . . they’re in crisis, when 

seconds matter in the lives of a loved one, a son or a daughter, a 

mom or a dad, a spouse or a loved one, a grandma or grandpa, a 

mushom or a kohkom, we need to make sure that those 

environments, those emergency rooms are open and able to 

respond with the health professionals in all the services that are 

required. The fact that we’re in the crisis that we see here today 

is a . . . represents a massive failure of leadership, a massive 

failure of management on behalf of this government, and we’re 

going to continue to make this a priority to ensure that 

Saskatchewan people can count on the services that they 

deserve and that they require. 

 

Now we see a plan that’s been put together here today. As I say, 

we give credit to all those that have played a role in piecing this 

together and ensuring a provision of supports and services. But 

as it relates to government, that’s not good enough. We need the 

confidence for Saskatchewan people that they can access those 

emergency rooms with the services they need. And that’s going 

to require this government to wake up to the realities on the 

ground and make the critical investments . . .  

 

The Speaker: — Time has expired. I recognize the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 

pleasure for myself to join into a debate talking about 

something that is very important to the constituents of Regina, 

to people in southwest Saskatchewan, and that’s the ER, 

emergency room, in the Pasqua. And, Mr. Speaker, I think I 

speak for many people that say, I want to thank the Minister of 

Health, the hard-working team in Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region, the ER doctors, everyone that was involved to coming 

to an agreement to ensure that the emergency room at the 

Pasqua Hospital will be open for the immediate future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s interesting that they brought this 

motion forward, and it was brought forward by the member 

from Regina Lakeview. I don’t know what they promised him 

to make him stand up for 15 minutes and talk about health care 

when he did an absolute terrible job as the minister of Health 

when he was the minister, Mr. Speaker. And I think for him to 

stand there and talk about all the things that they were going to 

do — We were going to do this. We were going to do that. We 

just didn’t have the money — Mr. Speaker, it really flies in the 

face of them. And then saying, oh, we left so much money in 

the bank account, why didn’t you do this? It’s because we had 

economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, especially when it comes to ERs in particular. And 

I’d like to quote from The StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker: “When 

the ER in Royal University was in crisis, the NDP passed off 

the responsibility to health regions.” And I quote, Mr. 

Speaker:“Saskatchewan Health minister, John Nilson, told 

reporters on Thursday that the region was responsible for 

settling the disputes with the emergency room doctors and he 

would not get involved.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I understand that they’re a little upset today, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think there’s only nine people in 

Saskatchewan that are upset that the Pasqua ER is open. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, they stand in their spots right there and 

they talk about how important the ER is, how important the 

Pasqua ER is to people in Saskatchewan and people in 

southwest Saskatchewan, and then they stand up and give 

speeches and talk about how mad they are that that Pasqua ER 

room is open. So I think there could be a bit of contrition. 

 

You know, they had to have their motion in three days early, 

and things change, Mr. Speaker. It’s kind of a fast-paced world 

in politics. And things are changing for the better. So why 

couldn’t they just stand up and say, you know what? We don’t 

do it often but congratulations to a government that got the 

Pasqua emergency room open, and we thank you guys for doing 

that. 

 

I don’t think that would have been too hard from the member 

from Lakeview or the member from Rosemont to do. It’s a 

fantastic thing that we have care for people in Regina and 

southwest Saskatchewan. And I think, I know it’s not very 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4311 

common where the opposition say thank you, but this could 

have been one of those cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that we’re going to have conversations 

back and forth. And the member from Rosemont hasn’t talked 

enough so he’s still trying to talk from his seat. But I think we 

need to hear of the records of our government and when they 

were in government because, Mr. Speaker, when . . . And I’m 

pretty comfortable if the member from Rosemont and Lakeview 

want to have an election based on health care. I’ll have that 

fight every day, Mr. Speaker, because I’ll put our record against 

their record any day of the week. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and I think they get angry when we want to 

talk about their record. We talk about them closing 52 hospitals 

across Saskatchewan when they were in government. And I for 

sure when I’m in Regina want to talk about the closure of the 

Plains hospital, Mr. Speaker, because when I was knocking on 

doors — and this just isn’t from me, Mr. Speaker — when I was 

knocking on doors, one out of five doors go, you know what 

was a really bad idea? Closing that Plains hospital in 1999. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s coming from constituents of Regina 

Walsh Acres. That’s coming from people that . . . I think the 

NDP just thought people were going to forget about the Plains 

hospital. It’s SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] now. I think it always was SIAST actually. 

That’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they want to talk about us not having the job done in health 

care, and I think that that’s something where we’re going to 

have to correct the record right now, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

records are very important. And the member opposite talked 

about not consulting nurses, not consulting health care 

professionals, which last night I had a fantastic talk with a lot of 

people in the health sciences reception, which was fantastic to 

talk to front-line workers and see how they feel. 

 

But here’s some interesting quotes from SUN, Mr. Speaker. 

And this isn’t a quote from 1986. This is from April 2006: “It’s 

frustrating to see a profession you love so much in the 

communities you care for be disrespected by your own 

government.” Mr. Speaker, from Rosalee Longmoore on 

nursing shortages under the NDP: “There’s no light at the end 

of the tunnel unless it’s a train. These staffing levels are 

dangerous.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s their record: “There’s no light at the end of 

the tunnel unless it’s a train.” And they’re going to come and 

stand in their spot in this legislature and say we have done 

nothing for nurses, Mr. Speaker? We’ve had 1,000 more nurses 

start working in Saskatchewan since 2007. I think that speaks to 

our commitment, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 

who went on the nurse recruitment trip, our commitment to 

bring in nurses and improving health care for people all over 

our province. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Rosalee Longmoore, president of SUN, said in September 2007, 

September 26th, “Staggering workloads and excessive overtime 

are driving our nurses away.” And obviously, Mr. Speaker, we 

saw that in the NDP’s nurse recruitment records, Mr. Speaker. 

Nurses were leaving the province in droves under the then NDP 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s very interesting that they’re quiet 

over there now. They don’t want to talk about their record. And 

I think we saw some very angry people speaking about the 

Pasqua ER being open, Mr. Speaker. And there’s only nine 

people that are mad about the Pasqua ER being open today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a few of the things that we’ve 

done in emergency care because the member from Rosemont 

talked about emergency care and when seconds count. And I 

agree with him on that. When seconds count, emergency care 

should be there, and that’s why we brought STARS to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, probably one of the best 

emergency care initiatives brought forward in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s when seconds do count. And they looked at 

bringing in air helicopters a couple of times, and they said it 

couldn’t be done because they didn’t need it. And we thought 

the people of Saskatchewan deserved to have the best medical 

services available in a timely manner. And I think STARS is 

one of the great initiatives brought forward by a government 

that cares about the health care of their people, to make sure 

that they have timely access to emergency and critical care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we show every year during budget time our 

investment and how much we care about health care in our 

province. Over the last six years, we’ve invested one point . . . 

$1 billion in health capital, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s 

pretty important. 

 

And when we want to talk about hospitals, I think we want to 

do a compare and contrast between our record and NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. We build hospitals. They close hospitals. We recruit 

nurses. They lose nurses. We recruit doctors. They lose doctors. 

In a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, that’s pretty much how our record 

has played out in the last five, six years. We have STARS. They 

don’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to building a couple 

more hospitals. My friend from Moose Jaw North talked about 

the Moose Jaw Hospital coming online, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 

exciting for south Saskatchewan patients. My friend from North 

Battleford, we’re looking at the new psychiatric hospital in 

North Battleford. That’s approximately $110 million. The new 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, which I think 

was a wonderful initiative brought forth by this government, my 

friend from Saskatoon Northwest enjoys that. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re committed to a new Plains surgical outpatient centre in 

Regina. 

 

So speaking about the Plains, Mr. Speaker, I think it will be 

something that I’d be remiss if I didn’t talk about it a couple 

more minutes, Mr. Speaker. And they want to talk about 

southern Saskatchewan’s need for emergency care. Well that 

was one of the reasons the Plains hospital was built, Mr. 

Speaker, to create access coming in from Estevan, from 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. That was a jewel of a hospital. There 

was first-class care coming in, Mr. Speaker. And I think that 

they don’t realize how much that hurt southern Saskatchewan, 

rural Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They didn’t 

care. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. I think almost they cared more 

about the Plains Hotel shutting down than the Plains hospital, 

Mr. Speaker. 



4312 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

And I think when it comes to it, Mr. Speaker, that they closed 

the Plains hospital strictly based on politics. They wanted to 

keep a hospital in downtown Regina, and they wanted to keep a 

hospital at the Pasqua. Politics played a huge role in that 

decision. I don’t think so much good public policy there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In door knocking in 2011, as I said, the constituents said, you 

know what’s bad public policy? Closing the Plains hospital. 

And I would wager, I would wager that I’m going to have some 

more comments on the Plains hospital in the 2016 election, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think people don’t forget bad, bad decisions. 

And I think that’s why the member from Lakeview and the 

member from Rosemont don’t enjoy talking about their record 

because it’s chock full of really bad decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple more, a couple more 

numbers I’d like to throw out before my time’s done, and that’s 

the opposition’s record when it comes to doctor, nurse retention 

in our country when they were in government, Mr. Speaker. 

Between 2001 and 2006, the NDP’s last five full years in the 

province, we lost 1,160 total health care workers — 455 RNs 

and RPNs, 117 physicians, 155 pharmacists, and 95 

physiotherapists. Mr. Speaker, that’s the record of decline. 

That’s the record of stagnation, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud to 

be on the side of a government that has a record of growth, a 

record of retention, and a record of health care being moved 

forward. And I’m happy to say that the ER, Pasqua ER is open 

for business. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s been 

with a considerable deal of alarm that I’ve watched the 

proceedings around the question of the Pasqua emergency room 

unfold, Mr. Speaker, and I say that from a number of 

perspectives. This is a service that is provided that benefits the 

whole of southern Saskatchewan, but something I’m very proud 

about, in terms of the constituency that I represent here in this 

legislature, is the fact that it’s the home of the Pasqua Hospital. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the crisis that is under way in the 

emergency room at the Pasqua Hospital. This isn’t something 

that’s been, you know, acute for weeks. It’s not something 

that’s been boiling for months. This is something that you pick 

different points over the past year, Mr. Speaker, and this has 

been . . . It’s plain that this is a health care facility that’s been 

under crisis. 

 

And I guess I’d take some encouragement from the fact that 

there’s a temporary solution that involves not closing the 

emergency room. I think the message brought forward today by 

this government is a vast improvement over what we’ve seen 

over the last week where the minimizing that’s gone on, the 

deflecting from the importance of the issue that’s gone on, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the way that this government seems to point 

the finger every which other way but in the mirror at themselves 

in terms of who is in charge as this crisis has unfolded and as it 

carries on, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

And we see further proof of that here today where it seems that 

it’s not so much about patients first, Mr. Speaker, it’s about 

politics first from this government. And you see that in the 

reaction from again the guffawing and the backslapping, 

self-congratulatory party that they’ve thrown for themselves on 

the eve of this announcement. And it’s a special kind of 

arrogance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a special kind of arrogance 

to preside over a crisis and then to declare yourself worthy of 

congratulations when there’s a temporary solution arrived at. 

It’s a special kind of arrogance involved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re glad to see that there is a temporary solution in place 

that does not involve the partial closure of the emergency room 

in the Pasqua. We’re glad to see that there is at least some 

semblance of better communication being made to the people of 

Saskatchewan. But again, Mr. Speaker, if past is indeed 

prologue, if the best indicator of future behaviour is past 

behaviour, what we’ve seen over the weeks and months 

preceding this, Mr. Speaker — where the crisis has been 

referenced in different forums, in different media, and certainly 

by different of the constituents that I have the privilege to 

represent in this legislature — the overcrowding that takes place 

in the emergency room, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s against this 

backdrop that that government has come forward with a pledge 

in the growth plan to eliminate emergency wait times, to 

eliminate emergency room wait times. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, you see them come forward with a 

goal like that and you think, okay are they on a different planet 

or something? Because the constituents that I talked to that have 

experience directly with the emergency room at the Pasqua, the 

family members that I talked to that have direct experience with 

the emergency room at the Pasqua tell a very different story 

from the kind of bravado that would seem to be entailed in that 

goal. 

 

And again if this was something that indicated, you know, they 

were making real progress towards it, Mr. Speaker, then there’s 

a different speech that comes forward at this moment. But they 

come forward with a goal like that, and then the next sort of 

checking-in point in terms of the emergency room — for, you 

know, one of two emergency rooms in the second largest city in 

this province, in the capital city of this province — is the fact 

that they can’t keep it open overnight. 

 

They bring it to the brink of this crisis. They preside over this 

crisis. And again, Mr. Speaker, there’s a special kind of 

arrogance involved in then trying to congratulate themselves for 

a temporary solution being arrived at. It makes me shake my 

head, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can’t believe it. 

 

And then in terms of the way that the debate carries over across 

the way, you hear the member from Walsh Acres, Regina 

Walsh Acres, who you wonder how he’s been serving his 

constituents in the city of Regina in terms of this crisis 

unfolding, Mr. Speaker. And you wonder about the fact, that 

again instead of some kind of spirit of contrition or spirit of, 

you know, we’ve obviously gotten something wrong here, or 

the fact that . . . I think of the old adage that the first, the first 

step towards solving a problem, Mr. Speaker, is recognizing 

that there’s a problem, and recognizing that if you’ve got a role 

to play in that, what is your role in that? 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something we’ve seen no end 

of in this Assembly is the way that that government, you know, 

points the finger every which way but at themselves, in terms of 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4313 

the people that make the decisions, in terms of the role that the 

Health minister has to play, in terms of the role that the cabinet 

has to play, in terms of the role that the Premier has to play, but 

in terms of the role that MLAs from southern Saskatchewan and 

MLAs from Regina have to play in this argument. 

 

And that it came to the brink of this, Mr. Speaker, and their 

response is not one of contrition or recognition that they’ve 

made some kind of less than adequate contribution to solving 

this problem, you know, it’s something else, Mr. Speaker. The 

way that they’re laughing and back-patting and congratulating 

themselves, it really takes a special kind of arrogance. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why are you so mad? 

 

Mr. McCall: — The Premier heckles from his seat, why am I 

mad? And I’ll tell you why I’m mad, Mr. Speaker. Because this 

is a government that said they’re going to put patients first. This 

is a government that said they were going to put patients first. 

And over the last week in particular, Mr. Speaker, in the way 

that they’ve chosen to communicate with the public, it’s been 

very plain that it’s been politics first, not patients first. 

 

So if I’m mad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m mad because the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve that government to keep its 

word. The people of Saskatchewan, you know, deserve 

something better than this government coming forward and 

saying, you know, it’s not our fault. It’s somebody else’s fault. 

 

You know, Harry Truman used to have a sign on his desk that 

said, the buck stops here.” Apparently the Premier’s got a sign 

on his desk that now says, the buck stops somewhere else. You 

know, something else, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again the way that this crisis has unfolded and their 

inability to communicate straight with the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . One of the first rules of crisis 

communications, Mr. Speaker, is be available, be clear, and 

make sure that people have the information that is required by 

them. And over the past week we’ve seen this government, you 

know . . . Last Thursday after the House closes, you know, just 

before suppertime last Thursday is when the final word came 

out on the then closure plan for the ER  

 

And then we’ve seen different members of that government add 

additional bits of information in terms of what the . . . you 

know, the emergency room is going to close. Well then what’s 

the plan? You know, the people, surely to goodness, have every 

right to expect that if they can’t manage to keep the emergency 

room open, then they should be able to know what the plan is. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, as this situation changes from day to 

day . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I hear the Health 

minister congratulating himself from his desk. You know, it 

was just yesterday in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, just 

yesterday in this Assembly where the Health minister’s 

response to this, again reminiscent of the response made around 

concerns being brought forward around seniors’ care where that 

Health minister said, “It may not have as much of an impact as 

one may think, Mr. Speaker . . .” It may not have as much of an 

impact as one might think, Mr. Speaker. From yesterday’s 

Hansard. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the deflection, in terms of 

the buck passing that goes on with that government, and now 

the way that we see them congratulating themselves when they 

arrive at a temporary solution, having presided over the crisis, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a special kind of arrogance that has them 

doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My hope is that in the days 

forward they pay attention to the people like Tracy Zambory, 

the president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, who’s 

raised very serious concerns about the way that this government 

has so badly handled this file. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I’d hope that they’d remember all of 

the good speech they’ve given themselves about putting 

patients first. Because when you look at how the handling of 

this has unfolded, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty plain that it wasn’t 

patients first. It’s pretty plain that it was politics first. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s a true 

honour for me to enter in this debate here today on access for 

the people of our province to emergency services, in this case 

with this motion in the community of Regina and the 

surrounding area, Mr. Speaker. And I’m a little bit disappointed 

when I sit here and I listen to some of the anger and the 

comments that come from the members opposite. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, with the announcement of the agreement that came 

together here this morning, it’s truly a good thing for, and not a 

political thing, but a good thing for the people of Regina and the 

surrounding areas that they’ll have access to their emergency 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time in this House or across the 

province, this is not the first time, whether it be temporary or 

otherwise or the discussion of coming of breaks in emergency 

services in different communities across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s many communities that have had this 

discussion in years past. And it’s been true that our government 

since 2007 has very definitely in the past, and we continue to 

take steps to improve the number of available emergency, 

emergency facilities and the medical professionals involved 

with delivering those services across the province, Mr. Speaker, 

in all communities including Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s this government that formed the Saskdocs, Mr. 

Speaker, which has worked very hard with communities and 

health regions alike on different physician recruitment and 

different retention plans with physicians. Many of these are new 

and innovative methods that haven’t been tried before. But 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, what was working . . . what was in 

operation before was not working. Mr. Speaker, it was this 

government that created the SIPPA [Saskatchewan international 

physician practice assessment] program, the Saskatchewan 

international physician practice and practicum assessment, 

which was to facilitate the integration of internationally trained 

doctors and to integrate them into practices in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. And to date there’s been 91 physicians that are 

now practising in this province that were through that program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was this government that looked at our training 



4314 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

contingent of 60 seats at the College of Medicine and were 

quick to increase that to 100, Mr. Speaker. We increased the 

medical training seats by 40. We doubled the amount of 

medical residency positions, Mr. Speaker, as well as increasing 

the premium on earnings for rural physicians that will practise 

in the full scope of practice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve looked at different ways to deliver health care such as 

primary health care, Mr. Speaker, with eight innovation sites, I 

believe, are in operation across the province, as well as a new 

program delivery for health services, it’s known as 

collaborative emergency centres. One most recently opened a 

number of weeks ago in the community of Maidstone, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s my understanding that there’s another one 

that is opening on this day today, which makes it all the more 

special of a day, in the community of Shaunavon later today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As others have alluded, Mr. Speaker, and I did, we increased 

the medical training seats from 60 to 100 or medical, the 

medical residency seats, pardon me, from 60 to 120, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s allowed us to increase the number of 

emergency physicians that we’ve been able to train. I think we 

started with two when we came to government, Mr. Speaker, 

and have brought that up to eight with an additional two Royal 

College residents, which the first of those will be graduating 

very shortly, Mr. Speaker. And Saskdocs, the physician 

recruitment agency, is working very hard to retain those 

graduates to work in this province and quite likely in this city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been no stranger in my area to struggles with 

emergency room and lack of physicians, Mr. Speaker, in rural 

Saskatchewan. That’s been going on for a number of years up 

in our area. We lost emergency services in one community in 

2006. There’s another community that lost it a couple of years 

before that. And it’s through the hard work, I might add, of 

community members partnering with their health regions, 

working under some of the new and innovative opportunities 

that this government has provided, that those communities now 

are being able to offer some of their services back to the 

residents, not only in the community hosting it but the 

surrounding communities as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the collaborative emergency 

centres. We have the community of Spiritwood, which is one of 

the first five that has been announced to have a collaborative 

emergency centre. And I was back in that community this 

weekend and I can assure you that the residents there are 

thankful and they’re working very hard, as we speak, with their 

health region to ensure that that will come to fruition sooner 

rather than later, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can also speak to other challenges. And the member for 

Rosemont talked about challenges in our health care system. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the community where I lived, our challenge 

was the facility. It was built in the early ’50s and it could not 

handle efficiently the amount of volume that was going through 

its ER department and its acute care, Mr. Speaker, as well as the 

long-term care facility was aged. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was this 

government in 2009 that announced 13 facilities to be replaced 

at that point in time, that facility included. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

$26 million facility, originally announced that 65 per cent 

would be the government’s share, 35 per cent the community 

share. It was increased to 80/20, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That facility is now open. I had the opportunity with our 

Premier and our two Health ministers and the member from 

Sask Rivers to attend the opening. It’s paid for, Mr. Speaker; 

it’s open — 34 long-term care beds, full community services, 

20 acute care beds, Mr. Speaker, and a fully functional 

emergency department. That’s this side, that’s this 

government’s commitment to health care in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Just to contrast a little bit, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been discussing 

access to health care in this province, Mr. Speaker. And when 

the members opposite were managing this file and they came to 

a struggle, what they did, Mr. Speaker, is they didn’t try to 

work through the struggle and keep the facility open. They 

closed it 51 times in Saskatchewan and one more time with the 

Plains hospital in Regina here, Mr. Speaker. There’s members 

on this side that are working to keep these facilities open as 

well as replace them: for instance the hospital in Moose Jaw, 

Mr. Speaker, one in North Battleford, and a new children’s 

hospital in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s members on that side, Mr. Speaker, that closed 16 

long-term care facilities as well as pulling 1,200 beds from the 

provincial complement, Mr. Speaker. It’s members on this side, 

Mr. Speaker, and the government of today and our Health 

minister that are replacing 13 of those facilities. I believe it’s 14 

now with the one in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All in all in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP managed 

this file, they spent $325 million in their last six years of 

government. And this government in their first six years of 

government has tripled that, Mr. Speaker, with $1 billion of 

investment in our infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member of Rosemont talk about 

the challenges with regards to health care and I would just 

remind him to ask some of his caucus members because there’s 

one of them in there that very recently said that when he was 

Health minister and had a challenge with health care, Mr. 

Speaker, he explicitly said that he wouldn’t get involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to health care services and 

infrastructure, thankfully the people of Saskatchewan have 

elected a government that make the access to our health care 

system the highest priority. And we will continue to do that, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 

Questions? I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during 

the dark days of the NDP, they sadly eliminated 1,200 

long-term care beds and 16 long-term care facilities. They 

closed 52 hospitals, the Plains hospital and other facilities 

across our province. The member from Regina Lakeview, when 

he was the Health minister, refused to step in when emergency 

services in Saskatoon were in crisis. Our ministers and 

members stand up for health care. 

 

Under the NDP’s last five years in office, the province lost 455 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4315 

RNs and RPNs and 173 doctors. Former NDP cabinet minister 

Pat Atkinson even admitted that when it came to seniors’ care, 

the NDP government was focused elsewhere. To the member 

from Regina Elphinstone-Centre: why did your party simply 

ignore health care and create issues by closing facilities and 

ignoring crises? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in my remarks I said that it’s no 

longer patients first with this government. It’s politics first. And 

I can tell by that question, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not exactly just 

politics first. It’s apparently politics first; it’s apparently politics 

last; and it’s apparently politics always. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the crisis with the ER, the 

potential closure, represents a massive failure of that 

government. This is something that’s been coming down the 

line for some time, something that will have been known by the 

Premier and government as an issue and a crisis for some time. 

My question to the member from Walsh Acres: when was he 

informed of the unacceptable planned closure of the emergency 

room at the Pasqua Hospital? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And we’ve been working to ensure that there’s good health care 

in Saskatchewan all across, in not just Regina, Saskatoon — 

rural Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want to 

say that we’ve been working hard to make sure that there’s a 

plan in place to ensure that emergency rooms are open to our 

public, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I guess to compare that and contrast that with our 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, they closed, they eliminated 52 

hospitals. Who do you guys talk to? You guys eliminated 16 

long-term care facilities. Who’d you talk to before you guys did 

that? You guys spent $325.5 million a year on health capital. 

Who did you say that’s enough money for, John . . . member 

from Lakeview? Who did you consult when you closed all 

those hospitals? Who did you consult when you closed the 

Plains, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard 

from several of my colleagues, the Premier included, about the 

former minister of Health, the current member from Lakeview, 

when he abdicated responsibility when he was minister. He told 

reporters in 2004 in the midst of the dark days of the NDP, he 

told reporters that the Saskatoon Health Region when the RUH 

[Royal University Hospital] was experiencing crisis, they were 

responsible for settling the dispute with the emergency room 

doctors, and he wouldn’t get involved. This is his chance to 

answer right here, right now, answer, why did you pass the 

buck in that situation? 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue today is, why did 

this Premier allow this kind of uneasiness, the feeling of fear to 

exist for a whole week in this province when they announced 

the closure of the ER? Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know when 

the members from Regina, we don’t know when the Premier 

knew that this decision was going to be made. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s totally unconscionable that a leader or a quote 

leader allows this kind of upheaval to happen in the city of 

Regina around a service that’s so crucial for this province. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

terms of the question that was asked to the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres by my colleague, the member from Regina 

Rosemont, it wasn’t answered. And the question is very 

seriously, very simply this: in terms of the crisis that the city of 

Regina and southern Saskatchewan has been subjected to, when 

did that member find out, when was he notified that the 

emergency room was going to be closed at the Pasqua Hospital? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

To answer my colleague across the way, Mr. Speaker, we talk 

about health care in our caucus all the time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We have conversations. We talk about what we’re 

going to do. We have a platform. We have a plan for growth, 

Mr. Speaker. We do plans all the time in our caucus, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m very happy to be a part of a team that talks 

about all the issues they’re taking forward and all the initiatives 

we’re going to bring forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t know how decisions were made over there when they 

were in government, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how they . . . 

what their rural MLAs felt when they closed those hospitals. I 

know what Lewis Draper felt when they closed the hospitals, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know Lewis Draper didn’t feel very 

good when they made the decision to gut health care in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think on our side, we take all of our conversations very 

seriously, and I’m proud to be part of a team that accepts 

everyone’s input in decisions that are made. 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me get this straight. In 

the dark days of the NDP government, dark days, they closed 

1,200 long-term care beds, 16 facilities across the province. 

Now we’re working hard, and we’ve opened or have funded 14 

new long-term facilities. And we’ve added $10 million to the 

Urgent Issues Action Fund. 

 

Under the NDP in the last five years of their government, the 

five years that the member from Athabasca likes to say the good 



4316 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

years — this is the good years — they lost 455 RNs and RPNs 

and 173 doctors. In fact it got to the point . . . It was so bad that 

the NDP cabinet minister, Pat Atkinson, even admitted when it 

came to senior care, the government was focused elsewhere. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Walsh 

Acres never answered the other question. Maybe he can help us 

out with this. We know that there’s a potential, following 

December 15th with this crisis, that the emergency room may 

no longer be open. That’s unacceptable. To the member: what’s 

the plan, and can he guarantee Regina residents, Saskatchewan 

residents that it will remain open all through the holiday season 

and well into the future? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much. I appreciate the 

question coming from the member from Rosemont. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’ll guarantee one thing. I’ll guarantee our Health 

minister will work a lot harder than the member from Lakeview 

did when he tried to keep Regina General Hospital emergency 

open or when he . . . [inaudible] . . . washed his hands of 

keeping the Royal University Hospital emergency room open, 

Mr. Speaker. I guarantee you our minister will work hard with 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and our Regina health 

board to ensure that we have the best care possible for the 

members of, for the constituents of Regina and southwest 

Saskatchewan. And I guarantee you he’s going to work very 

hard to get that job done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, any decline in service is a 

serious issue, and our government works hard to find permanent 

solutions. The members opposite cannot say the same. The 

closure of the Plains hospital in Regina had a substantial effect 

on health care within Regina and surrounding area. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, aside from driving more health care workers out of the 

province — to the member from Regina Lakeview — why did 

your government take no steps in preventing the permanent 

closure of the Plains hospital? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issue today is will there be 

emergency care at the emergency room at Pasqua Hospital after 

December 15th. The Premier won’t answer that. The Minister 

of Health won’t answer that. People are asking all kinds of 

questions around a whole bunch of things that happened a long 

time ago, but the issue today is what’s going on right now in the 

city of Regina in southern Saskatchewan, and we don’t have 

good answers at all from this Premier. The Premier’s laughing 

in his chair. He’s laughing at the people who are concerned 

around southern Saskatchewan about care, and this is 

unfortunately how we see this man. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, a question for the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres. I’m quoting from yesterday’s Hansard 

wherein, discussing the crisis around the emergency room at the 

Pasqua, the Minister of Health stated, “It may not have as much 

of an impact as one may think, Mr. Speaker.” And then from 

yesterday’s Leader-Post from the president of the nurses’ 

union, Tracy Zambory, who states, “It would help if nurses 

were included in the conversation of plans because what we’re 

finding is that we’re being told what’s happening rather than 

being involved in the conversation at the front end.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the member from Walsh Acres agree with 

the nurses’ president or with his Minister of Health? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The 75 minutes for the 75-minute 

debate has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 605 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Wotherspoon that Bill No. 605 — The 

Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and Accountability 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t really hear from 

above the shrieking of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, whether the 

debate is really on the P3 bill, and I’m assuming that it is and I 

rise in my place to offer some comments about the particular 

bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say once again, here we go again. 

The conservatives are back, Mr. Speaker, and this is another 

example as I sit here in the Assembly and I listen to some of 

their debates on their plan to privatize health care, Mr. Speaker. 

I look at the plan that they have to bring the P3 model to the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 

becoming more and more confused as to what the Sask Party’s 

agenda is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We hear them every day brag about the money they have, Mr. 

Speaker. They brag about all this money they have in the bank 

and that they have a balanced budget; they’re moving forward 

on this initiative and that plan. Mr. Speaker, they brag every 

single day on the dollars that they have, Mr. Speaker. And then 

you look at the mess. All the money that they have, the 

booming economy, the growing population, and you look at the 

mess in health care, Mr. Speaker. A good example was the 

debate today. The mess in health care, Mr. Speaker, was created 

by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then you turn around and you look at the debt in the 

Crowns. The debt in the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, when the 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4317 

government is raiding SaskPower, raiding SaskPower of their 

money and their savings and all the hard work of the SaskPower 

employees and management to try and make sure that they can 

use that money for infrastructure development, Mr. Speaker. 

But no, instead of allowing SaskPower to keep that money in 

savings and to reinvest in SaskPower’s infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker, what happens is the Minister for SaskPower reaches 

over and gives the money to the Minister of Finance and says, 

here’s a bunch of money from SaskPower. Go ahead and try 

and balance your books with our money with the profit of 

SaskPower because the ratepayers or the people that subscribe 

to SaskPower, well they’ll pay all that bill anyway and we’ll 

turn around and we’ll blame the NDP whenever we get 

questioned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So right now the debt in the Crowns, the debt in the Crowns are 

primarily being placed on there by the Sask Party government 

because every cent of profit within SaskPower is going down to 

balance the . . . so-called balance the books. And, Mr. Speaker, 

every single day I wouldn’t mind seeing the Minister of Finance 

reach over and shake the Minister of SaskTel’s hand, the 

Minister of SaskPower’s hand, saying thanks for helping us try 

and balance the books by raiding your savings, Mr. Speaker. So 

the problems in health care, the problems in the Crown, and 

now their latest . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the Deputy Premier to 

come to order. If members want to enter into the debate, there 

will be opportunity for them to enter into the debate. Currently 

the member from Athabasca has the floor and I would ask the 

other members to respect that as his right to speak. I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, very much, Mr. 

Speaker. So what happens is the mess in health care created by 

the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, all the debt within the Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. They had the choice. The government had the choice 

to leave the earnings in SaskPower to allow SaskPower to 

strategically invest those earnings so that they’re able to keep 

the rates low for the people of Saskatchewan. But they chose 

not to do that. They raided SaskPower’s savings to try and 

balance the books and, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what is 

happening now. 

 

And now their latest scheme, the Sask Party’s latest scheme is 

the P3 scheme where what they want to do, Mr. Speaker — and 

we see it clear as day on this side — is they want to be able to 

get the credit for announcing these nine new schools. And then 

what they’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is they’re going to punt 

that debt down the road. So they get the credit under the school 

construction. But guess what? Our children and grandchildren 

will be paying that bill. Make no mistake about it. 

 

It’s the same principle behind their bungling of health care, Mr. 

Speaker, where many of those costs are going to be paid later 

on. It’s the same way that they’re dealing with the Crowns. 

They’re breaking the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They’re breaking 

the Crowns. They’re breaking the Crowns on a regular basis, 

hoping that the people of Saskatchewan don’t know this. But 

the people of Saskatchewan are finding out about this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And now the latest scheme by the Sask Party is to punt debt 

down the road under the P3 model. So they get all the credit for 

building these schools, but they don’t pay the bill. Our 

grandchildren will pay those bills, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 

fundamental reason why the opposition, the NDP opposition are 

asking for accountability and transparency through this bill. We 

want to know. We want to know, what the heck are we paying 

for those P3 models? We want to know, Mr. Speaker. The 

people of Saskatchewan want to know. 

 

So the people of Saskatchewan are sitting here, the people of 

Saskatchewan are sitting here saying, well what is this P3 

model about? What is the P3 model about? They have a right to 

know, Mr. Speaker. They have the right to know. And the worst 

thing about some of the arguments that we’re hearing, Mr. 

Speaker, is some accountants are debating whether this is a 

good model or not. It’s not clear-cut from their point of view. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the worst thing I think, the 

worst thing under the P3 model is that there’s a lot of control 

lost to the local organizations and school boards and groups that 

use these schools. Many of these groups and organizations that 

use the schools now, Mr. Speaker, they’re allowed access. But 

when a private company owns that school, guess who decides 

who has access to that school? Not the government, not the 

school board, not the parents’ organizations. It is the person that 

owns the school, Mr. Speaker, their corporate friends, Mr. 

Speaker. So once again you see, you see how we sit here as an 

opposition . . . And I think today is going to be the turning day, 

Mr. Speaker, when people of Saskatchewan realize the Sask 

Party are bungling everything from health care to the 

management of the Crowns, and now how we build schools in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are asking for one thing on P3s, 

one thing on P3s. We’re asking them to come to the public and 

show the public exactly what they plan on doing. They want to 

see the deal. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this bill is 

about. We are asking the Sask Party government to come clean 

on their P3 model. Show the people of Saskatchewan, the 

taxpayers, exactly what you’ve been saying to this Assembly, 

that you’re going to save money. Show us, prove to us that 

you’re going to save money. And, Mr. Speaker, they absolutely 

refuse to do that. 

 

So today I tell the people of Saskatchewan, the people of 

Saskatchewan this: this government wants to build nine schools 

through a P3 model. This government wants to get companies 

that are probably from other parts of the country to build these 

schools, and these companies will own those schools. And not 

only will they own those schools but the taxpayers will be 

paying for those schools. And you’re going to be denied access 

by those schools unless you have a compelling reason — or the 

cash — to access that school for a lot of community functions, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the member from Martensville laughs. The member from 

Martensville laughs, Mr. Speaker. And what we say today is 

that one of the schools that’s going up through this P3 model is 

going to be in Martensville. Its going to be in Martensville, Mr. 

Speaker. So we are very happy that Martensville is getting a 

new school, Mr. Speaker. But people ought to know what 

they’re paying for. People ought to know that they have access 

to that school. People have to know, what’s the plan? What’s 



4318 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

the cost? 

 

We have a right to know. And the Sask Party is sitting there and 

they’re not sharing any information. All they’re telling the 

people is P3s are good and we’re going to support them. Mr. 

Speaker, the people have the right to know. Taxpayers have the 

right to know, and the Sask Party has stubbornly refused to let 

the taxpayers look at this deal, Mr. Speaker. And on our side of 

the Assembly, on our side of the Assembly, given the mess that 

they’ve created in health care, the absolute mess that they’ve 

created in health care, Mr. Speaker, given the facts that they’re 

raiding our Crowns to balance their books, Mr. Speaker, and 

now their latest scheme to hoodwink the taxpayers, Mr. 

Speaker, is the P3 model. 

 

And what is the NDP asking today, Mr. Speaker? We’re asking 

for a very thorough review of what the P3 model would look 

like. We’re asking the minister to come forward with his 

argument to put all the information on the table. What is wrong 

with that proposal? To let the people of Saskatchewan, the 

school board association, the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation], the taxpayers’ association, the different groups and 

organizations that are out there that are involved in the 

education file, they have a right, Mr. Speaker. In fact every 

taxpayer has a right to be able to look at this deal and determine 

whether these guys have a right or not, and they refuse to even 

allow the taxpayers that opportunity. And I say, Mr. Speaker, 

on behalf of the opposition, shame. Shame on that proposal to 

not share information with the people of Saskatchewan on how 

they can justify their P3 model. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, under the P3, we know that they’re punting 

debt down the road. We know they’re doing that, and people 

out there should know. And I hope I can do this justice. But 

what they want to do is have a private company build the 

schools and they, the private company, will of course put the 

money in. Then every year the government will pay a certain 

fee, or the people that use the school pay a certain fee, and we’ll 

be paying for that for the next 20, 30 years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re also going to control access. Any 

kind of modifications to the school, any program that wants to 

be put in that school, any group that wants to access that school, 

has to go through this private company, Mr. Speaker. So 

anyway to have all these deals set up . . . And all the experience 

they talk about is in Alberta, and they talk about this in BC 

[British Columbia] as well. 

 

And many groups that are involved with the P3 model are 

sounding the alarm bells to this government. They’re sounding 

the alarm bells in their own province. And the weird thing about 

this all, Mr. Speaker, the really weird thing about this all is that 

all the bragging that the Sask Party does, that they have all this 

money to do all these wonderful things, why is it now we’re 

going down this path of P3s where we’re punting debt down the 

road? That’s what confuses the people of Saskatchewan. They 

don’t know what the heck this P3 model is. Why are we punting 

debt down the road? Aren’t we paying down our debt? People 

are asking. Don’t we have record job numbers? Don’t we have 

population growth? Don’t we have a good economy? How in 

the earth can you have all those assets in place and yet you’re 

still insisting on punting debt down the road so our 

grandchildren and our children will pay for that debt? The 

grandchildren and children will pay for those nine schools. 

Make no mistake about it. It’s not going to be us. It’s not going 

to be us. It’ll be the children and grandchildren that’ll be paying 

for their schools. 

 

And I say today the reason why they’re embarking on this P3 

model is, number one, is they have mismanaged the finances of 

the province. That we know on this side of the House. 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, they’ve also squandered a lot of the 

opportunity that they inherited from the past NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

They have squandered that opportunity. And the third thing 

that’s really confusing, Mr. Speaker, is that despite the fact that 

they had all these assets, they still have to punt debt down the 

road. And the only reason that we can see that, Mr. Speaker, is 

that they want to be in front of the cameras cutting the ribbon, 

getting the photo op. And who pays the bill? Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not those people in the photo op. It’s going to be the children 

and the grandchildren of this province that’s paying that bill. 

 

And yet you look at some of the actions happening, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Minister of Finance says, oh, we still have a 

balanced budget. They’re hiding that debt, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re hiding that debt. And let me assure the people of 

Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, that not only are they going to pay 

more for that debt but their children and their grandchildren are 

paying for that debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I sit here and I listen to some of the 

members talk about some of the tough choices that the NDP had 

to make when they assumed government in the ’90s, Mr. 

Speaker, 1991. There, Mr. Speaker . . . And a lot of the 

conservatives over there don’t like to hear this. This is the real 

history, when you have interest, interest, not debt payment but 

interest on your debt alone, almost $1 billion a year that the 

government had to pay at that time, almost $1 billion a year we 

had to pay in interest alone, Mr. Speaker, just in interest, when 

this province couldn’t make payroll because the conservatives 

broke this province and we couldn’t make payroll to our own 

employees, Mr. Speaker, when we had to go to the federal 

government cap in hand, cap in hand to tell them, we need some 

help in rebuilding Saskatchewan because the conservatives 

nearly killed the province. They nearly killed the province. 

 

And those people across the way never talk about that. They 

say, oh the NDP done this, the NDP done that. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, history will not be rewritten by the Saskatchewan 

Party, Mr. Speaker. History will speak for itself. When your 

interest payment on debt alone is almost three times your 

education budget, almost three times the education budget, then, 

Mr. Speaker, we say across the way here, every time you chirp 

about some stat, every time you chirp about some money that 

you’re saving, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House where 

they try and portray the NDP as being bad, Mr. Speaker, they 

talk about the dark days, those were the death days of the 

Conservatives that we had to struggle through and that we had 

to fight for and to rebuild our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And no matter how much the right wing likes to chirp across 

the way, Mr. Speaker, $1 billion in interest every single year 

that we had to pay just on the debt, never mind repaying the 

debt, just to pay the interest alone, Mr. Speaker. And you can 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4319 

imagine the huge financial burden on the government at the 

time, the huge financial burden of the government at the time. 

And not only did they put us in debt of $15 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, but they cleaned out the Crowns. They cleaned out the 

Crowns and they made these long-term deals that forced the 

NDP to keep some of their deals so some of their rich friends 

could benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you look at all those examples, and that’s why I tell people, 

learn from history of the Conservatives because today they’re 

repeating the same practice they did in the ’80s. Because not 

only are they raiding the Crowns . . . So everybody paying their 

SaskTel bill and everybody paying their SaskPower bills, guess 

what? You didn’t have to pay those increases if the Sask Party 

would’ve left the earnings in SaskPower to reinvest in the much 

needed infrastructure. 

 

And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, perhaps we couldn’t do the things 

that we wanted to when the NDP assumed government from the 

Conservatives. You know why, Mr. Speaker? There was a little 

problem. There was a little problem that we had when we took 

over from the Conservatives. The province was broke, flat 

broke, Mr. Speaker, flat broke. That’s the lesson of the 

Conservatives of the ’80s. 

 

So when I sit here and listen to some of the backbenchers chirp 

about what the NDP done, they weren’t even here, Mr. Speaker. 

They didn’t even know what choices were being made to be 

able to balance the books to bring back Saskatchewan from the 

brink of bankruptcy. 

 

Now we fast-forward to 2013, and here we are again. They’re 

raiding the Crowns. They’re raiding the Crowns out of all the 

profit, and people are expected to pay that. They even want to 

sell the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They’re selling a Crown right 

now as we speak. They’re making a mess out of health care, 

Mr. Speaker. And now through the P3 model, they’re punting 

debt down the road. So who pays for it? Not you and I, not 

them, but our children and our grandchildren will pay for these 

schools. Our children and grandchildren will pay for these 

schools, and the community groups that are out there, the 

community groups will also pay because accessibility will be 

denied under these new P3 models. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all the NDP are asking for today, under this 

bill, is transparency and accountability. But they stubbornly 

refuse. They dismiss those concerns. And I tell every person in 

Saskatchewanland today, whether you live in Weyburn or 

whether you live in Buffalo Narrows, Beauval, or whether you 

live in Saskatoon, that these P3 models . . . Be very wary 

because we’re asking a bunch of questions on how these deals 

are structured, and all the evidence that we’ve got, all the 

information we’ve got from school boards associations, from 

governments, from some of the opposition parties, not only in 

our neighbouring province but BC as well, they are telling us 

you’ve got to make sure that the deal is in the best interests of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the government doesn’t come forward 

with that information and share the information publicly, then 

on this side of the House we have absolutely no confidence, no 

confidence in that minister when he talks about how well the 

P3s are going to work, zero confidence in their assertion that 

this is a good deal for Saskatchewan. Why? Because they refuse 

to share the information with the people of Saskatchewan, 

something that the NDP believe they have a fundamental right 

to know what kind of deals that this government’s making 

under their P3 models, Mr. Speaker. Under their P3 models, 

they refuse to bring the information to the people of 

Saskatchewan and that’s a fundamental problem that I think the 

people of Saskatchewan are going to quickly realize. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you look at some of the points that are 

raised earlier. And I’m not going to use quotes today. But I 

want to tell the people of Saskatchewan this: when the Sask 

Party assumed office, they had money in the bank. They had a 

growing population. They had a booming job market. Things 

were going really well. And, Mr. Speaker, just by the blessing 

of good timing, they were put in government. Just good timing, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s not good management. 

 

So what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that through all the years, the 

rebuilding the province, after all the years of struggling through 

massive debt, massive debt, Mr. Speaker, the NDP worked very 

close with the people of Saskatchewan to rebuild our province, 

to rebuild our province. And the conservatives over there know 

it. They know it. 

 

What really upsets conservatives, Mr. Speaker, what really 

upsets PCs [Progressive Conservative], Mr. Speaker, is the fact 

that (a) they know their history. They know their history. And 

secondly what really upsets the PCs, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

booming economy, the great province that we have, Mr. 

Speaker, it was not created by the right wing. It was created by 

a pragmatic, forward-thinking New Democratic government 

alongside the people of Saskatchewan. That’s our history, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re very proud of it. 

 

Now today, now we sit here in opposition and we’re telling 

people of Saskatchewan, well, Mr. Speaker, once again, here we 

go again. The conservatives are in charge over there. There’s no 

liberals over there. They’re all conservatives. They’re all 

conservatives. Because the conservatives over there are in 

charge. They’re in charge on that side of the Assembly. 

Liberals, there’s no liberals over there. They’re all 

conservatives. 

 

And the reason why I say that, Mr. Speaker, because they sit in 

their chairs and they’re willing, they’re willing to raid the 

Crowns. They’re willing to put this province into debt. They’re 

willing to get the credit. But the kids and the grandkids will pay 

that debt for many, many years. And, Mr. Speaker, they still 

claim that the books are balanced when the auditor has clearly 

said no, they’re not. 

 

So the people of Saskatchewan, I’ll leave you this final point, 

on this final point. They made a mess, a mess of health care. 

We’ve seen evidence of that today. And they’ll continue 

making a mess of health care. 

 

More and more cases are coming forward, Mr. Speaker. People 

are wondering why the mess, despite all the economic promise 

of the province. Because the Saskatchewan Party does not know 

how to govern at all. We have zero confidence in their ability to 

manage this boom properly so everybody benefits, including the 

future generation, including the future generations. Instead 



4320 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2013 

through this model under P3s, they’re punting debt on to the 

future of our province. And I say shame on them. 

 

So despite the bragging that they do and despite the chirping 

and the back-patting that they do, they’ve made a mess of 

health care. They’re raiding all our Crowns of any profits and 

putting the bills on your power bill, on your phone bill. And, 

Mr. Speaker, now through the P3 model, you’re punting debt on 

to your children and your grandchildren. And from our 

perspective, that’s not how a government should do business in 

light of the good times that the province of Saskatchewan 

enjoys today. That’s not how they should do business. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again we’re going to have a lot more to 

say on this Bill and many other bills. And I think that today, 

Mr. Speaker, has been a very good day for the NDP because we 

have hammered home the fact that there’s health care 

challenges. Wake up to it. People of Saskatchewan aren’t going 

to sit back anymore and listen to your excuses. 

 

Now they’re raiding our Crown corporations. We’ve exposed 

that, Mr. Speaker. And now their latest scheme, their latest 

scheme is to punt debt down the road to the P3 model. And we 

say shame. Shame on that. 

 

We have the ability. We have the economy. We have the 

strength. We have the people to do many of these things on our 

own. And this government refuses to listen. They stubbornly 

dismiss those concerns by the people of Saskatchewan. And I 

say, come election then, the people of Saskatchewan will not 

forget that. They will not forget that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 605. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 605, The Public-Private 

Partnerships Transparency and Accountability Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Plans for New Schools 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Marchuk.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask my 

colleagues to please bear with me. We have an unfortunate list 

that I’m going to just read off, and I would like to just . . . If you 

can keep your heckling down: 

 

1996, Weyburn; 1995, Riceton; 1994, Fenwood; 1996, Rama; 

1997, Tisdale; 1999, Biggar; 2000, Tramping Lake; 2002, 

Battleford; 2004, Radisson; 2005, Saskatoon; 2002, North 

Portal; 2001, Norquay; 2000, Lloydminster; 1999, Moose Jaw; 

1998, Yorkton. These are all towns that had their town, their 

school closed by the NDP. And that’s just the first page, Mr. 

Speaker. I have the rest, but we won’t go through them. 

 

It’s a dark chapter in the province. But there’s one personal one 

here that I left off that I need to mention and that was 1997, 

Esterhazy. East School Elementary School was closed by the 

NDP, and that’s where I went to school, Mr. Speaker. Our 

slogan for the school was Rise to the Top at East School. That 

was our school motto. No one is rising to the top at East School 

anymore because of the NDP. Mr. Speaker, this is one of the 

many of the over 170 schools that the NDP closed. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the province, the people of the province 

should remember this and it’s a quote that I think is fitting for 

the people in rural Saskatchewan and all throughout the 

province is, “Forgive your enemy, but always remember their 

name.” That’s the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Thankfully those dark 

days are behind us. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, new schools are opening up. Mr. 

Speaker, 20 new schools have opened since the government 

changed in 2007. Today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, people 

are moving to our great province. We just celebrated, the 

province grew to 1.1 million people. And that 100,000 people 

that voted with their feet on where they would like to live and 

raise a family, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan. And that took six 

years to grow that 100,000.  

 

As we all are aware, it took 77 long NDP years to grow the 

province last time by 100,000. Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the 

lack of a plan for growth under the NDP, and it speaks to the 

growth plan that we have. And why we see growth in 

Saskatchewan is that it affords us to repair some of the damage 

the NDP did to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s challenges that come with 

growth. One of the ones that are felt by everyone in the 

province and by families are the lack of the investment in 

schools that the NDP did over 16 years. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not just the schools that they closed. It’s the lack of 

maintenance that they provided the school divisions, and were 

really now put in a pretty good deficit when we took over by the 

lack of the capital that the school divisions had to provide a safe 

working environment for our teachers and for our children to 

learn in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to do things differently than the 

NDP. With the schools that we have just announced under the 

P3 bundling, we’re getting nine new buildings, which is 18 new 

schools throughout the province. This is going to go a long 

ways to address the urgent need for school space in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this approach is not meant to fit all the new capital 

requirements in the province. We’re going to do it where it 

makes sense. We’re going to bundle schools, and that’s where 

we’ve seen the major announcements in Regina and Saskatoon 

and Martensville and Warman. It makes sense. We’re still going 

to do the traditional build. We’re still going to be out there 

where it makes sense. But to listen to the NDP, their approach 

would have us still living in sod houses, Mr. Speaker. 



November 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4321 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP would have the public believe that the 

path that we’re deciding to go with this bundle of schools is 

wrong. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the old way of thinking in 

Saskatchewan. And it’s a way that growth is a bad thing, that 

growth is something that they don’t want. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

have a little story to share on why I . . . It’s obvious why the 

NDP doesn’t want growth. And I was talking to an NDP 

supporter and she had a very astute comment. And I don’t often 

give compliments to the NDP, but this is an interesting 

comment that sheds light on how the NDP are and their policies 

that they support. 

 

And it was her view — and we were talking about the growth in 

the province and what’s happening and it’s exciting — and it 

was her view that neighbourhoods that had new trees or in her 

words, short trees, were a lot less likely that they would support 

the NDP. Mr. Speaker, she shared with me, and she’s a senior 

NDP supporter, that it was their policy that if they had short 

streets . . . Think about that. That’s the new neighbourhoods. 

It’s part of the 100,000 people that have moved into 

Saskatchewan. And her observation is they are less likely to 

vote NDP. 

 

And that sums up what the NDP policy was for 16 years, to 

hold back this province, Mr. Speaker. By holding back the 

province, it was good policy for the NDP, but bad policy for the 

people of Saskatchewan. We welcome growth and even the 

challenges that come with it, Mr. Speaker. And in education, 

this is one of them, that we’re going to rise to the challenges. 

And we’ve announced these nine new buildings, or 18 new 

schools, that are going to be completed in the P3 mode. 

 

And one of the simplest reasons why we are going to go down 

this road is cost certainty, Mr. Speaker. We know that there has 

been overruns in the past in education. And 2002 to 2006 in 

northern Saskatchewan, the Rossignol High School, estimated 

original cost was 6.8 million. Actual cost, Mr. Speaker, 15.6 

million. That’s unbelievable what that school was going to cost 

and what it was going to come in at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to have that with a P3. We’re 

going to know for a certainty that the cost of that school, what 

we sign on that contract is what it will cost, Mr. Speaker. And I 

have a couple other examples. In Meadow Lake from 2000 to 

2003 the estimate was 9.5 million. It came over budget again, 

10.8 million. 2004 to 2006 in Saskatoon, Centennial Collegiate, 

estimate was 15 million, and it came in at 18.8 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the problem that we have in Saskatchewan, 

is that a lot of these large projects go over budget unless you 

use innovation, unless you use modern structures to make sure 

that the project is completed on budget. And another, I think the 

most important part, or important part for me of P3s — and, Mr. 

Speaker, you would appreciate this — I was talking to a pretty 

impartial person and he was talking about why he’s very 

supportive of P3s. And he brought up the important fact that 

with P3s, the maintenance, you know it’s going to get done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now when the NDP was in government, they neglected 

maintenance throughout our province, throughout our education 

system. And that right now is what we’re facing is the backlog 

of maintenance that has to be done. Now, Mr. Speaker, we 

know with the P3 the maintenance will get done because we’ll 

sign the contract and it will get provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important, this P3 discussion, it’s about 

policy, and it’s about policy decisions from this side of the 

House versus that side. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that 

the NDP is trying to run and hide from their party’s record, and 

his own record, Mr. Speaker, and I’m speaking about the 

Leader of the Opposition. The NDP has removed every bit of 

their policy from its website. The NDP platform from the last 

election is gone. All the NDP policy resolutions are gone. Even 

the NDP policy review book, the tree book, written by the NDP 

leader, even it’s gone. And why is that, Mr. Speaker, why does 

that NDP leader stand for . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Exactly. 

 

For instance, he’s been talking about a smart growth plan for 

months now. Where is the so-called smart growth plan, Mr. 

Speaker? We can’t find it on their website. But, Mr. Speaker, 

this is what I’m talking about with the P3 and bundling the 

schools. It’s the policies that we bring forward and, you know, 

it’s the opposition’s role to take a different view of it. But 

they’re not just taking a different view, they’re not putting any 

new ideas forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, with that, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the debate that’s going 

to be forthcoming around P3s. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to join in this debate around P3s and building 

infrastructure for our education system. And I’m going to have 

a lot more to say further down the line, Mr. Speaker, and I look 

forward to discussing our plan versus no plan from the other 

side. And eventually they’re going to lay something forward on 

how they intend to mix education and education infrastructure 

in our system right now, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to 

seeing their platform and their policies coming forward. And 

with that, I’d like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has moved that the 

House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:40.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4298 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4298 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Celebration of Hanukkah 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4298 

 Saskatchewan Employers on Top 100 List 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4298 

 Movember Supports a Good Cause 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4299 

 Moose Jaw Educator Honoured 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4299 

 Collaborative Emergency Centres in Rural Communities 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4299 

 Improving Access to Housing 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4299 

 Growth Plans 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4300 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4300 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4300 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4301 

 Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4302 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4303 

 SaskPower Rates and Investment in Infrastructure 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4303 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4304 

 Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4304 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4304 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 125 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4305 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4305 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Emergency Medical Services 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4305, 4315 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4307 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4309, 4315 

  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4310, 4315 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4312, 4315 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4313 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4314 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4315 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4315 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4316 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 605 — The Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and Accountability Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4316 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Plans for New Schools 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4320 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4321 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


