




















































Hansard: May 15, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 64A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 15, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3571 

 May 15, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to all 

my colleagues in the House, I’d like to introduce a constituent 

of mine, Ms. Camille Munro, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. 

I’m going to talk about her recent exciting accomplishments in 

a member’s statement coming up, but I’d like to ask all 

members to help me welcome her to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 

extending a welcome to this young woman who joined us in the 

Assembly today and congratulate her. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to welcome to you and through you to 

all members, a group of students, Mr. Speaker, and teacher and 

educational assistant from Vincent Massey Community School 

in my constituency who have travelled here. And these are 

grade 6 and 7 students, and I look forward to meeting with them 

later on this afternoon to have some questions and a juice box 

and a chat about what goes on here in the legislature. 

 

I would also like, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Sounds like government members want me to buy Blizzards, 

and perhaps when session winds up, I’ll visit Massey Place 

school with some ice cream treats. That would be a good idea. 

 

I do want to welcome Allison Maclean, the teacher who is here, 

and thank her for taking this effort in bringing students to the 

legislature. It’s hugely important for democracy and for 

children. And I do want to say a welcome to Tracy Lyons as 

well, educational assistant working with the students in the 

classroom. 

 

And from time to time here in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we 

provide apologies for things. And I have to apologize to Tracy 

because she’s actually my neighbour as well. And I have to say 

sorry for all the times that my lawn does not meet the Lyons’s 

gold standard and all the times that the sidewalk is not as clear 

as soon as it should be through the winter. So I’d ask all people, 

Mr. Speaker, in the Assembly to welcome this group from 

Vincent Massey. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, suddenly I’m regretting my 

last heckle of the Leader of the Opposition, because it’s an 

honour to be able to introduce to you and through, a great group 

of students from Ashley Park School in Swift Current. And I’ve 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Yes. Yes, I’ve already 

texted back to the office so that we can have something a little 

bit more than juice boxes now, Mr. Speaker, for this group from 

Ashley Park School. 

They’re in grade 4. I think there’s 35 students who are there. 

They’re accompanied by teachers Mark Siemens, Lynn 

Anderson, and Alysa Marchand. There’s educational assistants 

as well, Angela Sauder. And a very good friend, Liz Ramage is 

also with the group up in the galleries. And there’s some 

parents, some chaperones that have joined the group: Melanie 

Arntsen, Melanie Friesen, Ryan Hunter, Amanda Peters, Janice 

Bezanson, Cindy Gross, Rick Redekop, and Joanne Boniface. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the students have been to Science Centre. And a 

little bit later on, we’ll have a chance for a picture and a 

meeting, and then probably some other stuff now. So it’s great 

have students in the legislature from Swift Current, and I want 

to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly and hope 

members will do the same. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

introduce some other guests that we have from my home 

constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place. And that’s the Walls 

family, Mr. Speaker, who are seated in your gallery: Scott, 

Sandi, Brock, Jenna, and Chad, who made the effort to come 

here to the Assembly. Katrina was unable to get off work. But 

they’re a family that does a tremendous amount in the city. 

They’re very engaged in their church. All the children have 

benefited and participated to a large extent in the cadets 

program. And they haven’t been to the legislature and they 

wanted to come and see what goes on and have a bit of a family 

road trip for the day. 

 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the Walls family 

to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the west gallery is somebody very important, very special to me 

and to the people of Moose Jaw North, and that’s my 

constituency assistant, Judy Hatfield, just sitting in the front 

there. 

 

Judy and her husband moved to Moose Jaw a few years ago. In 

fact we found her when we were on the campaign trail. And 

when there was an opening in the office, I admired her 

enthusiasm for the province, and put her to work. She’s very 

dedicated, great work ethic, which is really a blessing because 

coming from Alberta, she really didn’t understand the total 

political system in Saskatchewan. But she’s caught on very 

quick. 

 

I’m very pleased to have her as my CA [constituency assistant]. 

She’s a friendly face at the door and a welcoming voice on the 

phone, works very hard for my office in Moose Jaw as well as 

the people of Moose Jaw North. So I’d ask everybody to 

welcome Judy Hatfield to her Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to welcome 

three very bright grade 8 students that are joining us here today. 

I received a phone call directly this morning asking if I had 5 



3572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2013 

minutes to answer some questions about a project they were 

doing on parliamentary democracy, and I said, well I can do 

you one better. Can you get on your bikes and join us for 

question period? 

 

So I welcome here today Mr. Elias Maze, Mr. Christian Leader, 

and Mr. Zack Spasoff. They’re each students at the École 

Massey School. It’s a pleasure to have them here today. I 

enjoyed meeting with them before question period, and maybe 

we’ll reflect some of what you shared with me in question 

period here today. 

 

And I’d also like to say that Elias’s parents, Belinda and 

Patrick, are good friends of Stephanie and ours. And Belinda’s 

certainly an impressive individual, a Regina police officer. 

She’s a fantastic runner, an awesome mom. And Pat Maze is a 

good friend. He’s a board of governors member for the U of R 

[University of Regina], also on the senate, president of the 

teachers’ association. He’s not as great of a runner and he’s a 

pretty poor fisherman, Mr. Speaker, but nonetheless, I certainly 

count him as a good friend. 

 

It’s my pleasure to welcome these three bright individuals to 

their Assembly, and I thank them for being here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To and 

through you, I’d like to introduce three lovely ladies sitting up 

in your gallery: my constituency assistant, Danielle Velazquez, 

her sister, and her mother who have joined us here, come down 

from Saskatoon to see the proceedings. Like all of us that sit 

down here, we always have a great person working behind the 

scenes to be able to help us out, deal with the constituency 

levels, certainly while we’re in Regina. And I very much 

appreciate Danielle. And it’s been said in here by other 

members, but she is the best, absolutely, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you very much and please welcome to your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to introduce three individuals in your 

gallery. Mr. Speaker, we have our Treaty Commissioner, 

George Lafond, is here. He’s a Blackhawks fan, so he’s still 

enthralled by the playoffs. He’s joined and accompanied by 

Chief Cliff Tawpisin who is the chief of the Muskeg Lake Cree 

Nation and who works tirelessly on behalf of his community. 

And he’s accompanied by Murray Browne. Murray is the 

director of operations at Muskeg Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all individuals to join me in welcoming 

these individuals. They work tirelessly for their children. They 

work tirelessly for the community, but they also keep in the 

mind the broader perspective and presence and importance of 

our province and of our country. And I’d ask all members to 

join me in welcoming these three nation builders. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the member from Greystone in welcoming Treaty 

Commissioner George Lafond, along with Chief Cliff Tawpisin 

and as well as Murray Browne. To echo the comments, thank 

you for what you’re doing in the province. Thank you for the 

roles that you’re serving in and the difference that you’re 

making in the lives of so many people, all people here in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you for being here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members today, 

a school group they have in the west gallery from Countryside 

School at Saltcoats, nine grade 8 and 9 students. They are 

accompanied by their teacher, Bonnie Penner, and also 

chaperones Colin and Michelle Bartel, Evan and Janelle Penner, 

Doug and Viona Regher, Narcenio and Loly Cano, Kurt and 

Melissa Barkman. And I’d ask all members to welcome to them 

to their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and to all members of the House, my 

legislative intern for this part of their program, and it’s Simon 

Hutton who is from Yorkton. He seems like quite a guy. He’s 

quite interested in sports, whether it be hockey, badminton, 

track and field, volleyball. He travels the world, and he’s 

bilingual. And he’s got an interest in political science and 

economics, and he’s been a real help in this session helping 

with preparing for estimates and bills. So I want to ask all 

members to join me in welcoming and thanking Simon Hutton 

in our legislature today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I 

have the honour of introducing two special guests from my 

constituency today, Dana and Kristy Black. Dana travelled 

down from Porcupine Plain last night and is staying with Kristy. 

Kristy works in my office. 

 

Dana is 17 years old, in grade 11 at Porcupine Comprehensive 

School. She’s an amazing dancer. She just finished a successful 

year of jazz and ballet and lyrical. And this is Dana’s very first 

time to the legislature, and her sister, Kristy, is looking forward 

to showing her around and touring the building with her. 

 

Kristy works in my office, and she is a thoughtful, dedicated 

young lady. And I’m very fortunate to have her working with 

me. So I am asking all members to please join with me in 

welcoming these two young ladies to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members, 

my legislative intern this session and that’s Michelle Neufeld 

who’s up in the gallery, waving. 

 



May 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3573 

And Michelle was from Rosthern, born in Rosthern, but was 

raised in Saskatoon. She has a youth care worker certificate. 

And as she entered into that career, she was introduced to the 

world of non-profit organizations, which she now has a very 

keen interest in. She’s completing her honours Bachelor of Arts 

degree and she’s done all kinds of volunteer work. She was the 

Fairy Godmother program coordinator for The Princess Shop, 

which is a mentorship program for young women. She also 

worked with female youth at the Salvation Army Bethany 

Home and she has also worked at the Canadian Deafblind 

Association, assisting disadvantaged individuals with daily 

living. She is a proud mother of a six-year-old son who wants to 

be an author, an astronaut, and a builder. 

 

And I’m very pleased to have Michelle working with me for 

this term, and after we finish here in the legislature she’ll be 

helping me out with constituency work. So I look forward to 

that. So please welcome Michelle. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join my colleagues in recognizing the Treaty 

Commissioner that has joined us. And in particular to the chief 

of Muskeg Lake, Chief Cliff Tawpisin, just to mention to the 

chief that I’m very pleased that he is here along with the Treaty 

Commissioner. It’s always nice to have visitors join us at the 

Assembly. 

 

And I just want to point out for the record, Mr. Speaker, I used 

to play volleyball against the Treaty Commissioner. And this 

was many, many years ago when Muskeg Lake used to come to 

Ile-a-la-Crosse to play against the Ile-a-la-Crosse Halfsons. And 

the Treaty Commissioner, Mr. Lafond, was actually their go-to 

guy. And I can say that 30 years after we used to play volleyball 

against each other, the palms of my hands have finally calmed 

down. They were swollen up for many, many years, Mr. 

Speaker. But for the record, the Ile-a-la-Crosse Halfsons always 

dominated the Muskeg Lake volleyball team.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say it’s always an honour to have 

visitors and to see people that we played sports against many, 

many years ago. And once again, Mr. Speaker, it’s always nice 

to see them continuing on in their service to their own people. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join with 

the members opposite and my colleagues in welcoming the 

Treaty Commissioner, Mr. George Lafond, as well as Murray 

Browne and, in particular, Chief Cliff Tawpisin from Muskeg 

Lake up in the Rosthern-Shellbrook area. 

 

I might add that in this last year, Muskeg Lake had just a 

rock-solid hockey team. And I would ask the member from 

Athabasca if he would like to try that team on for size this year 

because they were quite successful in their league. They even 

beat out another rock-solid team in the community of 

Shellbrook this fall that we had the opportunity to watch. Thank 

you very much, and I’d like all members to join in welcoming 

these people to their Assembly. 

The Speaker: — Unfortunately guests in the gallery have no 

voice with which to rebut any comments from the floor. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand today to present a petition in relation to 

cellphone coverage for northwestern Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from all 

throughout Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake as soon as possible to ensure the Sask Party 

government stops stalling behind the rhetoric, and refusing 

to listen to the chorus of voices calling for action, and to 

begin immediately to plan and then quickly commence the 

construction of a second bridge crossing the North 

Saskatchewan River in Prince Albert. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Moose Jaw, Weyburn. And I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning seniors’ care here in 

Saskatchewan: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 

quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 

more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 

standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 

for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in 

seniors’ care facilities; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 

as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of a rental housing rent freeze in the city of 

Estevan. Actually these people . . . And there’s hundreds of 

signatures. 

 

That renters across Saskatchewan are asking for help dealing 

with unreasonable rent increases. And with the growing 

shortage of quality, affordable rental accommodation in cities 

across Saskatchewan, property management companies are 

buying up property and increasing rents by amounts that are 

unreasonable, unfair, and to many are basically an eviction 

notice. 

 

They say that the city of Estevan has been overly expensive due 

to unguided rent increases, young individuals from the city are 

leaving and not returning due to this problem, and that families 



3574 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2013 

that have lived here for years are moving away. And for the first 

time in Estevan’s history, a homeless shelter is open and being 

used, and rental for lots in the trailer court are skyrocketing. 

 

And therefore in the prayer, they respectfully request: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly call upon the Sask Party 

government to listen to the people of Estevan who demand 

that the rental prices in all buildings and holdings be frozen 

at the current amount. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are literally hundreds of names on this 

petition, and they come from the city of Estevan and 

surrounding area. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present today a petition in support of the Saskatchewan film and 

television industry. In fact in light of the fact that we still don’t 

have a workable and bankable incentive to attract film 

production here to Saskatchewan creating jobs and economic 

spinoff, telling our stories, and also in light of the fact that the 

Alberta legislature last week passed a motion in support of a tax 

credit not dissimilar than the one that we had here in 

Saskatchewan and moving away from the one that they’ve got, 

and that was brought forward by a Wildrose member, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan provide a tax 

incentive for film, video, and television employment to 

leverage investment, employment, and growth in the 

province’s film, video, and television sector. 

 

This petition is signed by people from across Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition to the Legislative Assembly. Northern Saskatchewan, 

as you know, is being targeted by the Nuclear Waste 

Management Organization to become a storage site for millions 

of used irradiated nuclear fuel bundles. These radioactive 

nuclear bundles would be shipped on provincial highways. 

Some provinces have already banned the storage or transport of 

used nuclear bundles. 

 

And so I’d like to read the petition. It says: 

 

We, in the prayer that read as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly pass legislation to 

permanently ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

of nuclear waste into, out of, and through Saskatchewan. 

 

And this signed by a number of individuals, Mr. Speaker, and 

come from communities such as Gallivan, Cochin, North 

Battleford, Cut Knife, Neilburg, Saskatoon, Paynton, and 

Waterhen Lake. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on Highway 123. This highway provides the only access to 

communities of Cumberland House and Cumberland House 

Cree Nation. This highway was recently voted by Saskatchewan 

residents as the Canadian Automobile Association’s worst road 

in the province. This highway needs major upgrades and 

repairs. Mr. Speaker, people are very concerned for their safety. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize the upgrades and repairs and 

maintenance to Highway 123 is important to northern 

residents and must be undertaken immediately. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is signed by hundreds and hundreds of residents 

of Cumberland House. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Regina Resident Crowned Miss World Canada 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 

introduce a constituent of Regina Dewdney, the newly crowned 

Miss World Canada, Camille Munro. Camille was one of 35 

participants who competed in the Miss World Canada pageant 

this past week in Richmond, BC [British Columbia]. She’s the 

first Saskatchewan woman since 1963 to be crowned the winner 

at this event. 

 

Camille is passionate about making a difference in the lives of 

all young women. She volunteers at Dress for Success Regina 

and teaches dance at Martin School of Dance & Baton Twirling. 

Aside from preparing and competing at Miss World Canada, 

her volunteering, humanitarian work, and the two jobs she has 

— one of which is working at F Division at the RCMP — 

Camille will also be receiving her bachelor’s degree in human 

justice this coming June from the U of R. 

 

Last month I attended Camille’s fundraiser and, Mr. Speaker, I 

was impressed by her passion and energy for making a positive 

difference in our community. Camille is now prepared to head 

to the Miss World competition in Jakarta, Indonesia this 

September where she’ll be representing Regina, our province, 

and our entire country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 

congratulating Camille in all her accomplishments thus far and 

wishing her the best of luck this coming September. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatoon Mother Centre Supports Women  

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to have 

been an active supporter of the Saskatoon Mother Centre long 



May 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3575 

before it opened its doors last year. The Saskatoon Mother 

Centre is one of two Mother Centres in Canada and one of 750 

Mother Centres around the world. 

 

This centre is a safe place for women who are interested in 

supporting each other in finding and deepening skills and 

developing their leadership capacity. The Saskatoon Mother 

Centre recently hosted a very successful Mother’s Day event 

with over 50 women from around Saskatoon attending. 

 

This summer the Mother Centre is organizing its third annual 

dragon boat team for the Saskatoon dragon boat races. The 

centre has also recently started a sewing circle attended by a 

diverse group of women — women with disabilities, Aboriginal 

women, and women across a range of ages. There is child 

minding available for women who participate in activities, as 

this helps women attend events as well as actively participate 

once they arrive. 

 

All of the centre’s events and activities are only possible 

through the incredible work of the seven community women 

who are part of the governance structure along with its 

community partners: the Saskatoon Health Region, child hunger 

and education program; Catholic Family Services; KidsFirst; 

Central Urban Métis Federation; and Breastfeeding Matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking all of 

the incredible people who helped make the Saskatoon Mother 

Centre happen and who keep it going day to day. It is a 

wonderful space for women in the heart of the city of Saskatoon 

at Station 20 West. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Eastend Multiple Sclerosis Walkathon 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise in the House today to talk about a special event in my 

constituency: the annual MS [multiple sclerosis] Walkathon 

held in the month of May each year. 

 

This one, this occasion marked the 15th anniversary of the 

walkathon which raised close to $40,000 for this year’s event, 

bringing the total to more than $300,000 over the last 15 years. 

That really is a remarkable achievement, Mr. Speaker. This 

particular MS Walk began because of the efforts of Bonnie 

Gleim, a young woman from Eastend who was diagnosed with 

this debilitating disease. With her positive outlook and her 

talent for inspiring others, Bonnie brought this event from 

humble beginnings to the success story it is today. 

 

She’s quick to give credit however to all those who help make 

this event such a successful fundraiser for the MS Society — all 

those who gather donations, the participants who actually walk, 

the local credit union staff who tally the money, and the fire 

department which provides a truck to lead the parade of 

walkers. Bonnie herself is a busy wife and mother as well as a 

local businesswoman, yet she finds time to serve as Vice-Chair 

for the Saskatchewan division of the MS Society of Canada and 

will soon become Chair in 2015. 

 

I ask all members to please join with me in congratulating 

Bonnie and her supporters for raising funds for MS research 

and providing support over the last 15 years. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Joints in Motion Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on May 2nd, Stephanie 

and I enjoyed a fundraiser organized by Evan Quick at Beer 

Bros. for Joints in Motion and the Arthritis Society. It was a 

great evening for a great cause. The cuisine and beer pairings 

were exceptional, an amazing six courses. Chef Malcolm’s 

homemade sausage with caramelized onion mash along with a 

porterhouse oyster stout was my personal favourite. 

 

This event also included a silent auction with items from local 

artist Jason Robins, Sara Lindsay Makeup Studio, Just 

Volleyball, Orange Boot Bakery, Andrew Laursen at Satori 

Hair, and many more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s because of local leaders like Evan Quick that 

Joints in Motion has raised over $33 million to fund important 

arthritis research and advocacy. Evan has raised more than 

$60,000 through his own efforts. This October, Evan’s Joints in 

Motion team will be completing a cycle tour in the Algarve. 

Past treks have included the Inca Trail, Mount Kilimanjaro, and 

the Everest Base Camp. I want to give a special shout-out to 

Don Black and the crew over at Greystone, as well as my 

father-in-law in the Willows Wellsch Orr & Brundige law firm 

as event sponsors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me to thank Evan Quick, Beer Bros, all the donors, and to wish 

the Joints in Motion team the best of success on their upcoming 

cycle tour. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Walk a Mile in Her Shoes Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

the House today to do a follow-up statement for the Walk a 

Mile in Her Shoes event held last Thursday in Melfort. The 

event was outstanding, with over 145 walkers registered and 

participating, over 100 men donning women’s 4-inch-high red 

heels. Many spectators also walked along with the participants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the event was well organized with a band, ankle 

taping, barbecue, water stations, and golf carts for the weary. 

I’m very pleased to state that there were five members of the 

legislature participating in the Walk a Mile event. A full 80 per 

cent of the members walked the full mile in the prescribed 

footwear, while the remaining 20 per cent had his legs 

unexpectedly turn to rubber after seven-tenths of a mile and had 

to finish in sock feet. 

 

The night was very successful in fundraising with pledges over 

$23,000, but also raising awareness of this terrible crime of 

domestic violence. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in congratulating the North 

East Outreach and Support Services organization for this unique 

project in support of Angel’s Lighthouse transition home to be 



3576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2013 

erected in Melfort. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Early Childhood Educator Appreciation Day 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise in the House today to acknowledge the 

significant contributions of those who work in the early learning 

and child care sector. On behalf of the Saskatchewan Early 

Childhood Association, our government proclaimed today as 

the Early Childhood Educator Appreciation Day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, early childhood educators help children get the 

best start in life. Our government has made significant 

investments in the early years to allow more children to benefit 

from early childhood education. For example, this year’s budget 

secured over 500 more child care spaces for Saskatchewan 

families. This brings the number to a historic total of more than 

13,700 spaces and a 48 per cent increase since 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also committing 1.6 million in program 

and capital funding to add 15 pre-kindergarten programs. This 

expansion will serve approximately 240 more vulnerable three- 

and four-year-old children and their families. 

 

Early childhood educators work and play and build trusting 

relationships with children and their families. Mr. Speaker, I 

encourage all members of the Legislative Assembly to join me 

in recognizing the professionalism and dedication of our early 

childhood educators on Early Childhood Educator Appreciation 

Day in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Track and Field Team Takes Overall Title 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to happily recognize and congratulate a superb group of 

girls from St. Mary High School in Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, 

the St. Mary’s female track and field team had an outstanding 

record at the Nike High School Invitational Grand Prix national 

meet in Toronto last weekend. 

 

This team of girls proudly medalled in nine of the ten events. 

This more than doubled their nearest competitor. The St. Mary 

girls were one of 12 female teams competing in the event. Each 

member of the team participated in four events that fit their 

strengths and, Mr. Speaker, they performed in an outstanding 

fashion. Winning a total of 11 medals, this team took home the 

overall girls championship title. The team is competing again 

today and tomorrow in the city high school championships at 

Prime Minister’s Park in Prince Albert. I would especially like 

to recognize and thank head coach, Kelly Prins, for his 

leadership and dedication in coaching these girls. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the St. Mary High School female track and field 

team on winning the Nike High School Invitational Grand Prix 

in Toronto. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care for Seniors 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout this 

session, we’ve heard far too many stories of situations where 

the seniors’ care and care facilities simply isn’t up to the 

standards that our seniors, that our grandparents, in the province 

deserve. Families and front-line workers have told us, Mr. 

Speaker, that one of the biggest issues it comes down to is 

chronic understaffing in facilities. 

 

One of the issues, concerns we’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, is the 

instance of where seniors miss their weekly baths because of 

short-staffing. I asked the Premier last week if he thought this 

was acceptable and he said no, which of course is a good thing. 

But his plan to address it, Mr. Speaker, was simply having CEO 

[chief executive officer] tours of facilities, something that will 

not address the issue. But I’m glad we can agree that missing 

weekly baths by seniors is a problem. 

 

My very specific question to the Premier is this: is he satisfied 

with just weekly baths for seniors in care facilities or does he 

think they deserve baths more than once a week? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of 

the Opposition for the question. I think the answer to the 

question is specific to the care, the optimum level of care that 

each patient needs. Mr. Speaker, it’s true that in some cases, 

due to medical conditions, that might be the appropriate 

number. We’re going to let front-line health care workers make 

that decision. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. member and to the 

House, and through the House to the people of the province, 

that we do want optimal care for seniors when it comes either to 

bathing or any other element of their care. And so if they’re not 

receiving that, if the level-of-care decisions being made for 

long-term care residents is not about the best level of care, 

that’s a concern to the government. 

 

That’s why the Minister of Health is taking these actions to 

ensure that we are looking at the issue of staffing in the 

long-term care facilities. That’s why he has the CEOs engaged. 

That’s why he’s opened up the province and the Government of 

Saskatchewan to potential review of the current assessment 

tools that, you know, basically dictate both the level of care and 

even in some cases the number of staff that are at facilities, Mr. 

Speaker. We want to make sure that seniors are cared for in the 

province at an optimal level. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when we listen to front-line 

health care workers, when we listen to families who have loved 

ones in care facilities, Mr. Speaker, we hear stories about 

situations where there are not adequate staffing levels and as a 



May 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3577 

result people have fallen through the cracks. We have instances 

where people are not receiving the weekly baths that they 

deserve for their dignity. 

 

In Alberta, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government heard a lot 

of outcry on this issue when it comes to baths for seniors in care 

facilities. And at first they were stubborn and they didn’t bend 

on their position, but they came around, Mr. Speaker, and 

eventually listened and acted. This spring the Alberta 

government mandated a two-baths-per-week minimum standard 

in seniors’ care facilities. 

 

So again my specific question to the Premier: does he think 

seniors in care facilities deserve more than one bath a week, or 

is he satisfied with simply weekly baths, let alone situations 

where those baths are missed because of short-staffing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in terms of 

the preamble to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s question, I 

think it is important to point out that there are now in the 

province of Saskatchewan many, many more front-line health 

care workers than there ever were under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker. I do think it’s fair to point out 

that we were 1,000 nurses short under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

That was a deficit that needed to be made up in partnership with 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. We had too few doctors — 

arguably we still do — but there are 200 more practising. In 

every single category of health care workers, there are many 

more now than there were when members opposite actually had 

the chance to make decisions and not just ask questions. 

 

Now with respect to the question, Mr. Speaker, this side of the 

House will rule nothing out. As the Minister of Health has 

highlighted, his hands-on review from a CEO perspective, his 

preparedness to look at the assessment tools for long-term care 

residents, means that everything ought to be on the table, 

including the specific question that is raised by the Leader of 

the Opposition as well as other issues that might be related to 

the complement of staffing, that might be related to other areas 

of quality of care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are building nursing homes in this province. We are 

increasing staffing complements in this province. We are 

reducing surgical wait times in this province because we want 

to put the patient first, and that’s true of seniors as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What families have 

told us is that the situations where people have missed their 

baths, situations when people are only receiving one bath a 

week, Mr. Speaker, the shortages are because of the 

short-staffing that is occurring in facilities. And while having a 

CEO to tour a facility is a fine step, Mr. Speaker, unless that 

CEO is helping deliver the baths to seniors, ensuring that the 

care is there and listening to the front-line workers and listening 

to the families, it’s not addressing the issue. 

 

The Alberta Health minister, when he announced the 

two-bath-per-week mandate this spring, he said this: 

 

This is more than an issue of health and hygiene for the 

residents of our continuing care facilities. It is an issue of 

dignity. By mandating a minimum number of baths, we 

can ensure residents are being cared for appropriately and 

with the dignity they deserve. 

 

I want each of us to think of a senior that we love, whether it’s a 

grandparent or a mom and dad. If that individual was in a bed in 

a long-term care facility, unable to go to a bathroom, fully 

reliant on staff to meet their needs, their hygiene needs, would it 

be acceptable, would they be satisfied with having one bath a 

week? Will the Premier recognize that a minimum 

two-bath-per-week mandate, steps in that direction are what is 

needed in order to improve care for seniors in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. We’re absolutely going to look at the 

decision that Alberta has made. We’re going to look at what 

other provinces do around this particular issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our first term, we had a member of this 

Legislative Assembly focus on the issue of long-term and 

seniors’ care, reported as a Legislative Secretary, reported back 

to the government. Mr. Speaker, we also have as a government 

a record of actually opening long-term care beds in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the hon. member doesn’t want 

to countenance what happened perhaps prior to 2007. But it 

does inform the decisions we make today, and it informs the 

situation that we have today where there’s a shortage of beds, 

frankly, not just the staffing complement issues the member 

raises. There are many other issues. 

 

We are meeting those challenges, Mr. Speaker. We are 

addressing those issues. We’ve made those investments to open 

long-term care beds where members opposite closed them, Mr. 

Speaker. We won’t rule out the suggestion that has come from 

Alberta, but we’re also canvassing other provinces to see what 

they are doing to provide optimal care to seniors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is the stories that we 

hear from front-line workers, the stories we hear from families 

is that too often the care that our seniors need is compromised 

because of short-staffing. 

 

We’ve been constructive in this, Mr. Speaker. We have 

suggested minimum staffing levels for the different levels of 

care in order to ensure the appropriate level of care, the 

appropriate number of staff are there. And people can’t 

understand, Mr. Speaker, that when the economy is doing well 

in Saskatchewan, why the Sask Party government is unable, is 

struggling to deliver that level of care, that level of dignity that 

all seniors in this province deserve, that our grandparents 

deserve. When we’ve raised issues about the minimum 

standards, they’ve dismissed them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This particular issue of baths is a concrete step, and yes it would 

require more health care workers to provide the baths to seniors, 



3578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2013 

Mr. Speaker. But when we think about the people that built this 

province, when we think about our parents, our grandparents, 

they deserve it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Premier: will he look at the steps that Alberta has taken, 

and not run away from it as he has with minimum staffing 

levels? Will they consider the two-bath-per-week minimum 

mandate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just to be certain that there 

ought not to be any doubt about the priority this side of the 

House places on our moms and dads and our grandmas and 

grandpas, Mr. Speaker, we took over a situation in this province 

where those same grandmas and grandpas in long-term care 

facilities, under the watch of the NDP, had to contend with 

leaky roofs, had to contend with facilities that were in a very 

dilapidated state. And I remember the minister of Health 

bringing in pictures of those long-term care facilities that we 

inherited from members opposite, Mr. Speaker. And apparently 

it was good enough for grandparents at that particular time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was not good enough then. It’s not good 

enough now. And that’s why we’ve been adding long-term care 

beds. That’s why we’re building new facilities. That’s why 

we’ve increased the complement of health care workers in the 

province. Are we done yet? No, Mr. Speaker. Are we constantly 

reviewing all aspects of the health care system, acute care, 

long-term care included? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Health has indicated that. We’re going to look at 

what’s happening in other parts of the country. And there ought 

not be any doubt about our commitment to seniors, to our 

grandparents, to our moms and dads because, Mr. Speaker, the 

best indicator of future action is past action. We’ve been there 

in the past. We’ll be there in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Highway Conditions 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Sask Party government has shown a dismissive attitude when it 

comes to fixing the roads of the province. On the CAA’s 

[Canadian Automobile Association] list of worst roads, 

northern roads were some of the most in need of attention. This 

minister has bragged about his budget for highways day after 

day but, Mr. Speaker, he can’t get the job done, even with all 

the resources that come out of the North. 

 

For the communities of Dillon, Patuanak, Cumberland House, 

Sucker River, and Wadin Bay, the Sask Party government still 

won’t fix these roads that are essential to the local economy and 

way of life. Those highways are not yet on the capital list for 

this year or years to come. Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party 

government refused to listen to northern people and refused to 

put northern roads on their list for support for the next five 

years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take the premise of 

the question when the member opposite says that I stand and 

brag about the budgets of this government, Mr. Speaker. I will 

each and every day brag about the spending this government 

has put into highways across Saskatchewan any day compared 

to the years of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member has no grounds to stand on. He was 

the minister of Highways for what, maybe three or four 

months? Did the highways get fixed in northern Saskatchewan 

under his watch? Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our record . . . We have more to do. Absolutely. 

More to do in the North. More to do across this province, Mr. 

Speaker. But we won’t take advice from that member because 

when he was the minister of Highways, he did nothing for 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the five-year capital plan sits on 

the minister’s website, but he doesn’t seem to want to do 

anything. He doesn’t want to listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan who have voted on the worst roads. From north 

to south, rural to urban, there are highways needing attention. 

And Highway 22 makes it on to the list only because Highway 

22 was also on CAA’s worst roads list last year. In other words, 

he and they still didn’t get the job done. And even after all the 

petitions and online votes from the people of Saskatchewan, the 

Sask Party government and this minister won’t listen; instead 

they boast. Why are the concerns of Saskatchewan people being 

ignored when they speak out about the worst roads in the 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 

we know there’s more work to be done up there, absolutely. But 

again I’ll compare our record to the former government’s 

record, and especially that former minister’s record in northern 

Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would like the member 

opposite to go back through the 2011 campaign where they 

promised $5 billion worth of spending, Mr. Speaker. How many 

words were about northern Saskatchewan and roads? Not a 

word, Mr. Speaker. Not a cent. You’ve got some nerve coming 

in here today, Mr. Speaker, expecting a whole bunch to be 

done, when in their 2011 campaign, they didn’t mention a word. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party minister wants 

to brag about his budget day after day, but he doesn’t want to 

fix the roads that the people of Saskatchewan say are desperate 

in terms of needing to be fixed up. But when somebody looks at 

the future plan going forward to 2014, the worst roads just 

aren’t on their radar. The Sask Party government’s website 

doesn’t list any of the roads that made it on to the CAA worst 

roads list. Only the road to Love is on the list, Mr. Speaker, 

which is good for those in Love. But for those people who 

aren’t in Love, it’s only broken hearts. It’s broken pavement as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does the Sask Party government have no care 



May 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3579 

or love for the roads of this province? Why can’t they fix the 

broken pavement scattered all around Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker? And despite this minister’s boasting about his budget, 

and the petition and the phone calls and the letters, Mr. Speaker, 

why can’t he get the job done? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think going back 

to the 2011 campaign platform, there’s a lot of people that 

weren’t in love with that platform, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s absolutely more work to be done, but we won’t take 

advice, as I said, from the members opposite. 

 

We understand that CAA goes through this exercise each and 

every year. We know it’s a membership-driven organization. I 

can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very privileged to have 47 

members sitting around me that keep me in tune with the road 

conditions, Mr. Speaker, around this province. I don’t need that 

member necessarily quoting the CAA. We know we’ve got 

concerns around the province, but we also know, Mr. Speaker, 

that we’re putting record investment into highways, Mr. 

Speaker, that this province has never seen before, especially 

under 16 years of deterioration of the NDP. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

has failed to provide answers and accountability at every turn as 

it relates to its IPAC [International Performance Assessment 

Centre for geologic storage of CO2] affair. Last week we saw 

the dismissive approach from the Premier himself, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, at the root of this issue is that government shirking 

its responsibility and accountability for taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, session is concluding tomorrow, but the questions 

and concerns remain about how millions of taxpayers’ dollars 

could have possibly been wasted on bloated, untendered 

contracts with unacceptable conflicts of interest. Mr. Speaker, 

will the Premier finally do the right thing? Will he open up the 

books of the IPAC affair to the Provincial Auditor, and will he 

send all the information to the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police]? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — At the time that the contract was 

entered into, the funding was with the U of R. The U of R have 

had the Provincial Auditor look at their books and will 

absolutely co-operate with any information the RCMP want. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day in, day out the facts 

and information tell a different tale than the story and claims of 

that government. In a report by IPAC’s management on March 

28th, 2011, it clearly says that $2.1 million was spent for “no 

acceptable business purpose.” Waste, Mr. Speaker. MNP also 

did an investigation, but MNP was denied access to the 

information it needed, despite requests. 

 

And that government has tried to hide for years this whole 

affair. It was only exposed through extensive questioning in 

committee and a media investigation. The whole IPAC affair 

needs to be handed over to authorities. I’ve shared my 

information with the RCMP. Why hasn’t government done the 

same thing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, whatever is in my 

possession, should the RCMP want it, it’s theirs to look at. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party can pretend 

all they like by way of actions that they want to purport that 

they’ve been accountable on this, but certainly they’ve been 

anything but — and that despite sending over millions of 

taxpayers’ dollars and having government representation in 

place right from the start. The IPAC affair and the concerning 

web between IPAC, CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.], and ClimbIT, 

as well as with individuals with noted conflicts of interest, 

simply demands answers. 

 

This affair and the allegations of waste were hidden for years by 

that government, simply brushed aside, Mr. Speaker, only 

emerging, as I say, through questions in committee and through 

an investigation by the media. Enough is enough, Mr. Speaker. 

Why can’t that Premier listen for once, call in the Provincial 

Auditor, give her a full mandate to investigate the IPAC affair, 

and demand his officials to turn over all information to the 

RCMP? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — All of the concerns that the opposition 

has raised has been relationships with the University of Regina 

and the companies that the member opposite raised. So 

therefore the Provincial Auditor is the auditor for the University 

of Regina, and the president of the University of Regina has 

asked the Provincial Auditor to look into these things. 

 

Once government discovered that this was indeed happening, 

there was a number of steps taken. There was a forensic audit 

asked by MNP. They severed the relationship with the 

company, CVI. They secured the assets. Steps were taken by 

government as soon as it was discovered, Mr. Speaker. They 

were appropriate steps, and the Provincial Auditor has the U of 

R books that they can look at. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Providing Workers for the Job Market 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the tone that government 

members have taken on this issue has been one of digging in 

their heels. It’s been one of deflecting on all circumstances, and 



3580 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2013 

it’s been one of casting the blame on other people. And to have 

heckles, to have the tone coming across from other members on 

an issue that is serious is concerning for all Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, want the provincial 

government to have a long-term plan for the future. They want 

a sustainable plan for smart growth here in Saskatchewan. So 

they’re concerned when they hear in the news that in 2011 — 

the most recent year for which statistics are available — there 

were 1,600 net new jobs created in Saskatchewan. In that same 

year 3,510 temporary foreign workers arrived here. 

 

That means the number of temporary foreign workers arriving 

in Saskatchewan exceeded the number of net new jobs by 119 

per cent. My question to the Premier: does he share the 

concerns of Saskatchewan people about this fact? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

indeed the province of Saskatchewan has an economy that is 

indeed the envy of the nation. Clearly there are a lot of 

opportunities for people in our province. There are also 

shortages of people that are necessary for certain types of jobs 

in Saskatchewan these days. And that’s why a number of 

companies have asked for temporary foreign worker permits to 

allow people to come to fit the needs of the specific 

requirements that they have for jobs here in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With a strong 

economy comes the responsibility to be thinking long term, to 

be thinking in a sustainable, smart growth way. When we have 

the number of temporary foreign workers exceeding the number 

of net new jobs in the province, that’s concerning to many 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Between 2008 and 2011, 14,055 temporary foreign workers 

arrived in the province. In that same period, our province saw 

21,500 net new jobs. That means for the number of temporary 

foreign workers arriving in Saskatchewan represented on 

average 65 per cent of the new jobs created. That’s not a 

sustainable smart growth plan for the province. 

 

And there’s two problems with this, Mr. Speaker. These 

temporary foreign workers should be able to access a permanent 

immigration stream so it is a smart approach for the province. 

And we’ve seen the SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program] cuts that the government has made, which does not 

work towards a smart long-term immigration policy. At the 

same time, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government has failed 

when it comes to employment and training for First Nations and 

Métis people here in Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he have concerns with either 

of these issues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, that is precisely the reason 

why we are increasing training seats in all of our universities 

and in technical institutes across Saskatchewan, to get people 

ready, obviously, for the job market that is there. That is 

something obviously that the NDP never had any concern about 

because they simply didn’t do those kinds of things. They 

never, ever had to worry either about increasing employment in 

Saskatchewan because there simply wasn’t jobs available here 

in our province. It’s something that we’ve only seen in the last 

little while here in Saskatchewan where we have a very, very 

strong economy, something that is the envy of the nation. It’s 

unfortunate the NDP wouldn’t get on board with what’s 

happening in Saskatchewan these days. 

 

When it comes to Aboriginal employment, the last few months 

we’ve seen a dramatic improvement with respect to the 

numbers of that. Still a lot of work to do, no doubt, in that area, 

but we have seen improvement — something much different 

than we saw under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a direct question that was asked 

to the Premier: in 2011 we saw that there were 1,600 net new 

jobs created in Saskatchewan; that same year, 3,510 temporary 

foreign workers. That means temporary foreign workers 

arriving in Saskatchewan exceeded the number of new jobs by 

119 per cent. My question to the Premier: does he think this is a 

problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, the job numbers came out last week — 16,000 new jobs 

in the province. Year over year, Mr. Speaker, we see Aboriginal 

employment moving up. It’s why today in fact in the media just 

now, the Conference Board of Canada, the senior vice-president 

here in the province — the Minister of Finance was at a 

meeting with him recently— said this: “Pick a metric, any 

metric, and odds are Saskatchewan has just about every other 

province and state beat.” He went on to say Saskatchewan is the 

envy of North America. He did say the only hitch is finding 

enough workers, Mr. Speaker, the labour shortage issue. 

 

And so that’s why we’ve increased funding to SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] in terms of 

greater Aboriginal employment in the economy by 48 per cent 

over NDP numbers. It’s why we’re working with the federal 

government on immigration issues. And I think it’s probably 

why, Mr. Speaker, in the tree booklet that the Leader of the 

Opposition wrote for Dwain Lingenfelter for his campaign 

platform, on page 41 he recognizes the importance of temporary 

foreign workers as part of the mix. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the problem. When 

confronted with the reality facing Saskatchewan people, when 

confronted by the fact that we are not thinking long term, that 

we’re not thinking strategically, instead of owning the issue, 

instead of taking corrective action, Mr. Speaker, we see the 

Premier going on the attack on this issue. In the same way, in 

the same way we see the disconnect with what the Minister of 

Advanced Education says. Everything is great; that’s what the 

billboards say. But then we see program cuts. 



May 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3581 

In Premier’s estimates we talked about Eric Howe’s work 

recognizing that closing the Aboriginal education gap in the 

province means $90 billion to our province, to Saskatchewan. 

When that was brought up, the Premier shook his head and he 

disagreed. Eric Howe recognizes that, given the strength of the 

provincial economy, we need to be taking the right steps now to 

close the gap in Aboriginal education achievement in order to 

ensure that we are thinking smart in the long term. 

 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, we have a reliance on temporary 

foreign workers. Task force report comes out; we see the Sask 

Party government dismissing its recommendations and not 

seeing the importance of it. To the Premier: why is it that they 

ignore the recommendations coming from the task force? Why 

is he content to have such a reliance on temporary foreign 

workers here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, absent from that very, 

very long preamble to the question was the Leader of the 

Opposition’s acknowledgement in his own policy book that he 

wrote for Mr. Lingenfelter, that I presume he stands by, that 

temporary foreign workers are part of the mix. 

 

There’s a labour shortage. We want permanent residents to the 

province. We’re glad to see about 80,000 new permanent 

residents in the province. That’s certainly the biggest part of the 

answer. We want newcomers. We want greater engagement by 

First Nations. We see an increase in Aboriginal employment 

numbers. We see $22 million in the budget for specific 

initiatives for First Nations and Métis, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

why the Conference Board of Canada this day in the province 

of Saskatchewan is saying things like, Saskatchewan is the envy 

of North America. 

 

We’re trying to deal with the labour shortage through a number 

of different areas, Mr. Speaker. We are going to get that job 

done. But, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition 

talks about smart growth, it’s interesting. Here’s the surest way 

that we can stay on the path to smart growth in the province of 

Saskatchewan: we can follow BC’s lead and keep the NDP in 

the opposition. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman for the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 49, the forestry 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Forestry professionals amendment Act, 2012, 

with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 

that the bill and its amendments be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment 

Act, 2012 and that the bill and its amendments be now read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. Agreed. When 

shall the amendments be read the first time? Sorry. I recognize 

the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I move the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Environment that the amendments be now read the first and 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — Does the member for Athabasca and the 

Minister for the Environment wish to participate in this debate? 

There is an opportunity coming up . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . The economy. The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move that this bill be now read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Environment that Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



3582 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2013 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — No debate? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Everybody seemed to want to debate earlier. I 

recognize the chairman for the intergovernmental . . . Oh, 

carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman for the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act. 

2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for Crown Investments has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for Crown 

Investments that Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment 

Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

Act, 2012 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2012 (No. 2) and that the bill be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



May 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3583 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed 

again by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice to report Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 

and that the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

. . . excuse me. The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole . . . Already did that part. It has been moved by the 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 53, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Oh we’re in 54 now. Okay. We’ll go back 

where I was to start with. The Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 54, The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 and the bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 55, The Consumer Protection and 

Business Practices Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 

and that the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 55, The Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices Act and that the bill be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 55, The Consumer 

Protection and Business Practices Act be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



3584 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2013 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order 

the answers to questions 576 through 811. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government Whip has ordered 

questions 576 to 811. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — I’ll call the committee to order. The business 

before the committee is resolutions by the Minister of Finance. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, I’ll move directly to resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2013, the sum of $124,280,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2013, the sum of $124,280,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Resolution no. 

2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2014, the sum of $10,905,626,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2014, the sum of $10,905,626,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Resolution no. 

3: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2014, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending on 

March 31, 2015, the sum of $280,810,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 3: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2014, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending on 

March 31, 2015, the sum of $280,810,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I 

move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave 

to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved that the 

committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 

agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. Is 

the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. The committee is adjourned. 

 



May 15, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3585 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Committee of Finance has agreed to certain resolutions, has 

instructed me to report the same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I recognize 

the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. In accordance with rule 31(3), I 

invite the minister to now move first reading of the Appropriation 

bill. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 97 — The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 1) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 97, The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 1) be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill No. 

97, The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 1) be now introduced and 

read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of this 

bill. 

 

The Speaker: — In accordance with rule 33(1), the minister will 

now move second and third readings of the Appropriation bill. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 

read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 97, the appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second and third time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 

reading of this bill. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I wish to inform the House that the 

Lieutenant Governor is here. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 14:48 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following bills.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly at its present session has passed several bills which in 

the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 80 - The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 71 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la 

Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 77 - The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 

2012 

Bill No. 604 - The Public Health (Howard’s Law) Amendment 

Act 

Bill No. 63 - The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

Bill No. 64 - The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks 

Act, 2012 

Bill No. 89 - The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

Bill No. 901 - The Orange Benevolent Society Repeal Act 

Bill No. 902 - The Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon 

Amendment Act, 2013 

Bill No. 59 - The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 60 - The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 48 - The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 47 - The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 65 - The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 51 - The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur 

les enquêtes publiques 

Bill No. 52 - The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2012 

Bill No. 67 - The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

Bill No. 73 - The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 74 - The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 



3586 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2013 

Bill No. 75 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2012 

Bill No. 76 - The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 70 - The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi 

n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 

l’éducation 

Bill No. 58 - The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

Bill No. 46 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 

Act, 2012 

Bill No. 82 - The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2012 

Bill No. 91 - The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 94 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

Bill No. 79 - The Representation Act, 2012 

Bill No. 57 - The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 

2012 

Bill No. 84 - The Common Business Identifiers Act 

Bill No. 68 - The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 

2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur 

les juges de paix 

Bill No. 56 - The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi 

de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour 

d’appel 

Bill No. 61 - The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 83 - The Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services Act 

Bill No. 81 - The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

Bill No. 50 - The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 78 - The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 69 - The Information Services Corporation Act 

Bill No. 45 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 85 - The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

Bill No. 95 - The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

Bill No. 96 - The Operation of Public Registry Statutes 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 

2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Operation of Public Registry 

Statutes Act 

Bill No. 92 - The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act 

Bill No. 93 - The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

Bill No. 90 - The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 

2013 

Bill No. 86 - The Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability Act 

Bill No. 62 - The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 49 - The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 72 - The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 53 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 

(No. 2) 

Bill No. 54 - The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment 

Act, 2012 

Bill No. 55 - The Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices Act 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 97 - The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 1) 

 

to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:55.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 

a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:56.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3571 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3571, 3572 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3571 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3571 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3571 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3572 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3572 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3572 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3572 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3572 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3572 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3574 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3574 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3574 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Regina Resident Crowned Miss World Canada 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3574 

 Saskatoon Mother Centre Supports Women  

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3574 

 Eastend Multiple Sclerosis Walkathon 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3575 

 Joints in Motion Fundraiser 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3575 

 Walk a Mile in Her Shoes Fundraiser 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3575 

 Early Childhood Educator Appreciation Day 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3576 

 Track and Field Team Takes Overall Title 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3576 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care for Seniors 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3576 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3576 

 Highway Conditions 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3578 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3578 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3579 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3579 

 Providing Workers for the Job Market 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3579 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3580 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3580 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3581 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3582 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3581 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3581 

 



 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3582 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3582 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3583 

 Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3583 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3584 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3584 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Krawetz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 3585 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 97 — The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 1) 

  Krawetz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 3585 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3585 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


