




















































Hansard: March 14, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 33A  THURSDAY, MARCH 14, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2703 

 March 14, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would request 

leave for an extended introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to 

colleagues. 

 

There are a number of individuals, Mr. Speaker, who are here 

today to witness the debate around Bill No. 604, Mr. Speaker, 

the asbestos right-to-know Act. I’d like to introduce these 

individuals who are seated in your gallery. 

 

We have Jesse Todd who is Howard Willems’s stepson and 

Chair of the Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease Awareness 

Organization, or SADAO. We have Brenda Baergen, Howard’s 

wife, also with SADAO; Marianne Hladun, regional executive 

vice-president of the Public Service Alliance of Canada; Donna 

Pasiechnik of the Canadian Cancer Society; Jennifer Miller of 

the Lung Association of Saskatchewan; Lori Johb, representing 

the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour; Fabian Murphy, first 

vice-president, Agriculture Union, Public Service Alliance of 

Canada; Cathy Murphy who is a psychological health and 

safety expert; Sonny Rioux of the United Steelworkers District 

3; Terry Parker, business manager of the Saskatchewan 

Building Trades; also Chuck Rudder with the Building Trades; 

Bryan Glazer, president of CEP [Communications, Energy and 

Paperworkers Union of Canada] Locals 892 and 890; Don 

Boucher, administrative vice-president for western region CEP; 

Gary Schoenfeldt, vice-president of CEP area council; Clayton 

Burkholder, recording secretary of CEP, Local 892; Maureen 

Eckstein with the Saskatchewan Federation of Union Retirees; 

Corey Liebrecht of the United Steelworkers; as well as Rob 

Desnomie of the United Steelworkers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals have been watching the debate 

in the province around the issue of asbestos and this legislation 

for some time and they’re here to lend their support today. I 

should also add, Mr. Speaker, that they gave to me a petition 

which was not an order for the Assembly but a petition that 

calls for the support of this asbestos right-to-know legislation 

via the Canadian Cancer Society, SADAO, the Lung 

Association, the Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs, and 

the Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association, 

with over 1,100 signatures as of this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’d like the Assembly to welcome all of these guests to the 

legislature today, please. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister . . . Oh sorry. Carry 

on. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and just a couple of 

other introductions. In the front row of the Speaker’s gallery, 

Mr. Speaker, is Benji Noon and Meagan Noon who are from 

Thunderchild First Nation but live here in Regina, good friends, 

and follow politics closely in this province, and it’s great to see 

them here in the Assembly. 

 

And also guests that I’m very happy who are here today, my 

wife, Ruth Eliason, on the top bench with our daughter, Ingrid. 

So thank you for being here today. 

 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these guests, 

please. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well 

would like to ask for leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming the guests to 

the gallery today. We’re pleased that these people are here. I’d 

especially like to recognize Jesse Todd and Brenda Baergen, as 

well as Donna Pasiechnik from the Canadian Cancer Society 

and Jennifer Miller from the Lung Association of 

Saskatchewan. I’m also pleased to see that a number of 

members of various labour groups are here today as well in 

support of this significant initiative. 

 

Jesse and Brenda are family members of the late Howard 

Willems, and they are here today to witness a vote later on Bill 

604, An Act to amend The Public Health Act, 1994 to provide 

for access to information relating to Asbestos in Public 

Buildings. They have carried on the advocacy work that 

Howard did in regard to the creation of a mandatory asbestos 

registry. Last year we created a voluntary asbestos registry, the 

first of its kind in Canada. We want to thank all of the 

organizations that have submitted information thus far. 

 

Last year Bill 604 was introduced by the members opposite. I 

asked my officials to look at the merits of this and to see if 

there is something else that we should consider. After giving it 

careful consideration, we feel that there are some very positive 

aspects of this bill, and therefore government members will be 

supporting it. Later today we will be supporting the bill on 

second reading and looking forward to it going to committee. In 

committee we will have discussion with the members opposite 

regarding various amendments. We will of course be supporting 



2704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

the positive and the mandatory aspects of what we were looking 

for, amendments that will particularize the type of information 

that will be provided and requiring the information to be held 

on site as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to be moving forward with this, 

and I want to thank Jesse, Brenda, and all of the people that 

they have done to carry on the good work that Howard has done 

in regard to raising awareness about asbestos. On Monday I, 

along with the Minister of Health, was happy to attend an 

award ceremony where Howard Willems was given a 

posthumous award by the Canadian Cancer Society with regard 

to his work with regard to the workplace and health hazards of 

asbestos. 

 

I want to ask all members to join in welcoming them to their 

Assembly, as well as the other members that are here in the 

gallery, and thank all of them for the good work that they have 

done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in your gallery I would like to introduce three 

individuals. We are joined today by Dr. Josef Hormes. He’s the 

executive director of the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. 

He has more than 200 scientific publications, more than seven 

patents, has spent his career in Germany and the United 

Kingdom and Sweden and the United States, and we’re 

delighted to have him play a key leadership role at the Canadian 

Light Source synchrotron. 

 

Accompanying Dr. Hormes is Dr. Jeff Cutler, another example 

of brain gain here within Saskatchewan. He is very well-known 

for having hosted Prince Philip as part of the royal tour of the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron. He’s the director of 

industrial science at the Canadian Light Source synchrotron and 

also the deputy director. And a gentleman joining them, who 

needs little introduction in this house, Doug Richardson. 

 

When we think about the role of Doug Richardson and the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron, we can think of Dean 

Acheson’s memoirs. He’s the former secretary of state in the 

United States, and his memoirs were entitled Present at the 

Creation. And Doug Richardson played an absolutely essential 

and instrumental role in making sure the Canadian Light Source 

synchrotron was not put at the University of Western Ontario in 

London where the smart money said it was going, that it came 

to our fine and fair province. 

 

We know the importance of the Canadian Light Source 

synchrotron, Mr. Speaker, for its work in nuclear medicine, for 

its work in helping to facilitate success in the uranium sector, 

food security, water security, and also better understanding — 

importantly, as we know Commander Hadfield is up in the stars 

and looking at a better understanding of our universe — 

because the CLS [Canadian Light Source] is also working on 

satellite and advanced materials for spacecraft development. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join our 

three esteemed guests. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the member 

opposite in welcoming Drs. Hormes, Cutler, and Mr. Doug 

Richardson to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron is something of which all 

people in Saskatchewan are very proud — the largest science 

project once upon a time in Canada, doing such great work in 

research and innovation and really adding to that, adding to 

value on so many fronts here in Saskatchewan. So keep up the 

great work. Thank you for the work that you’ve done and the 

work that is yet to be done. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome good 

friends, not just to myself, but to the Assembly generally. I’m 

speaking of course of Debbie McKenzie-Pelletier. She’s here 

with her granddaughter. She’s in good Deb fashion. I’m now 

going to get it after question period, Mr. Speaker. But as all 

would know, the Legislative Assembly can be quite like a big 

extended family here, and Deb is, was, and she’ll always be a 

really valued member of this family. 

 

And Mr. Speaker saw wisely to bestow the Queen’s Diamond 

Jubilee Medal upon Deb, and for that so many of us were proud 

of the great work that Deb does and glad to see that recognition. 

 

So beyond all that, Mr. Speaker, she’s also a great friend and 

neighbour in the mighty community of north central Regina. So 

it’s really good to see Deb McKenzie-Pelletier here in her 

Legislative Assembly here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 

group of officials from the great community of Pinehouse. 

They’re in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. We have Mayor Mike 

Natomagan. We have Deputy Mayor Conrad Misponas, and we 

have councillor Greg Ross. And along with them we also have 

a couple of board members from the Métis local. We have 

Dominic Tinker and Alex Ross. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re in the gallery today to watch the 

proceedings, and they’ve been meeting with a number of my 

colleagues on various issues. I had a chance to chat with them 

this morning. I’m hoping to have an opportunity to chat with 

them a little bit later today. Mr. Speaker, they’re doing very 

good work up in Pinehouse. I’ve known Mike for a number of 

years now and certainly would like to commend all the good 

work that him and his officials are doing. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask all members to please give them a warm welcome to 

their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you, it’s my privilege today to introduce the first 

school group that’s come here from my constituency, The 

Battlefords. And they are a great group of 13 grade 8 students 

from the St. Vital School in Battleford. And I would like to 

introduce as well their teachers, Mr. Cawood, Mrs. Arbeau, and 

Mrs. Caswell, and also a parent, Mark Baier. Met with these 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2705 

students this morning for the first time and had a very good 

exchange with them. And I did find out one point that I 

understand Mr. Cawood is still the three-time undisputed 

champion of laser tag, and he’s going to carry that 

championship through till next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would invite everyone to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to join the 

Leader of the Opposition and the Minister Responsible for 

Labour and introduce a special friend of mine in your gallery. 

Mr. Clayton Burkholder is here with the group. Clayton and I 

go back probably three decades or so — fellow gearhead, 

fellow Chevy enthusiast. So I just want to welcome my friend 

Clayton to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join in the welcoming of the Pinehouse guests, Mr. 

Speaker. No question that having the mayor here today is a 

really important and also of course his support team. Joining 

Mayor Mike is of course Greg Ross, Dominic Tinker, and 

Conrad Misponas. 

 

I think it all really important to note that it’s great to see Greg 

bring his son here, Alex. But for the record, when Alex gets 

home, the reason why he’s a good-looking man is because of 

his mother. So make sure he hugs his mom and hugs his mom 

lots. And of course his mother’s name is Shirley. 

 

But all joking aside, I just want to say that I certainly concur 

that the community of Pinehouse is at an exciting time, and I 

want to commend the local leadership that is here today and to 

basically tell them in Cree: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

So the translation is, I’m very, very happy that they’re here 

today and to not be afraid of the Assembly because this 

Assembly belongs to the people of Pinehouse and the entire 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

join the member opposite in welcoming Debbie 

McKenzie-Pelletier and her great-granddaughter Mia to this 

Assembly. Debbie retired last year, in August I believe, after 

serving this legislature with Government Services for 29 years. 

So she is certainly no stranger to this Assembly. So I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Debbie. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take the opportunity to welcome all 

of our guests to the Assembly and to remind our guests not to 

participate in events on the floor, and that includes applause. 

Thank you. 

 

[10:15] 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I again 

rise today to present a petition in reference to cellphone 

coverage. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

of course Birch Narrows First Nations and the community 

of Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring 

communities in each of these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the most impressive thing about this petition, 

Mr. Speaker, is it’s being signed by people from all throughout 

Saskatchewan. And the people that have signed the petition 

here, Mr. Speaker, are from Moose Jaw; they’re from Weyburn. 

And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

And we know since the Act was introduced in December, 

literally hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been 

carried out in the interests of due diligence. And we know that 

there’s no labour relations crisis to fix and no necessity to rush 

this omnibus bill through that’ll likely govern workplace 

relations for decades to come. And this bill runs the risk of 

throwing into turmoil the stable labour relations that we have. 

Thousands of represented workers stand to lose their rights to 

bargain collectively and be represented by the union of their 

choice. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act, in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert. I do so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Pope Francis I 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday was a momentous day 



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

for the over 300,000 Catholics here in our province and the 1.2 

billion Catholics worldwide with the celebration of the papacy 

of Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio, Archbishop of Buenos 

Aires, Argentina, the 266th pope in the Catholic Church’s 

history. On behalf of the official opposition, it is my sincere 

pleasure to rise this morning to extend warm wishes to His 

Holiness Pope Francis I as he ascends to the Chair of St. Peter 

and commences his papacy. 

 

I’m confident that the new pope’s reputation as a humble man, 

who uses public transit and cooks his own meals, and most 

importantly as someone who is a strong advocate for the poor, 

will serve his church and our world well. Mr. Speaker, we 

know that so many Catholics both here in Saskatchewan and 

throughout the world are similarly devoted to living out their 

faith by acting justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly. Our 

province is grateful for those lives of sacrifice and devotion to 

building a better world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Assembly join 

with me in congratulating Pope Francis and extending warm 

regards to all Saskatchewan Catholics. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I too feel blessed 

with the opportunity to rise in the Assembly today in 

recognition of the newly elected pope of the Roman Catholic 

Church. 

 

Jorge Mario Bergoglio, who’s the former archbishop of Buenos 

Aires, made history by being elected the first pope of the 

Americas, the first Jesuit, and the first non-European pope in 

more than 1,000 years. He’s now known as Pope Francis, the 

name in honour of St. Francis of Assisi, the patron saint of 

animals and the environment, who dedicated his life in helping 

the poor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Pope Francis is known for his humility, including 

living in a small apartment instead of a large church residence 

and riding the bus to work instead of using the chauffeured 

limousine. Pope Francis is now the 260th pontiff in the 

2,000-year history of the Roman Catholic Church. Pope Francis 

is now the leader of the world’s estimated 1.1 billion Catholics, 

and in that I wish him strength and success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this Assembly to recognize 

Pope Francis, the new leader of the Roman Catholic Church, 

and in joining me in wishing him faith, courage, and vision. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Student at Centre of Idle No More Movement 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this week is Aboriginal 

Achievement Week at the University of Saskatchewan, a 

perfect time to recognize the work of a young, active U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] student and constituent of 

Saskatoon Centre, Erica Lee, who has been at the centre of the 

Idle No More movement. 

 

 

Erica is the cultural coordinator for the Indigenous Students’ 

Council, a well-established group on campus; has been running 

the Idle No More Saskatoon Facebook page. This is the hub 

where people from around the world go to find help organizing 

rallies, sharing stories, and supporting the cause. Lee has helped 

organize events here in Saskatoon, across California, and many 

other places. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Erica Lee was at the first Idle No More event 

before it was Idle No More. She spoke at the event — I was 

also able to attend, along with my colleague from Saskatoon 

Nutana — at Station 20 West last November. She got involved 

through her former teacher and friend, Sheelah McLean, one of 

the co-founders of the movement. As written in a StarPhoenix 

article featuring Erica Lee, and I quote: 

 

As a political studies and philosophy major at the U of S, 

Lee is living what she studies. She says her school work 

hasn’t suffered despite immersing herself at the very root 

of the national grassroots movement. Lee, who is the first 

person in her family to finish high school, refuses to let 

her grades slip. 

 

Lee said, “It’s important for me to finish my degree and get into 

a position of power.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

hard work and passion Erica Lee has put into making this world 

a better place, and I hope to see her sometime in the near future 

in a position of power. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

University of Regina Hosts Women’s Basketball 

Championships 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All eyes will be on 

the University of Regina campus this weekend as they host the 

CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] women’s basketball 

championships. I wish to welcome all the visiting student 

athletes from across the country to this great province. 

Competing in this championship are the University of Regina 

Cougars who won the Canada West conference title on March 

2nd to qualify for this weekend’s national championship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the U of R [University of Regina] Cougars had a 

record of 19 wins and 3 losses. They rank third in Canada and 

are one of eight teams to have qualified for this national title. 

And I’d like to extend my best wishes to them this weekend as 

they play as the host team. The tournament kicks off tomorrow 

night when the Cougars play the McGill Redmen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in expressing our 

thanks to the coaches, tournament organizers, and volunteers 

who’ll be working hard this weekend at the CIS championships. 

Please join me in expressing our support for the U of R Cougars 

and their quest for the their second women’s basketball national 

championship. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

Huskies Host University Hockey Championship 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise 

today to recognize the PotashCorp CIS Men’s Hockey 

University Cup which begins today and wraps up on Sunday. 

This national championship is being held in Saskatoon where 

the University of Saskatchewan Huskies will be the host team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Huskies will compete with five other teams 

for the 51st University Cup and will make their province proud. 

Also playing in the tournament are teams from the University 

of Alberta, University of Northern BC [British Columbia], 

Université du Québec, Saint Mary’s University, and University 

of Waterloo. 

 

PotashCorp was generously named as the title sponsor for this 

year’s championship, as well as next year’s championship 

which will again be hosted by the University of Saskatchewan 

Huskies. Mr. Speaker, this tournament will put the men’s 

hockey spotlight on our province, on the city of Saskatoon, and 

on the Huskies. For that I wish to thank the PotashCorp 

University Cup host committee for all their hard work and 

dedication in putting this championship together in our great 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join in me 

in wishing the Huskies the best of luck at the 2013 PotashCorp 

University Cup. Go Huskies. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to recognize that March is National Colorectal Cancer 

Awareness Month. In 2012 colorectal cancer was the second 

most diagnosed form of cancer in both men and women, yet it 

is 90 per cent preventable and easily treatable if detected early. 

 

Our government works to prevent colorectal cancer or find it in 

its early stages. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, working 

along with our health regions and the Saskatchewan Disease 

Control Lab, recently extended its colorectal cancer screening 

program to the whole province. Saskatchewan men and women 

from 50 to 74 years of age are contacted every two years with 

an easy-to-use test kit that helps detect blood in the stool that is 

invisible to the eye. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than 70 per cent of people with abnormal 

test results are found to have colorectal cancer or precancerous 

growths. This program saves lives by identifying colorectal 

cancer long before there are any symptoms present. Our 

government has committed to maintain this program at the 

Cancer Agency at an annual cost of about $3.6 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I respectfully ask that all members of this 

Assembly acknowledge the good work of the organizations 

running this screening program for the work that they do to 

prevent this disease and improve the quality of life for the 

people of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

First Impression 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, they say you never get a 

second chance to make a first impression. That’s really too bad 

for the Leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party] because his 

first week was terrible. 

 

First he came out in support of Dwain Lingenfelter’s plan to cut 

a special deal with First Nations on resource revenue, an idea 

that was soundly rejected in the last provincial election. Then 

when asked by supporters, he said he couldn’t find one single 

thing in Lingenfelter’s disastrous election platform that he 

would change — not one thing. 

 

Then he won’t tell Saskatchewan people where he stands on 

Keystone XL because he wanted to wait for the National 

Energy Board to approve the project, which they already did 

three years ago. Yesterday he finally said he supports Keystone, 

even though that’s not what he said on Tuesday and even 

though that’s what he voted against, Keystone XL, back on 

May 3rd. Mr. Speaker, that’s quite a first week — one misstep 

after another. 

 

You know, some people are saying it’s not fair to compare the 

new NDP leader with the old NDP leader, Dwain Lingenfelter. 

I actually agree, Mr. Speaker. It is unfair. Dwain Lingenfelter 

never had that bad of a week. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Asbestos Registry Legislation 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier on in the 

introductions this morning, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Advanced Education and Labour said that they would be 

supporting legislation, the private members’ bill on Howard’s 

law or the asbestos right-to-know Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate these steps. I commend the Sask Party 

for doing this. The initial steps of a voluntary registry did not 

go far enough, so I’m pleased that we’re moving with progress 

on this legislation. A central driving force behind this 

legislation was Howard Willems who passed away just months 

ago, Mr. Speaker. And as covered in introductions this 

morning, there are family members and many friends and 

co-workers of Howard here in the Assembly today, Mr. 

Speaker. He was a champion for better occupational health and 

safety, and his friends have carried on his work. 

 

My question to the minister: in honour of Howard’s work, will 

the Sask Party government agree in the committee stage to 

change the name of the bill to Howard’s law? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. I think all members want to recognize the contribution 

of Howard Willems and offer our sincere sympathies to his 

family who are here today. What we have before us, Mr. 

Speaker, is a bill that amends The Public Health Act and we 



2708 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

would not want to be able to change the name of The Public 

Health Act. But I think it would probably be appropriate while 

in committee to have some kind of discussion about how we 

might want to better memorialize or recognize Howard Willems 

in some permanent way, but we were not in a position to amend 

the name of The Public Health Act. But we certainly have other 

options, and it’s something to discuss at committee. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re pleased that 

this bill will be moving now to the committee stage. It’s a very 

important bill. It’s a Canadian first, and the opposition wants to 

deal with this in a very quick manner — a thorough manner but 

a quick manner — and not have a delay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy Premier: this is an 

important piece of legislation, and we’ve seen legislation go to 

committee before, Mr. Speaker, where it is stalled, where there 

has been delay tactics, where the legislation has been 

slow-walked by government members. My question to the 

Deputy Premier: do we have his clear commitment today, his 

word today, the Sask Party government will not use delay 

tactics, will not stall this legislation, but they will deal with this 

legislation in the committee process in a quick and efficient 

manner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I can confirm 

to the Leader of the Opposition this legislation will move 

forward in an expeditious fashion. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I thank the Government House Leader for that 

clear answer with respect to their willingness to have this go in 

a quick manner. 

 

In the minister’s earlier remarks talking about possible 

amendments that may occur at the committee stage, he brought 

up the prospect of strengthening the legislation. And I hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that any amendment that is brought forward 

would in fact strengthen the legislation. Could the minister 

please provide a bit more detail about the types of amendments 

that will be coming forward at the committee stage on this piece 

of legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question and, Mr. 

Speaker, I can advise the type of thing that we would want to be 

having discussion about would be the nature and type of 

information that we would be provided at on the registry. 

 

We saw during the voluntary phase of this registration process 

that the level of information, level of detail varied greatly from 

the different providers that were there. Some provided a 

minimal amount of information; some of the entities had a great 

deal of depth and detail. So I think it would be appropriate for 

us to have some discussion at a committee level, provide the 

information that the officials have gathered together as to the 

type of things that should be there. 

 

We also would want to include a provision that the information 

be kept on site so that if somebody didn’t have access to a 

computer, didn’t think of it, or whatever, was working on the 

site, that they knew that a certain portion of a building would 

have asbestos or may have had asbestos in it. So we want to 

give people the opportunity to understand and know; to simply 

have a registry that isn’t accessed isn’t beneficial. But we want 

to make sure we have good detail, and the amendments would 

support the purpose of the bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we look at 

amendments at the committee stage, it’s important that we have 

a proper discussion and we look thoroughly at the issues that 

government is bringing forward through amendments. Part of 

that is using the officials, yes, but part of that also, Mr. Speaker, 

I think, is hearing from experts within society — many of 

whom are here in the Speaker’s gallery today, who have been 

working on this, who have information and have views that 

they want to share. 

 

As we go into the committee stage now, Mr. Speaker, it’s the 

opposition’s willingness to have these individuals involved in 

the committee process in some way through providing 

information, by providing, Mr. Speaker, testimony if necessary. 

I know that is the desire of SADAO, the Willems family, as 

well as many of the other advocates who are up in the gallery. 

The opposition is willing to do this.  

 

My question to government members: are they willing to have 

experts involved in the committee process now as we look at 

possible amendments coming forward from the government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course it 

is the practice of committees to be able to call witnesses as they 

see fit. The government’s open to hearing testimony from 

experts in the field on this matter and, you know, we’ll be open 

to doing that in the context of moving forward with this in a 

expeditious fashion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Lobbyist Registry Legislation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in December of 2011 just after the 

election, the Premier announced that a committee would study 

whether Saskatchewan should have a lobbyist registry. He 

called the registry long overdue. He said he wanted to strike a 

balance between access to decision makers by lobbyists and the 

public’s need to know who is trying to influence the 

government. After six months, the committee recommended a 

lobbyist registry last May. But the public is still in the dark 

about who is trying to influence government because a lobbyist 

registry has yet to be developed. 

 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2709 

Mr. Speaker, after the Premier was so adamant about getting a 

registry, why has the Sask Party failed to introduce a lobbyist 

registry for Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 

December of 2011, the issue of the lobbyist legislation was 

referred to the standing committee for review and to provide 

recommendations back to the Legislative Assembly. And that 

standing committee did provide a final majority report with a 

minority report in the spring session of 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the intention of the government is that we won’t 

be introducing a bill this session. We are seeking some further 

input. I did have some discussions with members of the 

committee, including the member on the committee from the 

opposition. I indicated that we did want to have some further 

consultations on this matter. Mr. Speaker, we will be having 

those consultations with the intention of introducing legislation 

in the fall session. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think these discussions were 

probably about six months ago. So Saskatchewan will be one of 

the last provinces in Canada to implement a lobbyist registry. 

The Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives report on lobbying 

shows that the people of Saskatchewan have no idea what is 

going on behind the scenes between those who try to influence 

government’s decisions. If the government really treated this 

issue as a priority, the legislation would have been introduced 

and passed this session. Instead the government hopes no one 

remembers the Premier’s commitment. They just don’t like 

admitting mistakes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: what is the holdup that prevents a lobbyist 

registry from being implemented? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I find the premise of the 

question to be very interesting. Mr. Speaker, we’re providing, 

we’re providing an opportunity for further consultation, Mr. 

Speaker. We want to make sure that we get this legislation right 

the first time, so we’re going to proceed with further 

consultation. We have circulated a consultation paper, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll have those consultations this spring, Mr. 

Speaker, and we will be bringing forward legislation in the fall. 

We know that this is an important piece of legislation. We 

know this is an important piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and 

we will be bringing it forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to have the opportunity to hear the 

answer and the question, if I may, so I request that members 

please keep it down. I recognize the member for Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier seemed to be in quite 

a hurry about this lobbyist registry in December 2011. This 

report has been available. But I do like the attitude of this 

minister about waiting and listening to the public and maybe 

working a little better to get the legislation right. And it’s, you 

know, perhaps he can convey that attitude to the Minister of 

Labour because he has a similar, huge piece of legislation that 

isn’t right, that needs more consultation. It needs public 

consultation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister as it relates to this 

lobbyist registry is, why have they delayed it for a year and a 

half? Are they worried about releasing some information? So, 

Mr. Speaker, why are they delayed it so long? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member opposite for agreeing that having further consultations 

on this matter is a good thing. We want to make sure we get this 

legislation right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve heard from some stakeholders that wanted to have some 

further consultation. We want to have those consultations, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve circulated a discussion paper, Mr. Speaker. We 

will be bringing legislation forward, but we do think that this is 

an important piece. We take this matter very, very seriously and 

we want to make sure that we have the legislation in place as 

quickly as we can, Mr. Speaker, having regard to the fact that 

we need to have proper consultations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I reiterate that I do appreciate that 

minister’s willingness to work and get proper consultation on 

quite a small, on quite a small bill. But I don’t understand why 

the previous Justice minister doesn’t do that in his new role 

now as, role as Minister of Labour. 

 

Next week is the provincial budget. Will the minister commit 

today that the lobbyist registry will be in place by this fall, and 

we’re willing to pass it through in the fall session, so that the 

public knows who has lobbied the government in the 

preparation of the next provincial budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the government appreciates 

the fact that having a lobbyist legislation in place is a good 

thing, and we want to make sure that we proceed with it as 

expeditiously as we can, having regard to the fact that we want 

to have further consultations, Mr. Speaker. We will have those 

consultations this spring, and we will be bringing legislation 

forward in the fall. We’re committed to this, Mr. Speaker, and 

they will see legislation on the floor of this House this fall. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Forest Management Plan 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to 

sustainable forestry, it seems that the Sask Party government 

can’t manage new or old growth. There are four Island Forests 

that encompass more than 200 000 hectares of Crown forest 



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

land in the Prince Albert area. It’s an area, Mr. Speaker, of 

beautiful old-growth Jack pine and trembling aspen forest. 

These forests are islands surrounded by development and 

communities who have enjoyed their beauty for decades. In fact 

I cross-country skied in the beautiful Nisbet Forest a couple of 

weeks ago. 

 

There’s very little Jack pine forest of this age anywhere else in 

Canada, and that’s exactly why protecting that old-growth 

forest should be part of the smart growth of our forestry 

industry. However the Ministry of the Environment is 

developing a forest management plan to clear-cut the 

Saskatchewan Island Forests. Mr. Speaker, protecting 

old-growth forests should be a priority for the Sask Party. So to 

the minister: why isn’t it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question from the hon. member. But I must say we’re seeing 

more of the same misinformation. There is no clear-cutting. 

There is no plan for clear-cutting. What we have is a 

government focused on the long-term sustainability for our 

forests rather than short-term gain. 

 

The forests are mature. They are in decline. And they are at an 

increasing risk from fire, wind, insects, and disease. Through 

long-term forest management, we can ensure that the forests are 

protected. That is what’s happening. That’s what will continue 

to happen, and that’s in the long-term interest of the province. 

That’s what this government is most interested in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in the Torch River area, the 

forest provides amazing economic spinoffs that do not involve 

destroying the old-growth forest. The harvesting of Torch River 

chanterelle mushrooms, considered the best in the world, and 

the rare and expensive lactarius indigo mushroom fuels local 

businesses there. The clear-cutting in the Island Forest threatens 

these thriving small businesses, in addition to destroying what 

Tayler Krawczyk of Hatchet & Seed Contracting describes as 

an amazing biological lifeboat within an increasingly sterilized 

and plantation-driven province. 

 

The friends of the Torch River Forest say the province’s 

so-called plan for growth misses those important economic 

opportunities that will be lost as well as the bigger picture. One 

could say, the government can’t see the forest through the trees 

they want to clear-cut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the government foregoing 

the small-business growth opportunities in mushrooms, 

pharmaceuticals, recreation, hunting, and fishing in order to 

clear-cut the old growth of the Torch Island Forest? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. I understand members opposite are having a little 

trouble filling question period time, but again there is no plan to 

clear-cut the forest. There is absolutely . . . That is 

misinformation that is being brought by that member to this 

House. 

 

There is only a small fraction of the forest’s total area that 

would be harvested over a 20-year plan, approximately 5 per 

cent per year, to ensure that the forest is indeed renewed. It is 

overmature at this time. It is in decline. It’s an increasing risk 

for fire. If there was a fire, that would devastate the entire 

forest. That indeed would be crippling for the industry. 

 

So once again, this government is working with a long-term 

forest management plan. There is indeed no clear-cutting 

planned. That is again just misinformation that has been 

brought forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I read the plan and 

clear-cut is obviously on the table as part of the planning that 

the Ministry of the Environment is doing. So I don’t know what 

report he is referring to, but the report that I’ve read, 

clear-cutting is on the table as part of the possible forest 

planning. And on February 22nd, the minister closed a brief 

consultation phase for public comments, and many concerned 

citizens have taken the time to express their grave concerns 

about this forest management plan. 

 

In the ministry’s 95-page document about the new plan to 

clear-cut the Island Forest, the phrase old growth is mentioned 

exactly once — one mention for trees that have outlived this 

Legislative Assembly, one mention for the forests that are older 

than the province itself. Mr. Speaker, the old-growth forests 

cannot be replaced. And once these forests are clear-cut, they’re 

gone forever. 

 

We know the economic opportunities for small businesses exist 

to use the forests sustainably, but what we don’t know is who 

plans to benefit from clear-cutting these islands of forest. Why 

does the Sask Party want to erase over 140 years of forest with 

one fell swoop? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. And for the third time now on the floor of this 

legislature I will say that there is no clear-cutting planned, Mr. 

Speaker. I hope the members opposite understand that. The 

overall plan is to ensure the forest’s long-term sustainability 

and health so it will continue to support a range of ecological 

and economic values for present and future generations. 

 

The government of course recognizes the importance of the 

mushroom harvest to the local economy and will work with 

local harvesters to ensure that their needs are taken into 

account. Mr. Speaker, the long-term interests of forests and 

forestry are at the heart of what this government is trying to do. 

And it’s a lot more than the one tree that they have a concern 

about, and this is the one tree that they should be concerned 

about. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind members not to use 

exhibits. I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

Financial Management and Reporting 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a concern to many that 

we are out of line with the rest of Canada, in every other 

province, in proper accounting standards in how we report our 

finances. The province reports on two sets of books, something 

the Provincial Auditor has called both misleading and wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has an opportunity to fix this next 

week and report our numbers using summary financials, one set 

of books, and providing the straight goods to Saskatchewan 

people. To the Finance minister: will he commit next week to 

table the budget with one set of books and the right set of 

books? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member for that question. As many times as he has repeated 

that question in this Assembly, I will repeat the answer. In 2004 

the NDP, after being convinced by the opposition and the 

Provincial Auditor, moved from only General Revenue Fund 

budgeting to General Revenue Fund budgeting and summary 

financial statement production, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We continue to follow that policy. We continue to follow the 

rules and regulations as provided through the financial 

administrative Act, Mr. Speaker, that was changed in 2004, 

then under the leadership of Finance minister Melenchuk who 

indicated that they were going to move forward with providing 

summary financial statements in the public accounts. Mr. 

Speaker, we do that twice a year — we do it at mid-year and we 

do it in budget. Stay tuned to next Wednesday. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic 

government’s made substantial improvements to both our 

financial position and the reporting of our finances. That being 

said, that work was not complete, and further progress in 

reporting is certainly required and was required. Instead of 

taking those steps, as other provinces have, since taking office 

now for over five years, Mr. Speaker, the current government 

has stuck its head in the sand, thumbed its nose at accounting 

standards, ignored changes made by other provinces including 

our neighbours, and has dismissed and disrespected the 

Provincial Auditor in this province. How does that cut it, and 

why does this minister feel Saskatchewan people deserve 

anything less than in the true and full state of our finances? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we provide accurate 

accounting statements to the people of Saskatchewan through 

two methods. Two methods, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated: the 

summary financial statements and the General Revenue Fund. 

Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing, there’s nothing secret about it. 

 

The Provincial Auditor, who does great work for the province 

of Saskatchewan, has indicated that the summary financial 

statements published in the public accounts documents are 

accurate, Mr. Speaker. So for the member to suggest that 

there’s something irregular, I dare him to go to the C.D. Howe 

report, as I quoted yesterday, that says, and I quote on page 4: 

“Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia also 

get an A for preparing their budgets and public accounts on a 

common accounting basis . . .” I can’t understand why that 

member can’t understand that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty interesting that 

our Finance minister would reference the very report for which 

he won the award, the Pinocchio Award, Mr. Speaker. And we 

see in this Assembly, we see in this Assembly that our Finance 

minister’s nose may not get longer, but his voice certainly gets 

louder, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And he also referenced the Provincial Auditor’s report. The 

Provincial Auditor has stated very clearly in the reports that 

he’s referencing that the way this government reports its 

financing is misleading and wrong. We consistently see a 

government that spins its books, prints one thing on expensive 

billboards and ads, yet the black and white print in public 

accounts in the books says something entirely different. We see 

right now a government that’s running expensive ads — 

$92,000, Mr. Speaker — in fact to, I guess, set the table for a 

tough budget on Saskatchewan families. 

 

My question is this: how does that minister expect 

Saskatchewan families to accept cuts when he won’t even be 

straight with Saskatchewan people about the true state of our 

finances? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

some of my colleagues might suggest that I speak quite loud at 

most times, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll try to ensure that the 

member opposite does hear me, but I will try to keep my voice 

down so that we don’t disturb the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, the balanced budget that we have in 

this province is in envy by all other provinces, Mr. Speaker. We 

are balanced on the General Revenue Fund side, Mr. Speaker, 

which I’ve indicated is a subset of what the summary financial 

statements are. And, Mr. Speaker, after including all of the 

other components of the province of Saskatchewan, everything 

from the Crown corporations to WCB [Workers’ Compensation 

Board], to the Saskatchewan crop insurance Act, we have a 

balanced budget as well, Mr. Speaker, that is the envy of many 

finance ministers in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — As far as the envy of other provinces, I 

noted just a little while ago that the deputy premier of Alberta 

actually called these guys out, Mr. Speaker, as it related to the 

tricky budget that they put forward. And this government’s 

building a reputation of not being able to admit their mistakes, 

whether it’s the film tax credit, whether it’s three more MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], whether it’s cuts to 

educational assistance. 



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

And we also see a growing trend of a lack of accountability, 

and we see that alarming lack of accountability as it relates to 

the IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre for 

geologic storage of CO2] affair, Mr. Speaker, and the 

misleading statements, the conflicts of interest, and the waste of 

public money. And we see that as well in the reporting of our 

public finances, that lack of accountability, something called by 

our Provincial Auditor as misleading and wrong. To the 

minister: why is he failing to provide Saskatchewan people with 

the accountability that they deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the comments 

coming from the members opposite, I guess I will have to speak 

louder to make sure everybody in this Assembly understands 

that what the member is saying, what the member is saying, Mr. 

Speaker, is absolutely not true, Mr. Speaker, absolutely not 

true. 

 

We have a situation where the member opposite was part of the 

Dwain Lingenfelter program. The Dwain Lingenfelter program, 

Mr. Speaker, was to spend $5 billion, put this province, put this 

province back into debt by $5 billion. Mr. Speaker, he just ran 

for the leadership and — guess what? — that was his same 

plan, spend another $5 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to do that. We’re going to 

produce a budget that’s balanced. We’re going to produce a 

budget that continues to pay down debt, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 

plan for the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s why there’s 49 

members on this side and the negative nine over there. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I gather spring is springing early in here. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave of the Assembly to move a number of motions regarding 

committee membership changes. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to move motions regarding committee changes. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Committee Membership 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Rob Norris be substituted for the name 

of Darryl Hickie on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

That the name of Rob Norris be substituted for the name 

of Darryl Hickie on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Is the motion agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Laura Ross be substituted for the name 

of Warren Michelson on the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Laura Ross be substituted for the name 

of Warren Michelson on the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Roger Parent be substituted for the 

name of Laura Ross on the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Roger Parent be substituted for the 

name of Laura Ross in the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move: 

 

That the name of Nadine Wilson be substituted for the 

name of Doreen Eagles on the Standing Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Nadine Wilson be substituted for the 

name of Doreen Eagles on the Standing Committee on 

Human Services. 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2713 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the name of Darryl Hickie be substituted for the 

name of Nadine Wilson on the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Darryl Hickie be substituted for the 

name of Nadine Wilson on the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the Opposition House Leader 

on her feet? 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I have some motions to make regarding names 

of members on committee . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I need 

leave. Can I have leave to do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has requested 

leave to move motions regarding committee changes. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you to the Assembly for 

agreeing. I would like to move: 

 

That the name of Cathy Sproule be substituted for the 

name of Warren McCall on the Standing Committee on 

House Services. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Cathy Sproule be substituted for the 

name of Warren McCall on the Standing Committee on 

House Services. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I would like to move: 

 

That the name of Doyle Vermette be substituted for the 

name of Cathy Sproule on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved: 

 

That the name of Doyle Vermette be substituted for the 

name of Cathy Sproule on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. I would like to move: 

 

That the name of David Forbes be substituted for the 

name of Cam Broten on the Standing Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of David Forbes be substituted for the 

name of Cam Broten on the Standing Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. I would like to move: 

 

That the name of Cathy Sproule be substituted for the 

name of Warren McCall on the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Cathy Sproule be substituted for the 

name of Warren McCall on the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And last but not 

least, I’d like to move: 

 

That the name of Warren McCall be added to the 



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

membership of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts pursuant to an order dated March 4th, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 

Leader: 

 

That the name of Warren McCall be added to the 

membership of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts pursuant to an order dated March 4th, 2013. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 209 to 212. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 209 to 212 inclusive. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Commendation of Government Policies 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to join in the debate today as we 

talk about and commend our government for policies such as 

balanced budget, low taxes, a stable royalty regime, which has 

led to record unemployment rates and a nation-leading 

economic growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And first and foremost I’d like to thank the NDP caucus 

researchers for writing the questions for the member from 

Rosemont because they tie in nicely to my debate for the next 

15 minutes. So I want to thank them for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is some points that . . . You know, growing 

up on the farm in southwestern Saskatchewan, we listened to 

the radio when we were on the tractor and we always heard 

Paul Harvey and The Rest of the Story. So, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Rosemont gave us half the story today on 

question period and the Finance minister tried to fill him in on 

the rest of the story, and I think it’s up to me as representing the 

people of Walsh Acres to finalize the rest of the story and let 

him really talk about what the C.D. Howe Institute report 

actually said about our government’s accounting principles. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read from the C.D. Howe report for a 

couple minutes here and say, “Over the past 10 years, Canada’s 

senior government spent around $53 billion more than they had 

originally planned for in the spring, with the Prairie provinces 

and territories being the worst offenders.” 

But it goes on to say, “Encouragingly, however, the tendency to 

overshoot in both spending and revenue was less pronounced in 

the second half of the decade than in the first half.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m no mathematician, but for 10 years, I 

believe that the former NDP government was in power for five 

of those first 10 and I think we were in power for the last five. 

So it’s nice that the C.D. Howe report comes out and confirms 

that, that most people in Saskatchewan realize that over the last 

five years our government has done a much better job in 

budgeting and a much better job in spending the money of the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. So I’d like to say thank you very 

much to the C.D. Howe report for that endorsement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the C.D. Howe report goes on to talk, as my 

colleague from Regina Rosemont probably does know, and 

states, “Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 

Columbia also get an A for preparing their budgets and public 

accounts on a common accounting basis.” 

 

And it’s been a long time, oh a while since I’ve been in school, 

Mr. Speaker. My colleagues, some have been out of school a 

little bit longer . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . About 30 years, 

my colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow says. But I think an 

A is a quite high mark and I don’t think you can get much 

higher than A. And for the C.D. Howe Institute to be giving us 

an A, an A for preparing budgets and public accounts, I think 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you very much. The 

member from Athabasca says A is a high mark. I don’t know if 

he got too many, but I think he might’ve recognized something 

on his siblings’ report cards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and last but not least, I would like to talk about a 

table found on page 6 of the C.D. Howe report, Mr. Speaker. 

And it talks about Saskatchewan, and for budget presentation 

consistent with public reports, Mr. Speaker, it says, yes, the 

budget figures match. And that’s an A for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our grade for the use of reconciliation tables and 

figures, explanations of deviations, placement in the document, 

Mr. Speaker, it says, “Good use of reconciliation tables, 

detailed explanation for variation, results appearing at 

beginning of document,” Mr. Speaker. That grade is an A. Mr. 

Speaker, two out of two As. That’s not too bad. 

 

And the member from Regina Rosemont tends to spin and likes 

to spin a little bit of the relationship we have with our auditor, 

Mr. Speaker. But we went through this table and it says that the 

date of audit approval — and that’s when the auditor goes 

through and approves the budget for the provinces, Mr. Speaker 

— and ours is June 14th, 2012. That’s actually the earliest 

approval of any budget by an audit approval in the Dominion of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. So I think that that’s a pretty good 

recognition of how the C.D. Howe report presents our budgets 

and how they feel we do in budgeting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess he talks about the Pinocchio award affair a bit, and 

I guess I want to make it clear for everyone out there watching 

— I know there’s a lot of people watching right now — and I 

want to make it clear that the Pinocchio award is given over a 

10-year period. The first five years of that 10-year period was 

the NDP government; the last five years was our Saskatchewan 

Party government. And the C.D. Howe says that the last five 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2715 

years budgeting has been done a lot better, a lot more consistent 

and a lot clearer than the first five years of that 10-year report, 

Mr. Speaker. So I hope I could clear the air a little bit with that 

demonstration of how the C.D. Howe actually feels we report 

our budgets in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our population is now at an all-time high: 

1,086,564. I’m going to throw a few numbers at you and then 

kind of go back and talk about them in a second, Mr. Speaker. 

Our population has grown by 23,000 people in the past year, 

making Saskatchewan the second fastest growing province in 

Canada. The province’s population has now increased for 26 

consecutive quarters, and in the past six years, Saskatchewan 

has grown by nearly 94,000 people, the fastest and most 

sustained population growth in decades, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan unemployment rate now stands 

at 4 per cent, the lowest in Canada and well below the national 

average of 7 per cent. And this is a very true fact, Mr. Speaker, 

that Saskatchewan’s average weekly earnings increased by 5 

per cent in December, 2012, the highest growth rate among the 

provinces compared to December of 2011, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, employment for women increased by 5.1 per cent 

to 254,000 in January, hitting an all-time high for the number of 

women employed in our province. Mr. Speaker, employment 

for men increased by 4.4 per cent to 291,300. This is the highest 

level recorded for male employment in the province for the 

month of January, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that small-business optimism continues 

to be the highest in Saskatchewan as the CFIB [Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business] has reported recently, and 

most years, Mr. Speaker, we have a high optimism rate for 

small businesses in our province, Mr. Speaker. Our 

employment numbers coupled with the strength of our 

economic indicators, high average weekly earnings and 

optimism among our businesses signals that there’s going to be 

continued momentum for our economy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been able to talk to many people across 

our province in the last two years, being able to represent the 

Regina Walsh Acres constituency. And it gives me great hope 

for our future. 

 

I’ve been able to become part of an organization called SYPE, 

which is the Saskatchewan Young Professionals and 

Entrepreneurs, and they have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Thank you, member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they have little factions all over the province, SYPE, 

and they’re all young people that have come back to our 

province. I know on our board — there’s 10 people on our 

board, Mr. Speaker — one’s come back from BC; one’s come 

back from Alberta, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And it’s something that you never really saw in the ’90s. And I 

think it had a lot to do with the philosophy — the ’90s and 

2000s, sorry — a lot to do with the philosophy of the 

government of the day, Mr. Speaker. And that can be summed 

up very well by one of their senior ministers that said, the more 

people that leave, that’s a good thing because there’s more left 

for the rest of us, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

philosophy that really, when you think about it, it’s no wonder 

that people left. 

 

And I have close family relatives that had to leave this province 

because they didn’t think they could make a go of it, Mr. 

Speaker. My brother, my brother left. My two sisters had to 

leave the province, Mr. Speaker. Thankfully though, now in our 

new Saskatchewan, under a government that believes that we 

need more people in this province to contribute to an economy 

to make this economy grow, Mr. Speaker, my brother’s moved 

back and he’s in Lloydminster now, Mr. Speaker. He started up 

his own company and works in the oil and gas sector. For the 

member from Lloydminster, it is the Saskatchewan side that he 

lives on, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that he’s come back, he’s 

come back to the province, he’s felt that he has a lot of 

opportunity to grow. He’s working with oil and gas companies. 

He’s a pressure test truck driver, and he’s doing quite well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, not only that, but his wife, his wife has the 

opportunity on the Saskatchewan side. She’s opened a clothing 

store. And I believe the member from Lloydminster and his 

wife has visited the clothing store a couple of times and went 

out with some of the fantastic wares that she’s selling. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it speaks to — they have two young children 

— a young family that has the courage and the optimism to go 

and start two businesses, Mr. Speaker, in a time when you look 

around the world, that’s not happening in a lot of different 

jurisdictions in this country and in North America, Mr. Speaker. 

The fact that there’s young people willing to take a chance and 

having the confidence that the economy’s going to continue to 

grow speaks well for not only for this year and the next year, 

Mr. Speaker, but well into the future because we have those 

young people, and we’re not experiencing the brain drain that 

we experienced under the former administration in the late 

1990s and the early 2000s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, conveniently the member for Rosemont brought 

this up about spending — spending on budgets, spending on 

advertising — which is interesting because I don’t think he did 

quite the research he needed to do on budget advertising. So I 

just, I’d like to put into the record some of the numbers that 

were spent on budget advertising previously under the old reign 

of terror, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to say that in 2005-2006, 

2006-2007, the spending for the budget was $447,127. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a hefty amount of money to be spending on 

glossy brochures, as they like to say. ’07-08, Mr. Speaker, the 

total spending for the budget, budget advertising in ’07-08 was 

$315,246. That’s quite substantial. And they like to say 

sometimes on this side, our priorities may be a little misplaced, 

but that’s almost $1 million over two years for spending on a 

budget, which is quite substantial. 

 

So let’s see what perhaps was spent in 2011-12 and 2012-13. 

So 2011-12, the total spending on the budget was $192,257. 

Mr. Speaker, 2012-13 is $101,375. Mr. Speaker, that is 

substantially less than what the former administration spent on 

shameless self-promotion, Mr. Speaker. And I think that being 

proper caretakers of the public purse is a thing that we’re very 

well-known for throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, and the 

fact that we take care. We respect the taxpayers’ dollars. We 

want to use them in the most useful way possible. I think that’s 

a reason why there’s probably a fair number more MLAs over 

here than on that side to date, Mr. Speaker. 



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few other things I’d like to talk about, 

especially representing a seat in Regina. I’d like to talk about 

how, through economic progress and through expansion in our 

fine city of Regina . . . and talk about how the Conference 

Board of Canada feels our city is going to be doing in the next 

couple of years and kind of lay down the groundwork for some 

numbers that we think are quite optimistic. And we think that if 

Regina moves forward like this, we are going to be very well 

off and well served, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate will fall . . . 

Sorry, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, growth in Regina’s gross 

domestic product remains strong at an estimated 4.2 per cent in 

2012 on the heels of two years with the growth being above 5 

per cent. This pace of economic expansion was much stronger 

than the average annual gain of 2.9 per cent recorded in the past 

two decades. So, Mr. Speaker, in the past two decades, the 

average GDP [gross domestic product] growth in Regina was 

2.9 per cent, and for the two years prior to this year, it was 5 per 

cent and 5 per cent, and projected to be 4.2 per cent. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s some great economic news for the people of 

Regina and for the citizens of Regina, where people are 

choosing to live, work, and play right here in our fine city. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I guess I want to go through some of the forecasts 

for unemployment and for average weekly earnings for our 

great city, for the Queen City of Regina. Mr. Speaker, the total 

employment for 2010 was 119,000; 2011, 123,000; 2012, 

126,000; and forecasts for 130,000 in 2013. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

a lot more people in Saskatchewan working, paying taxes right 

here, and contributing to our great quality of life in our Queen 

City. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the unemployment rate in Regina: 2010, 4.8; 

2011, 4.7; 2012, 4; in 2013, 4.1. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

staggering number when you think about it. Across this country 

people are . . . Unemployment’s rising, Mr. Speaker. 

Unemployment at the national level is 7 per cent. 

 

So right here in Regina we’re quite proud of our companies. 

Our small business people are helping put people in 

Saskatchewan to work and helping people in Regina have great 

jobs and be able to afford the type of living that they want to 

and a high quality of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just one more thing is that sometimes you talk and 

we talk about the raising in the consumer price index and the 

rate of inflation, so it would be nice to see how much wages are 

going up compared to the consumer price index, Mr. Speaker. 

And right now in Regina the percentage of the personal income 

per capita was: 2007, 43,951; 2011, 46,363; 2012, 47,722; 

2013, forecast to be 48,985; and 2014 — I think this is a 

threshold that we’re proud to get a hold of — is $50,662. 

 

The average person . . . And they always say, you don’t think 

about the average citizen. You don’t think about that average 

citizen. Average weekly earnings . . . Average earnings per 

capita in Regina being over $50,000 in 2014, that’s fantastic 

news. And that’s something we’re very proud, and we’re proud 

to be able to make sure that the standard of living for everyone 

in Saskatchewan continues to be high. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the motion into record right now, 

Mr. Speaker. And the motion: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for policies 

such as balanced budgets, low taxes, and a stable royalty 

regime, which have led to record-low unemployment 

rates and nation-leading economic growth. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And of course I’ll be 

speaking in favour of this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — It has moved by the member for Regina 

Walsh Acres: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for policies 

such as balanced budgets, low taxes, and a stable royalty 

regime, which have led to record-low unemployment 

rates and nation-leading economic growth. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a 

few questions for the question, and of course first a few 

comments. But again with the motion, and reading it into the 

record one more time: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for policies 

such as balanced budgets, low taxes, and a stable royalty 

regime, which have led to record-low unemployment 

rates and nation-leading economic growth. 

 

You know, leave it to the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, to move a 

motion commending themselves. You know, in terms of the 

work that the people of Saskatchewan have done in terms of 

growing economy, in terms of creating jobs, in terms of being 

out there on the front lines to make the Saskatchewan that we 

all are so proud of even better, in the context of that, Mr. 

Speaker, leave it to the Sask Party to throw themselves a 

self-congratulation party with the motion. 

 

This motion, if anything, should be commending the people of 

Saskatchewan instead of that government. And I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, I understand maybe how it works in terms of the 

psychology on this side. You’ve got, you know, members that 

want to make sure that they’re shining up the apples and 

making sure that the powers that be in the in-group across the 

way are well placated and well shined up themselves, Mr. 

Speaker. But the people that should be commended in this 

motion are the people of Saskatchewan, not that government. 

You know, if we want to talk about the record of the members 

opposite, it’s been mixed at best. 

 

And certainly we heard about some of that in the question 

period here today in terms of, you know, they’ve got one set of 

books that says one thing, and again it forms part of this motion 

in terms of balanced budgets. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if the 

people were, you know, squarely in mind and not just the 

government themselves, I think if the people were in mind, 

they’d be interested in getting the straight goods. And of course 

to get the straight goods you can go to the Provincial Auditor, 

and the Provincial Auditor says that the books that this 

government keeps are wrong and misleading and that when 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2717 

they say it’s a balanced budget, something else has happened. 

 

I guess one of the other things that is interesting to think about, 

this motion coming forward in the context of today — again, 

this self-centred, self-congratulatory Sask Party-focused motion 

which instead should be focused on the people of Saskatchewan 

— to see this motion come forward in the context of today, 

when part of the debate we’re having in this House is around 

labour legislation, and one of the bills before the House of 

course is Bill 85. And I guess if things have gone well to date, 

Mr. Speaker, it begs the question in the main, why do you want 

to change the labour legislation that has governed the 

workplaces that have seen workers make a solid contribution to 

their own incomes and their average earnings but also to the 

productivity of corporations and to enterprise across this 

province? 

 

And that balance in fact, by a fairly objective standard . . . And 

you know, again this motion sort of walks past it, and there’s 

some things in it that you could agree with, and there are some 

things that are kind of disagreeable, Mr. Speaker. But one of the 

key ingredients of the advantages that we have — to use one of 

the words the members opposite are fond of — is that balance 

between worker and employer, between management and 

labour. 

 

And again there have been . . . You know, it casts your mind 

back to Bill 80 where the members opposite set out to fix 

problems that didn’t exist. And again, you wonder why they did 

that, why they moved into the building trades to take a bit of a 

hammer to the labour legislation that was governing it. And you 

saw that with Bills 5 and 6 and the way that that wound up and 

the fact that we now have a Supreme Court hearing pending. 

 

Again it doesn’t, it not only doesn’t recognize the balance that 

has been essential to moving Saskatchewan forward together — 

it doesn’t recognize that balance — it threatens that balance, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, in terms of if you’re going to make sure that benefit 

in an economy as blessed with natural resources as the one we 

are confronted with or possessed of here in Saskatchewan, for 

the innovation and the bright minds that have gone forward in 

enterprise . . . If you’re going to leave labour out of that 

equation or seek to diminish the contribution of labour in what 

should be a partnership, Mr. Speaker, then you’re going to be 

leaving a whole lot of families behind. And already too much of 

that we see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think in particular of what’s happened on this 

government’s watch as regards Aboriginal employment, and the 

records speak for themselves. In December 2007 when 

members opposite had taken over from the then NDP 

government, the Aboriginal unemployment was 11.8 per cent, 

First Nations unemployment was 12.8 per cent, Métis 

unemployment was 10.9 per cent. And again, Mr. Speaker, one 

of the central challenges we have in this province is to make 

sure that we live up to the promise of our provincial motto, that 

in fact we are drawing from many peoples that strength that 

would seem to be boasted at by the members opposite. But if 

we’re going to be strong as a province, we’ve got to recognize 

that we’re in this together and that we’ve got to move forward 

together. 

So what happens on the watch of members opposite as regarded 

this critical question of Aboriginal employment? Well by 2012 

unemployment was 11.8 per cent. Then it was up 15.7 per cent 

for First Nations people. And it’s 9.2 per cent for Métis people. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in this time of a booming economy and 

prosperity for many, that we have far too many First Nations 

and Métis people standing on the outside still looking in, it’s 

not just a shame, Mr. Speaker; it’s work that goes directly 

against the self-interest of the province because if we are going 

to succeed as a province, we have to succeed for all. We can’t 

have 13.5 per cent of our population, in the main, standing on 

the outside looking in. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of different steps that this 

government has taken, I think back to the budget of 2010 when 

that government unilaterally cut the Aboriginal employment 

development program, AEDP. And this was after some earlier 

hopeful sort of gestures to it — signing partnerships and 

running around and shining up the different partnership 

agreements. And there was work that needed to be done in 

terms of bolstering the mandate and the resources of that 

program. I wouldn’t deny that, Mr. Speaker. But perhaps 

members opposite were too busy doing ribbon cuttings and 

photo opportunities to attend to that work of making sure that 

First Nations and Métis people were engaged four-square in the 

economy of this province. 

 

And the minister at the time, the member from Regina South, 

who’s since been kicked out of cabinet but his deeds live on, 

Mr. Speaker, when he was asked about the cuts that were taking 

place in the First Nations and Métis Relations ministry at the 

time, which itself has since been rolled into the government 

relations branch as a junior branch in that ministry . . . And you 

know, I think that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. There’s a First 

Nations, Métis Relations branch of government, ministry of 

government for a reason, and it should have continued. 

 

But what did then minister of First Nations and Métis 

Relations, the member from Regina South, have to say about 

the cuts to Aboriginal employment development and other cuts 

that took place? The reporter asked him, you’ve had some cuts 

to your ministry today. Any response? Quote, Bill Hutchinson: 

“We’ve had all kinds of exciting news.” And that was the 

response of the minister on the day that they killed, you know, 

upwards of 110 Aboriginal employment development program 

agreements unilaterally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And since then, as the work of the well-regarded, well-known, 

well-renowned economist from the University of 

Saskatchewan, the head of the economics department, Eric 

Howe, the work that that individual has done in terms of 

detailing the damage that has taken place on the watch of 

members opposite and the service that he has done the province 

of Saskatchewan in sounding the alarm of what has gone on in 

terms of First Nations and Métis employment in this province, 

the guy should get a medal for his work, Mr. Speaker. And I 

guess more than even than a medal. I just wish that members 

opposite would listen to the words of someone like Eric Howe 

and that you would see it reflected in things like the motion that 

we’re here debating today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 

opportunity to participate in this debate today, and I support the 

motion on the floor. I also thank the historical Legislative 

Assembly of 1916 for giving women the vote, the right to vote, 

on this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the Sask Party was given our mandate to 

govern this province, we have delivered five consecutive 

budgets and soon will be delivering our sixth. Mr. Speaker, 

under the NDP, we were called the place to be from. Now we 

are called Saskatchewan, the place to be. Our province is now 

viewed from all parts of Canada and indeed the world as a 

leader in economic development and good governance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I discuss this motion, I will share with this 

Assembly a true story of one family from Saskatchewan. In the 

late ’80s this family had a mom, a dad, and three children. That 

mom, Mr. Speaker, is me. I went to university at our esteemed 

U of S, and I achieved an honours degree in psychology. This 

degree has been a great asset and has assisted me in many 

aspects of my life and career. I continued my education and 

graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in nutrition, which 

was followed by a year of internship so that I could be granted 

the status of registered dietitian.  

 

[11:30] 

 

That was so exciting for me. It was very exciting for my family. 

Together we set a goal, a big goal, and we achieved it. Mr. 

Speaker, in just a minute you will see how this story relates to 

this debate. Those that attend post-secondary school while 

raising a family will understand how important it is to have 

support of your family. And I’d like to take this time to 

sincerely thank my husband and our three children for their 

unwavering support and help. 

 

As I was saying, graduation was a very exciting time, one of 

hope for the future and the anticipation of working in my 

chosen field. Well, Mr. Speaker, that excitement was 

short-lived. My hope for a brighter future right here in 

Saskatchewan was dashed when I realized what I had done. I 

had graduated at the very same time that the NDP took power 

in this province. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, that meant there were no jobs for 

dietitians. Here I was, a wife and a mom with student loans and 

no jobs, a registered dietitian ready to help lead healthier lives, 

yet no dietitian positions. In fact I was told over and over again, 

sorry, we’re downsizing. I watched many, many of my fellow 

graduands leave this province so they could get a job in their 

chosen field. I really didn’t blame my friends or colleagues. 

After all it was the NDP that said it was perfectly all right for 

people to leave our province. In the backward thinking of the 

NDP, there would be more for those left behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can well imagine my dismay at not being able 

to find a job in my chosen field. Having no jobs for dietitians 

was a slap in the face for me and a very hard lesson in just how 

backward the policies of the NDP really are. They say health 

care is important to them. They say healthy people are 

important to them. The reality of the difference between what 

the NDP say and what they do was forced upon me. 

 

Did the NDP have a graduate retention program? No. Did my 

student loans come due? Yes. I took a job outside my chosen 

field . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You can laugh, but there 

were people without jobs. So I took a job outside of my chosen 

field and contributed in some small way to the well-being of my 

family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s fast forward a few more years to the late 

’90s. Our children have graduated, and guess what? The NDP 

are still in power, and true to their word, the NDP made 

Saskatchewan a very unfriendly place for business to me. And 

true to the NDP way, there were no jobs — no jobs for our 

children, no jobs for the children of my friends and family. You 

see, Mr. Speaker, the NDP can say it is just fine to be a wee 

province, but that is backward thinking. 

 

Let’s fast forward again to another time in Saskatchewan’s 

history and the history of this family, my family, and so many 

families just like us. It is now early 2007, and there is a 

dynamic, young leader and a caring, determined team of 

women and men ready to change the history of Saskatchewan. 

This dynamic, young leader, who is now the Premier of this 

province, helped all of us to see the promise of Saskatchewan. I 

must say that my timing was spot-on. I graduated with an 

M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration] at that time. That 

fall, the fall of 2007, the people of this province mandated that 

the Saskatchewan Party should govern and lead this province 

into the future. 

 

Fast forward once again and we arrive at today. Many families 

have reunited. Young people are staying in the province to live, 

to work, and to raise a family. Newcomers are making their 

home here, and more of our First Peoples are working or going 

to school to be trained in the skilled labour this province needs. 

Mr. Speaker, all of this adds up to the highest population 

Saskatchewan has ever seen.  

 

Our Saskatchewan Party government set a goal and achieved it. 

Now Saskatchewan is a business-friendly place, and that is a 

good thing. Businesses create jobs, jobs that provide an income, 

an income that pays the bills and provides for our families, an 

income that supports a better future for our children’s 

grandchildren, an income that generates caring and support for 

those that need a helping hand up. 

 

Because of good governance that our Premier and my 

colleagues on this side of the House attribute to listening to the 

people of this province and then implementing policies that 

make sense, we now have a AAA rating from Standard & 

Poor’s. Think about it. At a time when the rest of the world and 

indeed many parts of Canada are having a challenging time 

with their economies, we have an economy that is the envy of 

this nation. We have a balanced budget. We have record low 

unemployment. We have economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it takes hard work, whether it is through education 

or employment or both. It takes hard work to get ahead and 

move forward. That family from the ’90s knows what that’s 

like. I know what it feels like. When I talk to people, I 

understand their struggles and I share in their excitement of 

accomplishment. Mr. Speaker, to have a government in place 

that supports your efforts to have a better quality of life and that 

has policies in place to promote accomplishment is 1,086,564 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

times better than having a tired, old NDP that promotes 

mediocrity and fear. 

 

Our government sets big goals with achievable targets. Those 

goals and targets are found in The Saskatchewan Plan for 

Growth: Vision 2020 and Beyond. Mr. Speaker, people want an 

open and transparent government, one that is accountable. This 

plan for growth and our vision is readily available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please tell the people of our province that their 

voice and ideas created the Saskatchewan plan for growth. This 

is a plan for economic growth that builds on the strength of 

Saskatchewan’s people, resources, and innovation to sustain 

Saskatchewan’s place among Canada’s economic leaders. An 

expanding economy is the foundation for a growing and 

prosperous province. The purpose of growth is to build a better 

quality of life for all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please tell the people of Prince Albert Northcote 

that they will see themselves and their goals reflected as well. 

From building the workforce in many ways, such as working 

with First Nations and Métis organizations to adding 300 more 

apprenticeship spaces, from innovation in nuclear medicine that 

extended the lives of millions of cancer patients to research in 

food security and agriculture, from the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship to the Saskatchewan graduate retention program, 

from supporting Habitat for Humanity housing for those of 

moderate means to improving the senior income supplement 

program, we see a balanced approach, Mr. Speaker, an 

approach that keeps both our economy and social conscience 

strong. 

 

Saskatchewan is a province rich in resources with a growing 

population and a growing economy. We are truly blessed as a 

people and a province. The Saskatchewan plan for growth is a 

road map to sustain the growth we enjoy today and ensure we 

continue realizing our full promise as a province moving 

forward. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to rise today to enter into the 75-minute debate. 

Again we see the backbenches of the government side 

contorting themselves to commend the government for policies 

such as balanced budgets, low taxes, and stable regime but not 

really talking about the work that needs to be done. They’re too 

busy patting themselves on the back where there’s too many 

people, too many people left out of the things that are 

happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we have said on this side we recognize the good things 

that are happening here, and we are, well we are . . . We think 

this is a good thing, and we think we should support that. But 

too many people over there . . . And just the member we heard, 

the way she was speaking, it sounded like on November or 

October of 2007, things were in a wreck here. And then all of a 

sudden in early November, November 7th, things, people start 

coming in. All of a sudden the royalty rates changed for potash. 

All of a sudden things changed. This abrupt appearance theory 

that they have over there is kind of odd. And it shows the depth 

of thinking and the depth of commitment to people here in the 

province. 

 

And so we have some concerns. We have some deep concerns 

about this kind of motion when we should be doing real work in 

this legislature about things that really affect people. And 

they’re busy patting themselves on the back. And I really worry 

about this, particularly when we’re just waiting for the budget 

where they’ve spent some $92,000 out advertising, warning 

people, don’t get your hopes up too high; things aren’t as they 

might be here in Saskatchewan. But here we are on the 

Thursday, six days before and they’re telling us, you know, 

things are great. We’re doing a good job. The backbench fully 

supports everything that the front bench is doing. And I have 

some real concerns, you know. 

 

And I know my colleague here from Elphinstone-Centre, from 

north central, the community, has talked about the challenges 

that this government has done. And I don’t know if those 

members over there, the two that have spoken about the 

Aboriginal employment development program, AEDP, whether 

they think that was a good thing to cut that. And they’re very 

happy about that and they would have included that in the 

motion, but they wanted to make sure it wasn’t too long. Were 

they going to include that? 

 

Today we heard during question period that in fact we have the 

Minister of Justice who’s willing to delay passing a very 

important bill about lobbyist registration because he wants to 

get it right. He wants to consult. He wants to consult more. But 

yet we still see the Minister of Labour ramming it through, 

ramming that bill through, ramming that bill through. Because 

they, for some strange reason they feel that it’s necessary. But 

it’s the same legislation that got us to where we are today, that 

got us to a strong economy today. So why do you want to put 

that at risk? What is the value of putting that kind of chance, or 

that kind of gamble on the table? This is really not long-sighted 

thinking. This is very short-sighted. 

 

And so we have some real concerns. We have some real 

concerns and we have raised this. And every day I present 

petitions from real people in Saskatchewan. I don’t know if 

they want to think that they’re not, but we have petitions who 

say, we want to take the time to get it right. We want to get Bill 

85 right. They’re not saying, don’t do it. They’re saying, let’s 

take a longer legislative track to get it right. 

 

Because you know, all those bills, and they’ve amalgamated 12, 

but the impact is on 33 bills of legislation that deals with labour 

issues. And if that isn’t the core issues around the economy 

here in Saskatchewan, then I think we need to really rethink this 

resolution, Mr. Speaker, you know, because at the heart of it it’s 

the people here who make a difference in our province, isn’t it? 

The people who work every day in our mines, in our hospitals, 

in our schools, in our care homes — those are the people who 

make a difference. 

 

And so when we’re putting that at risk, you know, making it . . . 

taking away the stability of that and the predictability of that 

and saying, we have an ideology, an ideology that we want to 

ram through the legislation, and while we’re doing it, we can 

commend ourselves on how good we are, I think we have some 

real problems here with a government that’s out of touch with 

the people of Saskatchewan. 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

People are worried about this. It’s a bit of a shock and awe. It’s 

so huge, this Bill 85. It’s almost unbelievable when you’re 

taking out the word, Sunday; taking out the weekend; changing 

40-hour work weeks to . . . or the 8-hour day to a 10-hour day; 

40 to 44 hours. We need to understand all of this. We need to 

understand all of this and make sure we get it right. So I really 

think the intention of this motion is misplaced. And I think that 

they really need to think about it because there’s a lot of work 

that really needs to be done. 

 

Yesterday I raised in the House questions about how the 

government is working on priorities in K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12]. And they seem committed to certain things, but other 

things they don’t really care about. They don’t care about the 

size, the number of kids in our classrooms. They say that’s a 

school board issue, but we want you to have standardized tests. 

They don’t care how many kindergarten kids are in a room, but 

they want to know that they start after Labour Day because they 

want to have holidays. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is wrongheaded. If they’re going to be 

so involved, we need to see their plan. And yet the backbenches 

back there will say, good work, good work, Ministry of 

Education; you’re on the right track. I think they’re not. I think 

they’re not. When you’re talking about crowded classrooms, 

you’ve got some real, real problems. And when you’ve got 

disparity rates in our graduation rates, that’s a real problem 

because people aren’t connecting to the economy as much as 

they should. 

 

And I think until all the work is done, they should hold back on 

patting themselves on the back. They should hold back. You 

know, I think this is really, really important. So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I have some real concerns about this. 

 

[11:45] 

 

You know, we know that at a school in Saskatoon, there will be 

over 95 kids when they were expecting much lower numbers. 

But yet what does the minister say? He talks about, he talks 

about the research isn’t quite in on it yet, but he still goes, 

barrels ahead with standardized testing because they know best. 

They know best. So this is a real problem. 

 

And he talks about platitudes and I mean, I’ve got to tell you, 

we’re hearing a lot of platitudes today. We’re hearing a lot of 

platitudes today. You know, what the minister would say is, 

evidence to support enhanced outcomes is evidence, and 

investing in school infrastructure is an investment. Well that’s 

pretty straightforward. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues that they’ve 

done, some of the initiatives they’ve done are just not, not in 

the interest of the people of Saskatchewan. And I go back to the 

labour issues and how we are concerned about some of the 

changes that are happening there, particularly when it comes to 

the organized workplace . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I realize that some other members 

would like to enter into the debate, but currently it’s the 

member from Saskatoon Centre has the floor, and I would ask 

other members to respect that member’s right. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — [Inaudible] . . . have to speak louder and I 

appreciate saving of the voice. But I do want to say that I do 

have some concerns about the different priorities of this 

government, particularly how they seem to operate by surprises. 

And I don’t know if the backbenches like that. 

 

They didn’t campaign on three more MLAs that are going to 

cost us millions of dollars. But you know, the fact of the matter 

is, people want to know when they elect a government and they 

say what they’re going to do, that they’re actually going to do 

it. And they didn’t campaign on that. They didn’t campaign on 

that. And they didn’t campaign on cutting the film tax credit. 

They didn’t campaign on that. And all of a sudden, one year 

later, here they have a cut. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real issues here about the 

credibility, and particularly when this government wants to 

congratulate itself on a job well done. Well we have some real 

concerns. We have some real concerns about that. And so, you 

know, when we talk about the labour bill, what it means for 

people who are not in the organized workplace, what they mean 

in terms of the labour standards, there’s some real challenges 

around that. The Trade Union Act, we have some real 

challenges around that. And we have some real challenges 

about the fact that they have not solved the fiasco of the 

essential services bill. It’s been well over five years, now going 

on six years, for something that was a priority. And they have 

not dealt with the essential services legislation. And Mr. 

Speaker, if that’s not connected to the economy, I don’t know 

what is. I don’t know what is. 

 

And here we have more damaging legislation coming down the 

line, and yet what they want to do is pat themselves on the back 

for something that’s not well thought out. And we have some 

real concerns about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would urge the members on the backbench to think about 

the issues that are facing real families today, and that is 

overcrowded classrooms. Think about holding back on the 

labour bill. Make sure it’s done right. Take the time to consult 

on that. Get that essential services legislation worked out so 

we’re not dealing with it for another four years, and I’m afraid 

that we will. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no way, 

there is no way I can support this bill because there’s just too 

much work to be done. They’re always saying that. There is too 

much more work to be done. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, It’s a 

pleasure to rise today and enter into the debate about this 

important motion. It’s a motion, Mr. Speaker, that when I was 

growing up, the government of the day could not put forward. 

Mr. Speaker, I was born and raised in Saskatchewan and in the 

’90s I was going through high school and the government of the 

day was the NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, the government had high 

taxes, unbalanced budgets, and it really led to an exodus of 

businesses and people, Mr. Speaker. It was, unfortunately, it 

was a time of tough times in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And just compare that from the energy that we feel today. It’s 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

exciting. It’s exciting, Mr. Speaker, because things are 

different. This government realizes that governments can get in 

the way of growth. And if we can concentrate on activities from 

the government’s side that would actually encourage growth . . . 

And we’ve seen that with a decrease in taxes. And we’ve also 

seen the importance of that, Mr. Speaker, with balanced 

budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, balanced budgets are important. When we got 

elected, the Sask Party in 2007, we had inherited from the NDP 

a debt of $6.8 billion, Mr. Speaker. Through balanced budgets, 

we’ve actually incorporated into law that half of any surplus 

goes against the debt. This is something that we’re very proud 

of, that we were able to decrease our debt by 40 per cent. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite at different NDP 

convention after NDP convention always talked about paying 

off the debt. But, Mr. Speaker, they never got it done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after forming government we lowered the debt 

down to $3.8 billion. And why that’s important, Mr. Speaker, is 

that, as many people would realize, is when you have debt you 

have interest payments, and under the NDP government in the 

’90s it was over $900 million every year was getting paid to 

service the debt. 

 

Since forming government, we’ve been able to decrease our 

debt which also decreased the interest payments of such. So 

right now we’re only paying — which is still a significant 

amount of money — but $392 million. So that money frees up 

the government to put more money into education, more money 

into health care, and also more money to pay down the debt, 

because the ultimate goal is to be a debt-free province. And 

with the confidence that the people of Saskatchewan have put 

in this government, we’ll continue to do that important work to 

pay off that debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking of taxes, this government has in 2008, 

with the basic and spouse income tax exemption amounts, 

increased by $4,000. In 2008 we also significantly enhanced the 

refundable Saskatchewan low-income credit. Then further in 

2009, active family benefits was introduced by this 

government. So what this has done is that we had — this is for 

the 2013 taxation year — the changes, the reduction in taxes 

from this government is $473 million. That is a significant 

reduction in taxes that the Saskatchewan people pay the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now this is a comparison to the NDP. The NDP, while they 

were in government, Mr. Speaker, raised the PST [provincial 

sales tax] three times. They also raised income taxes twice, Mr. 

Speaker. They raised business taxes four times. They raised fuel 

taxes twice. Mr. Speaker, that is what caused the decline in 

Saskatchewan was all the taxes that the NDP, the taxes they put 

on the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another important indicator of how we are doing 

as a province . . . I could get up here and most people in the 

province agree that we’re on the right track, but it’s also 

important to speak to people that are independent, that are 

outside the province, that look at different provinces and 

compare how they’re doing. And it’s an important indicator if 

these non-partisan people believe or view how this 

government’s been carrying on the important work that we’ve 

done. 

 

In 2009 the Dominion Bond Rating Service increased our bond 

rating to AA. That’s important, Mr. Speaker. This is an outside 

body that for a living compares and judges . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’d ask the member from Athabasca 

to come to order, and I’d also ask the government members that 

are interfering in the debate. I’m having great difficulty hearing 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview, and I would ask all 

members to co-operate in the rules of this Assembly. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll rise again here, 

and maybe I’ll change . . . The opposition doesn’t want to talk 

about reduction in debt. They don’t want to talk about decreases 

in the personal taxes. They don’t want to talk about the 

improvement of bond ratings for Saskatchewan. The negative 

nine over there just want to talk about negatives. So, Mr. 

Speaker, maybe I’ll switch gears a little bit. 

 

And we’ll talk a little bit, I’m going to quote from the tree 

book, the tree book that now Leader of the Opposition wrote. 

And this is what the last 2011 election was campaigned on. The 

platform was developed by the leader now, now Leader of the 

Opposition. And this is important because in this document 

they talk about a dozen times that they’re listening. They’re 

listening. So what the Leader of the Opposition, back when 

Dwain Lingenfelter was their leader, just to quote him, “We 

have listened to your ideas and we have shared your dreams for 

a better Saskatchewan. Working together we can turn those 

dreams into reality.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reality of the NDP platform that they ran on in 

2011 was $5 billion in increased spending, $5 billion that 

would be put onto the backs of Saskatchewan. That would jump 

the debt significantly higher, which also in turn means that we 

would have higher interest payments, Mr. Speaker, which 

means we would have less money to spend on health care, less 

money to spend on education. This philosophy and going back 

with the NDP is something that we will not let happen to this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also just briefly talk about the Leader of 

the Opposition. And he clarified his position on Keystone 

earlier this week, and I’d like to thank him for seeing the light. 

But really, Mr. Speaker, this clarification is a flip-flop. Mr. 

Speaker, the leadership for the NDP was decided last weekend, 

and I wonder, I wonder what the result of that vote would be if 

the now Leader of the NDP would have flip-flopped before the 

convention, that the people, the members of the NDP, would 

have known, if they would know, would have known that he 

supports Keystone? Now this is the 49 per cent that did not vote 

for the Leader of the Opposition. And of the 51 per cent that did 

vote, I wonder if there was any of them that would consider that 

this flip-flop is important, that it goes to the character, or sorry, 

to the leadership that they would be able . . . that he would 

switch views. And we welcome that. We welcome the fact that 

he has clarified his position that Keystone is important. But I’m 

a little concerned that he might flip-flop again. Or if Thomas 

Mulcair, which is the federal NDP leader, would be 

campaigning against the interest of this province and Western 

Canada and Canada itself, is a betrayal. And I’ve yet to hear 



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

that the Leader of the Opposition condemn Mulcair for going to 

Washington and working against the interests of Canadians. 

And, Mr. Speaker, you can clarify, but really that flip-flop is 

encouraged from us, but we’d like to see more action. We’d 

like to see him stand up, stand up for Saskatchewan and against 

his federal leadership that is determined to derail the economy 

in Western Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just in conclusion, the motion which is important 

because the activity of this government, which is lower taxes, 

balanced budget, is encouraged because people vote with their 

feet, Mr. Speaker. As you know, since 2007, since forming 

government, we have had over 80,000 people move to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is outstanding. That we 

would never see under the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what those people that are now moving to 

Saskatchewan, the importance of such, is that we have the 

lowest unemployment rate in the Dominion of Canada which is 

something we should be proud of, Mr. Speaker. Just this past 

year we’ve had a growth of 23,000 people that have been 

employed in the province of Saskatchewan making it the 

second fastest growing province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. So 

with that I’d like to end and support the motion on the floor. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate here this afternoon on a motion 

that has been put forward by a government that seems to be 

much more focused on sort of a self-congratulation, 

back-patting of one another, certainly a limited focus on the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I find it interesting. We have such tremendous opportunity 

in this province. We have a lot of good work that’s going on in 

this province as well. That good work is being done by the 

workers of this province, the hard workers all across this 

province, the entrepreneurs, who are making those investments 

in communities across this province. 

 

And what I recognize with the members opposite is they’re far 

too willing all of the time to try to take all of the credit, for 

which very little should be attributed towards their actual 

policies or action. In fact there’s fair critique to be placed at the 

feet of this government by way of many of the policy changes 

that it’s made. And then we see members get up and speak in 

this sort of a disturbing way, where it’s sort of backbench 

members getting up to pat the backs of cabinet and 

self-congratulate themselves and have a little bit of an internal, 

self-interested lovefest as opposed to giving credit where 

credit’s due, Mr. Speaker — the hard workers all across this 

province, the entrepreneurs all across this province that build 

out strong, thriving local economies, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

pretty interesting that the members would rather sort of 

congratulate one another than focus where credit is due. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I heard one of the members talking about SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] yesterday. 

And certainly I enjoyed meeting with our rural leaders 

yesterday, at SARM yesterday and hearing about some of the 

realities that they’re facing by way of infrastructure, by way of 

health care that are needed, some of the concerns around spring 

flooding and lack of actions of this government that’s perceived 

by those members of SARM in that preparation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s that sort of focus that we should be talking about here 

today. In fact this would have been a better motion, for us to be 

talking about some of those concerns that we heard at SARM 

yesterday — whether it was the access to those community 

doctors, whether it’s making sure we’re prepared for flooding 

or making sure that we’re supporting the infrastructure in this 

province. 

 

Now part of the reference in this motion talks about an 

economy, an economy that has a lot of potential, an economy 

for which we should have tremendous pride, and an economy 

for which we should be ready to take those next steps. And we 

have a government that’s actually undermining the balance and 

strength of that economy with their actions, their policies, Mr. 

Speaker. We see that in a very direct way when we know our 

history has been to support a strong private sector, a strong 

Crown sector, support the place for workers within that 

economy, support entrepreneurs in this province. 

 

Where we see many aspects of that economy being undermined 

and in a very specific way is that of our Crown sector. That 

adds value to this province and has an incredibly important 

place, not just in the history of this province, but in meeting the 

challenges and opportunities of our future. And it disturbs 

many, Mr. Speaker, that we see our Crown sector being eroded 

and raided and attacked in very deliberate fashion by this 

government now actually breaking their campaign promises, 

Mr. Speaker, of at once committing to not sell off our Crowns. 

Now we see direct privatization — a sell-off of ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan]. We see as 

well an indirect privatization where we basically see many of 

our Crowns being gutted, many of the contracts . . . a culture of 

contracting out that’s tying the hands of those Crowns in future 

generations. 

 

But it’s also been the direct actions of this government by way 

of raiding our Crowns — over $2 billion of dollars over its 

term, over the past five years, Mr. Speaker, and this year alone 

having a surprise rate of $120 million on our Crown sector. 

Last year they did this to SaskPower and, surprise, surprise, 

rates went up, Mr. Speaker, direct consequences of the 

irresponsible actions of that government. 

 

So when we look at the whole economy, we have to do a better 

job of making sure we’re supporting the private sector and local 

entrepreneurs and also making sure we’re supporting that 

Crown sector being direct, something that’s being directly 

undermined by this government. 

 

When this government gets up and starts talking about its 

notions of its budget and suggestions and of being balanced, 

Mr. Speaker, most Saskatchewan people are laughing at these 

suggestions because they’ve looked at the black and white of 

the public accounts at the end of each year and realize that 

there’s an inconsistency, Mr. Speaker, from what this 

government boasts about at budget time and then what the 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

reality’s been for Saskatchewan people. And sadly we’ve had a 

government that’s boasted at budget times, the past three years, 

past four years, about a pretend or perceived balanced budget 

and then we’ve seen the numbers roll in and we’re three 

consecutive years into deficit and debt growth, Mr. Speaker, all 

of which comes at a consequence for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Of course, Saskatchewan people also are calling on this 

government to provide the kind of accountability and 

transparency they deserve, certainly the straight goods and the 

full, true state of our finances, something that’s being denied by 

this government. And if we look back in our history, we had a 

nice trend and I’ll say, under New Democratic Party 

governments, of both improving our financial position but also 

our reporting. 

 

Reporting though, reporting that was being progressed but 

reporting that needed to continue to be moved forward, and this 

is a government that simply stuck its head in the sand while 

every other province has come forward with changes and is 

now compliant with public sector reporting. And this 

government continues to report our finances in a way that’s 

improper and, as the auditor says, is both misleading and 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so when you look at the expensive billboards and ads that 

are being run by this government, it’s of concern to 

Saskatchewan people that the reality is something else. In fact 

it’s a concern to Saskatchewan people that this government is 

willing to go right directly into sending out these messages with 

taxpayers’ money that don’t match the reality, that don’t match 

the facts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this year alone, as one example, we actually have debt 

increasing by $950 million this year, yet we have members 

opposite that still get up and pretend that something else is the 

case. We see a government that’s recently been awarded the 

Pinocchio award, Mr. Speaker, something that doesn’t really 

engender a level of trust with Saskatchewan people and all 

areas where we need to be making progress. So it’s a concern 

where we see the record of this government. It’s also a concern 

where we see the improper reporting. 

 

One other point that I’d like to touch on, by being able to fully 

realize our true potential as a province is that of employment 

and the harmful cuts to the Aboriginal economic development 

program, the AEDP program that played a very important role 

in making sure we were making progress. And it’s a real 

concern to me and to many across this province that in 2007 we 

had what was at that point an unacceptable level of 

unemployment for First Nations and Métis people, but one that 

had seen significant progress. And instead of taking this 

tremendous economic opportunity and making strides, making 

progress, this government’s taken it directly in the wrong 

direction, Mr. Speaker. And this is of consequence to families 

today, to our economy today, but also tomorrow. And we have 

to do a better job of providing and extending opportunity to all, 

Mr. Speaker, and it is about building that better, stronger future 

for tomorrow. 

 

So when I look at the self-congratulatory, self-interested motion 

put forward, inaccurate motion put forward by government here 

today, I think most Saskatchewan people would be disappointed 

that that’s the approach that’s being taken by those that have 

been elected to serve them, that should be more focused on 

capturing the tremendous opportunity we have as a province in 

making a difference in the lives of Saskatchewan people all 

across our province, Mr. Speaker. And as I say, that relates to 

the erosion and attack on our Crown sector. That relates to the 

poor condition this government’s placed our finances, Mr. 

Speaker, the impact then that’s felt by Saskatchewan people, 

and its poor record on Aboriginal employment in this province 

when we know the tremendous importance of that to 

Saskatchewan people. I certainly won’t be supporting that 

motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Time for debate has elapsed. Oral questions. I 

recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — There’s a lot of good going on in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, and we certainly support that. We also 

believe we need to do a better job of supporting our province 

and the people of our province to reach our full potential. 

That’s why the cuts to the AEDP program make no sense, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s also why it doesn’t make any sense that the 

government opposite and members opposite don’t support 

building a bridge in Prince Albert. 

 

Question to the member from Prince Albert Northcote: why 

does she and her government not support building this 

important infrastructure, a bridge in Prince Albert? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member opposite for 

his question. Over and over and over, we hear the NDP 

pleading, pleading for us to fix their mistakes and their lack of 

action. Is it a guilty conscience for doing nothing? Or is it the 

envy of our government for implementing common sense 

policies? 

 

Our population is now at an all-time high, 1,086,564 people. It 

has grown by 23,024 people in the past year. Mr. Speaker, from 

’01 to ’07, Saskatchewan lost more than 35,000 people to net 

out-migration. Now we have an economy that is the envy of the 

nation as well as a population that is growing and diverse. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 2011 election campaign, the 

NDP promised to fund only half the cost for a second bridge in 

P.A. [Prince Albert] . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, we know numbers have never 

been the NDP’s forte. This includes confusion with basic 

economics as well. We’ve seen this many times, Mr. Speaker, 

that the NDP vote against our government’s budget because 

they are unfamiliar with the concept of a balanced budget or a 

booming economy. One would think that what they have 

learned from their past . . . and figure out that cutting jobs and 

raising taxes don’t stimulate economic growth. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Centre: when will your caucus 

learn what it takes to make an economy grow and agree that 



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

balanced budgets, lower taxes, and job creation are the way to 

keep Saskatchewan moving forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find that 

question kind of interesting and it’s very . . . You know I have 

to say, I have to say that, you know, the credibility of this 

Finance minister and the whole idea of this balanced budget 

and how they’re attacking the Crowns is alarming. 

 

But I’ve just got to tell you one thing about the credibility: that 

someone, a minister who has won the Pinocchio Award . . . Is 

that right? The Pinocchio Award? Did he win the Pinocchio 

Award? And then you ask us about credibility? I think they’ve 

got to figure something out about credibility and honest 

reporting of a budget and the accounts related to the budget. 

Somebody who has won the Pinocchio Award has no right to 

be calling anybody else down on credibility. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. What’s 

really important I think from our perspective as an opposition is 

to make sure that we respect the voters in each of our areas 

when we make certain commitments and certain dedication of 

support. 

 

Now my question goes to the member from P.A. Carlton or the 

member from P.A. Northcote — both members. The bottom 

line is that both members made commitments and solid 

commitments to the bridge in Prince Albert. My colleague 

asked the member from P.A. Northcote if . . . a simple question 

— yes or no. And she refused to answer the question. My 

perspective and my point, Mr. Speaker, is that it is a serious 

matter. It is a very important issue for the people of Prince 

Albert, and I think Prince Albert deserves an answer — yes or 

no? Are you going to build them that bridge? And if it’s going 

to be no, come clean with your answer and tell the people of 

Prince Albert that you cannot deliver. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member opposite for the question. It’s curious that when he was 

the Highways minister and the NDP were in government, he did 

not build that second bridge. In the 2011 election campaign, the 

NDP promised to fund only half the cost for a second bridge in 

Prince Albert. Yet in ’03 when the Diefenbaker bridge needed 

repairs, the NDP wouldn’t even honour the agreement that 

required the government to pay for 50 per cent of the cost. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are begging and pleading for us 

to fix their mistakes and their inaction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 2007 

Saskatchewan was a very different place. Taxes were on the 

rise; jobs were being cut. Citizens were leaving in droves to 

pursue employment opportunities and build their families in 

neighbouring provinces. Saskatchewan led the nation by having 

the worst job creation record coupled with steep population 

decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007 our government has turned this 

province around and has it moving forward. Now we lead the 

nation in job creation and have the lowest unemployment rate 

in Canada. To the member from Saskatoon Centre: why does 

your caucus continue to reject policies that are clearly keeping 

our province moving in the right direction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. And to this member I 

just have one question for her. Actually . . . well, one. Does she 

agree with the report, the Howe report, about what a disaster 

this government has around Aboriginal employment? What 

does she think about that? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again we 

see a motion brought forward to this House that is 

self-congratulatory, self-interested, and doesn’t, you know . . . 

addresses more the Sask Party than Saskatchewan people. 

Certainly the role that working men and women have played in 

terms of creating an economy that is prosperous and innovative, 

the role that those working men and women have played is 

essential. But it’s not recognized in this motion. And instead, 

Mr. Speaker, we see this government attacking the rights of 

working men and women with Bill 85. If they’re going to live 

up to their words around wanting a prosperous Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres: why are they attacking working men and women with 

Bill 85? 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And in 

the spirit of how my colleague from Saskatoon Centre 

answered: why did you attack Saskatchewan for 16 years and 

drive everyone out of our province, lower wages, and want 

everyone to leave, Mr. Speaker? That will be my question to 

them. Why did 35,000 people pick to leave this province 

instead of stay under your reign of terror, across to members to 

the aisle? 

 

Mr. Speaker, why on earth did they put farmers on the streets of 

Albert Street so that they would not be on their farms working 

because they didn’t think they could make a go of it, Mr. 

Speaker? Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of questions that aren’t 

being answered here today, but I’m very proud of our 

government’s record. And I think I’ll stand behind our 

government’s record, our platform, ahead of the Lingenfelter 

platform any day of the week and twice on Sunday. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP’s low 



March 14, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2725 

expectations for this province is well documented. As people 

and jobs left in droves, NDP minister Eldon Lautermilch said, 

“What it looks like to me is more wealth for a similar number 

of people.” While the NDP will not admit to deliberately 

driving people out of this province, their record suggests 

something completely different. 

 

Throughout 16 years of NDP government, they raised the PST 

three times. They raised the income tax twice, and business 

taxes four times. They also raised the fuel tax twice. Mr. 

Speaker, that is an awful lot of taxation. 

 

To the member from Regina Rosemont: given the economic 

growth under our government, will the NDP finally admit that 

their tax increases scared people and business out of this great 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I would suggest, that given the rare 

opportunity that those backbench members have to speak, that 

they shouldn’t read the rubbish that’s written for them on their 

caucus papers, and they should focus on the reality of this 

province. It’s sort of the sort of storytelling, Mr. Speaker, that 

we hear from the Minister of Finance who’s now won the 

Pinocchio Award, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a lot of opportunity in this province. We need to do a 

better job supporting the workers of this province, the 

communities of this province, building out that strong Crown 

sector that’s been directly undermined and attacked by 

members opposite and truly capturing the opportunity, not this 

phony baloney sort of message that we hear from members 

opposite and denying the voice that they’ve been elected to 

provide to their constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres to talk about why this government 

wants to attack working men and women with Bill 85, and 

whether or not they’ve played a role in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 604 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Broten that Bill No. 604 — The Public Health 

(Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a few 

brief remarks on Bill 604, which is the asbestos right-to-know 

Act, and we hope it’ll be called Howard’s law. It’s an 

amendment to The Public Health Act and so this is amendment 

legislation. It’s a piece of common sense legislation that will 

give our citizens more information so that they can make 

informed, safe decisions, especially when they’re working in 

some of these buildings. 

 

Asbestos is deadly. It causes all kinds of problems, not 

necessarily always immediately. But over the long term we’ve 

seen some very, very difficult situations and we know that it’s 

absolutely deadly and a substance that we need to change the 

use of. 

 

A mandatory registry of public buildings is necessary for 

people who use buildings. Students, patients, workers, they all 

have the right to know if there’s asbestos present in a building 

that they’re going to use. A voluntary registry doesn’t go far 

enough, and I think the minister has acknowledged that, 

because it’s not always clear which information should be 

provided and how much information. I think when we’re 

talking about the health of our people here in Saskatchewan, we 

need to be clear and we need to make sure that they’re 

protected. 

 

As we know, this legislation is here because of Howard 

Willems and the Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease Awareness 

Organization and other allies who have worked with him while 

he was still alive and now work with the organization. The 

work’s being carried out by many, many people. And we have 

guests that were introduced earlier and who are here now who 

are very supportive of this legislation going forward. 

 

As the New Democratic Party opposition, we’re committed to 

getting this passed through committee in a timely manner. And 

I understand that’s the government’s position as well. We don’t 

want it watered down, so we’ll look very carefully at the 

amendments that are going to be proposed. And it’ll also be 

important that we get proper consultation with people in the 

committee process. 

 

One of the things that we can do with certain types of 

legislation, and I believe this is one of them, is that our 

processes here in the legislature allow for public attention and 

public information to be given to the whole community through 

the committee process. And so I know that both sides will be 

working together to make sure that we can assist in that as well. 

 

As I said before, we would like to have this bill named 

Howard’s bill to honour Howard Willems for what he’s done. 

I’d like to give a special thank you to all of the supporters and 

all the people who have been working very hard to have this 

asbestos registry go forward. We as New Democrats have been 

very honoured to work with all of the people who have been on 

this project. We know that the government has responded as 

well, and that’s one of the reasons we can have this bill going 

forward now. 

 

So obviously we’ll be voting in favour of the legislation and we 

look forward to it being moved to the Human Services 

Committee as soon as possible so that the appropriate processes 

can be put in place to have the bill go forward. Thank you. 

 



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2013 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is second 

reading of Bill No . . . moved by the Opposition House Leader, 

excuse me, the Opposition Leader now, is Bill No. 604, The 

Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? 

 

Mr. Broten: — I designate that Bill No. 604 be committed to 

the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — Bill No. 604 is committed to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:24.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2703 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2703 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2704 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2704 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2704 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2704 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2705 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2705 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2705 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2705 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2705 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Pope Francis I 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2705 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2706 

 Student at Centre of Idle No More Movement 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2706 

 University of Regina Hosts Women’s Basketball Championships 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2706 

 Huskies Host University Hockey Championship 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2707 

 Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2707 

 First Impression 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2707 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Asbestos Registry Legislation 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2707 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2707 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2708 

 Lobbyist Registry Legislation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2708 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2709 

 Forest Management Plan 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2709 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2710 

 Financial Management and Reporting 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2711 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2711 

MOTIONS 

 Committee Membership 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2712 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2713 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2714 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Commendation of Government Policies 

  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2714, 2724 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2716, 2724 

  Jurgens ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2718, 2723 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2719, 2724 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2720 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2722 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2723 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2724 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2724 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2724 

  



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2725 

  Broten (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 2726 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


