




















































Hansard: November 19, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 15B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2013, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4095 

 November 19, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the sitting 

will resume, second reading debate on Bill No. 108, The 

Athletics Commission Act. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 108 — The 

Athletics Commission Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — And I recognize the member from 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Pleasure to resume debate on Bill No. 108. Before the 

proceedings got under way, I was assured by the member from 

Melfort that he’s been watching the last two hours of my 

speech, sitting on pins and needles. First I’d urge the member to 

get up, walk about, help the circulation best he can. And it 

would say something that he’s been listening to my speech for 

two hours, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s only been going for 30 

minutes. 

 

So I’ve got a few more things I’d like to say on Bill No. 108 as 

regards to the Athletics Commission proposed to govern the 

boxing and mixed martial arts exhibitions and demonstrations 

in this province. But I don’t think I’ll be taking a half hour to do 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nor will I be taking two hours to do 

that. 

 

But again revisit where we’d left off. This is a pretty interesting 

piece of legislation. And as I was taking my supper over the 

break, Mr. Speaker, I was reminded of what a timely piece of 

legislation this is as on Access Communications they had the 

Brain Blitz round table and including, you know, the president 

of Boxing Canada, Pat Fiacco, and as well, president of the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders, Jim Hopson, and other individuals. 

 

But they were talking about, it was put on by the Saskatchewan 

Brain Injury Association, and they were talking about the risk 

of brain injury in sport and again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

need to, when there is danger, when there is risk, balancing the 

interest and the enthusiasm that’s there for a particular sport, be 

it boxing or be it mixed martial arts. That need is there, Mr. 

Speaker, to take those steps to make sure that the medical side 

is addressed as best as humanly possible and to make sure that 

you’re not driving something underground, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the way that this could go in other jurisdictions. But 

also to make sure that the regulation is there, the protocols are 

there, that the safety practices are there to make this as safe as 

possible endeavour as possible.  

 

And when you’ve got those kind of balances being achieved, 

Mr. Speaker, and the regulatory side well addressed, then as 

government I think you can proceed with something like this. 

 

But looking at the . . . I’d realized I had misspoke earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’d like to correct the record for this, and I thank 

the Minister for Culture and Sport for correcting me during the 

break. I’d been referring to AJ Scales and Mayor Eaton and Pat 

Fiacco as commissioners, members of the commission. That is 

not the case. The commission has not yet been struck, so just to 

clarify that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again I still take some interest and some encouragement 

from the fact that people like Anthony or AJ Scales or Pat 

Fiacco and the considerable expertise and the considerable 

expert knowledge that those individuals have when it comes not 

just to the competing side of mixed martial arts or boxing but 

also what it takes for officiating, what it takes for proper 

regulation, what it takes for proper promotion. So we look 

forward to seeing the involvement of those individuals as this 

effort proceeds, Mr. Speaker. We look forward to better 

understanding of the details of the legislation itself as regards to 

the rollout of the commission. 

 

But I know that other members are very interested in the 

proceedings, that other of my colleagues would like to enter 

into the adjourned debates, and that other of my colleagues 

would like to certainly take the time to consult and to talk to the 

people, not just the SUMAs [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], not just the sporting side of the 

world, but also, Mr. Speaker, people like the Saskatchewan 

Brain Injury Association that have some very valuable insights 

and contributions to make to a discussion like this. 

 

So in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

108, The Athletics Commission Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 102 — The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to enter into this debate, Bill 102, An Act to 

amend The Builders’ Lien Act. And it is interesting that we just 

had a reception with the land surveyors just over the supper 

hour, and I was able to visit with them, as I think many in the 

House were able to talk with them. And they were interested in 



4096 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

of course this Act. This is one that means an awful lot to them, 

so it was kind of fortuitous that I was able to talk to them about 

the process and how we are going to be going through this and 

how this means an awful lot to them. Clearly for some reason 

they happen to have been left out of the group that was counted 

in amongst those who improved the land and therefore . . . or 

improved the project and therefore had a right to some sort of 

claim if the project fell through. And so it was interesting, and I 

want to refer to some of their work. 

 

You know, I didn’t realize this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

they’re referred to as the second oldest profession. Did you 

know that? The second oldest profession, land surveyors. And 

that was the second thing that people became very interested in 

is the possession of property, and how are you going to divide 

up this property? And it was the surveyors who came in. Now I 

don’t know if lawyers and accountants were third and fourth, 

but apparently surveyors take claim to be the second oldest 

profession. But I . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s the oldest? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well I don’t know. I’ve been trying to find that 

out. But let me get back to the speech at hand here, Mr. 

Speaker. Let me get back to the speech at hand, Bill 102. So it’s 

a very important one, and I will talk more about the surveyors 

because they are celebrating a major landmark I think. Well, 

landmark? Major event in their history. I’m not sure if it was 

this year or last year, but a centennial of sorts. And they 

definitely have played a major role in our history here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But to speak specifically to this bill, and this is one that I 

actually did raise with them, that we talked about the process of 

passing legislation. And it’s not just as simple as meeting one 

group’s wants and then that’s done and that moves on. We’re 

opening up this Act, The Builders’ Lien Act. I don’t know that 

Act. I’ll have to take some time to study it up and understand 

what are the groups that do have some claim if a project is not 

complete and there has to be legal action taken. 

 

So as I was saying to some of the surveyors, that’s a question 

we’ll have: have we completed the list now of those who do 

have a legitimate claim to redress if the project fails? For some 

reason they, as I said earlier, for some reason it was felt that 

they did not count as architects or as engineers do in that they 

. . . literally, you can see their work and, in terms of approving 

the project, that it’s a land improvement. But I think we all have 

to acknowledge very much that surveyors do too. They’re the 

first people on the job to make sure everything’s surveyed out 

appropriately. 

 

So that makes a lot of sense. But as I said, the question will be, 

are we, when we’re opening up this Act, this is the appropriate 

time to check to see, are there other groups that we should be 

finding out that they’ve been left out of the mix? And that will 

be very, very important. 

 

The other question, and there’ll be lots of questions when we 

get into committee on this, and the minister . . . the legislation 

speaks to the new section 4: 

 

“When contract deemed complete 

4 For the purposes of this Act, a contract is deemed to 

be completed when the total price of the following is not 

more than 1% of the contract price: 

 

(a) completion; 

 

(b) correction of a known defect; 

 

(c) last provision of services or materials”. 

 

I’m not sure if that’s very clear. Now I’m not in this kind of line 

of work, so I’m not sure if I understand the language. But when 

the minister said in his comments, he said, I quote: 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, this bill will update the section in the 

Act that determines when a contract is deemed to be 

complete . . . By repealing the $1,000 figure, a contract 

will deem to be complete when the price of completion is 

not more than 1 per cent of the contract price. 

 

I’m not sure if I understand that. So something’s complete when 

you have 1 per cent left towards the contract price of what it 

would cost to be complete. But then you have to figure out what 

that 1 per cent is. It is as if you have to go out and hire 

somebody to finish that 1 per cent. So I’ll have to get 

clarification on that because it’s not plain English, and it 

doesn’t make a lot of sense to me. Now maybe I’m just missing 

a key component here and they are just about ready to explain it 

to me. 

 

But I think that this will be very important for us to understand, 

and of course this is viewed as a flexible benchmark that will 

adjust automatically with the scale of construction projects. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know the scale of construction 

projects in Saskatchewan vary widely, and some in the last 

decade or so have been phenomenal. And so 1 per cent of a 

several hundred million project can be well a couple million 

dollars, and so this is a significant number. So I’m quite 

interested in knowing more about that. 

 

So the surveyors were very supportive of this, but I told them 

that we will be contacting them, and it’s up to them to let us 

know that it’s a priority for them, to let us know that this is 

something they’re onside with. We understand in the first go 

round when The Builders’ Lien Act was developed that they 

weren’t part of the consultations. They somehow were not 

included. Now they were and that’s a good thing. We think 

that’s important, but we want to make sure that all the groups 

were included in the discussion. So we want to make sure that’s 

the case. 

 

But I do want to take a minute and just recognize the 

Saskatchewan Land Surveyors Association if I may. And I 

think we all received this book Land Surveying in 

Saskatchewan: Laying the Groundwork for Property Rights and 

Development, commemorating the first 100 years of the 

Saskatchewan Land Surveyors Association, 1910 to 2010. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a very interesting read. It was interesting that 

today, as I said, that we had a reception with them. And I want 

to commend them and congratulate them for the 100 years. 

 

In Saskatchewan, you know, so much of our modern history 

since the 1800s have really revolved around the fact of the good 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4097 

work that the surveyors have done. 

 

And I think about now the member from Batoche. I know in his 

riding he has some of the old remnants of the seigneurial system 

that he can trace back via Quebec to France when it was based 

off of the river where you had narrow strips of lots. And they’re 

still in existence in the Batoche district because of the Métis and 

the French heritage there, which is very interesting of course. 

 

And then we had the system that we got from the Americans 

where we have the section system, the quarter section, 640 acres 

to a section and all of that, and so much percentage went to 

schools and public land and so much went to the CPR 

[Canadian Pacific Railway]. That history really shaped who we 

are in Saskatchewan. 

 

And of course the growth of technology, which was huge. And, 

Mr. Speaker, another not-well-known fact may be that we’re 

one of the few — now the writer of the book couldn’t find 

another state or province in the world — where all of our 

boundaries are artificially drawn. We do not use a river, an 

ocean, or any natural geographic body as a boundary. Every 

other province in Canada uses at least one geographic feature as 

a boundary. Now I’m not sure what . . . Alberta might be the 

Great Divide I think, where towards the bottom of BC [British 

Columbia] and Alberta might be the Great Divide, but everyone 

else has a river, an ocean, a Great Lake, something like that as a 

divide. We have nothing. And of course we know that we have 

one straight, I think the west side is straight; the east side is 

where the correction lines are all on. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So it’s very interesting, that whole history and of course the 

whole history of how they first came out when they were, you 

know, marking the land so that they could divide it up. And an 

interesting story was that first they thought they would use 200 

acres to a quarter section as opposed to 160 acres. Now would 

you know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they went from 200 to 

160? They could get more settlers into the province of 

Manitoba at the time. They had an idea that we would do it with 

200 acres per quarter or 800 per section, but they did the math 

and they would get about 15,000 more settlers into Manitoba if 

they cut it down. 

 

Now I don’t know if that sounds like a government plan. It 

sounds like the way a government would think, but they wanted 

more settlers out here so they went with 640. But a fascinating, 

fascinating read. 

 

And then the other couple of interesting things of course was 

when Cluff Lake got its land rights in northern Saskatchewan. 

And it was some 450,000 acres, and somebody had to go up 

there and figure out where that 450,000 acres were. That’s a big 

piece of land and how were they going to figure that out? Now 

it’s not that long ago. You and I could think that it was just, you 

know, what would that have been — 25, 30 years ago, Cluff 

Lake? You know, and that’s not, in my mind that’s not that long 

ago. For some other people it’s a long time ago. 

 

But the idea was at the time it was just before GPS [Global 

Positioning System], you know. And now with GPS it would be 

a piece of cake to figure it out, but they had to use some really 

interesting, innovative technology to figure out how they got 

that, where the markings were for that mine in northern 

Saskatchewan. And now it’s not such a big deal. 

 

Now I was talking with some of their surveyors, and you know, 

we were comparing notes about how they’re away from home 

an awful lot and we’re away from home an awful lot. I was 

asking them if they work quite as hard as some of the surveyors, 

you know, a hundred years ago and they felt, well maybe not 

quite like that. The times have changed. They said labour laws 

had changed since then and that probably it would be against 

the law to do those kind of things nowadays. But I said I don’t 

know about that, you know. I mean, I’m not sure why it’s . . . 

count out the change in labour laws. Anyways, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I digress here, but it’s very interesting. 

 

The other interesting thing is now that we see with condos, the 

idea of three-dimensional surveys. That’s of course the strata 

surveying and of course whether it’s in residential condos or 

they have an example in the book of the Weyburn grain 

terminal and how they had to do that in a three-dimensional 

area. And I’m not quite sure what the necessity of that was, but 

it’s very different in terms of the work that a land surveyor is 

doing now or what a surveyor is doing. 

 

Interestingly, as I think about it, I know when we were in 

Chicago for the western . . . Where did we go to where you 

went to Minnesota, the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . the 

midwest legislators conference. And we were there for Chicago 

a few years ago. And they were talking about how they had to 

deal with land rights, but they also had to deal with air rights 

because what was happening was that you would have the trains 

running on the land and the buildings were built above the 

tracks. And so you had rights above the land. You didn’t have 

rights on the land, but rights above the land. And so in a sense 

that was the precursor to the kind of strata rights, I think that’s 

the term that we enjoy now. 

 

So I think the surveyors make a very strong case for how they 

are very integral to our economy. And when we come to 

investment and we come to improvements to land and to 

projects like that, certainly they should not be left out, that they 

do have a claim, and we should make sure that we work to see 

that their claim is brought forward. 

 

But as I said, we do have issues around the idea of, are there 

other groups that we should be making sure are included with 

this? And of course when we get into committee, I will be 

asking about the 1 per cent. 

 

Now I am not sure if these folks up here are land surveyors. 

They are surveyors. Okay. Well I wanted to introduce them as 

surveyors. So welcome to your legislature. I am talking about 

The Builders’ Lien Act, the one that you’re very interested in. 

And we’re just saying how important it is, the work that you do. 

And just reviewing the book that you had provided to all the 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] and how 

interesting that is and the progress that our country has made 

because of surveyors. Not sure you’re working as harsh 

conditions that some of your folks from the 1800s have, but 

maybe. I don’t know. But it’s very . . . 

 

But, I think, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the surveyors are in the 



4098 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

gallery and hearing a bit of this speech. I know that it is 

important work that they do. But there is a process here and we 

will see the process go through because it is our obligation to 

make sure that due process is carried out and that all the . . . 

And there are no undue consequences.  

 

I mean I know the surveyors, actually it was interesting, I was 

talking to Don Franko earlier about this. And of course when he 

understood the process that we want to make sure there’s 

nobody left out, that when we open the Act we don’t want to 

open the Act yet again. It’s very important that we make sure all 

the groups are included. 

 

So I just have to say, Mr. Speaker, it was interesting the group 

that was there. I also had the good fortune of meeting Lana Bily 

from Midwest Surveys. Now she is the second woman 

surveyor, female surveyor in Canada. The book highlights both 

Lana and another woman who’ve really come into their own in 

making sure that women are included in this workforce and this 

sector. So it’s hugely important. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would urge all members — I know 

we’re here for a while tonight and for the next couple of weeks 

— they may want to take out this book. There won’t be a test on 

it but if you want a good read, read Land Surveying in 

Saskatchewan. Read Land Surveying in Saskatchewan. It’s a 

good read and I think it will serve us all well to understand the 

good work that surveyors do in Saskatchewan for us. And it’s 

important that we have an opportunity to debate this bill. It’s an 

important bill, and we want to make sure that they get the 

recognition that they deserve for the good work that they do. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would now move adjournment of 

Bill No. 102, An Act to amend The Builders’ Lien Act. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 103 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

the debate on Bill 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2013. I realize . . . I guess child support 

payments that are due to families, to raise the children and we 

know there’s an order that’s issued. In those circumstances, you 

know, a parent is supposed to pay to make sure that the parent 

that’s raising the child, whether it’s a . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you, to ask for leave for introductions of 

guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the . . . Leave has been 

granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to make some introductions for members of the 

Saskatchewan Land Surveyors Association. They’ve been 

joined by a few of their friends from Regina and elsewhere. But 

joining us from Swift Current is Gerald Johnson, from 

Lloydminster is Jim Clarke, and from Yorkton is Adam 

Kraszlany. I think we also have a gentleman named Marco up 

there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Carlo — sorry, Carlo — 

and others that have just come. 

 

They’ve just ensured that we were all informed from both sides 

of the House to have a better understanding of their work and 

most especially on the post-secondary side the significance of 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] programming to their effort to make sure that on 

an ongoing basis they’re able to better meet their labour market 

needs, especially in this busy time for all of our land surveyors. 

So, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d ask all members to 

join me in welcoming all these members that are joining us in 

your gallery tonight. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to give 

the member the opportunity to introduce the guests that are in 

the gallery. 

 

Now I was just talking about how important it is for child 

support payments to be made when an order is issued for a 

spouse or, you know, of children to make sure they pay, 

whether it’s a single parent, that they pay, you know, the child 

support payments that are due. And hopefully they do that. And 

I know that the maintenance orders, I think it’s in the 

amendment it talks about provisions, about 91 per cent of 

maintenance orders are collected. And the agency does a good 

job and has a bunch of opportunities, these tools to their selves 

to collect from individuals to make sure that the maintenance 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4099 

order payments for families are collected. And there’s many 

different ways that they do that. 

 

And this provision is giving it I guess more tools to the 

maintenance organization as far as to follow through on the 

order, to collect those fees that have been awarded to an 

individual or family for children whether . . . well it doesn’t 

matter how many, I know. There’s an amount of dollars that are 

agreed to and the order is brought forward. 

 

Having said that, you know, you look at 91 per cent. And I’m 

not sure why this is coming in and I’m sure, you know, there’s 

probably lots that will have to be discussed. And that’s why 

we’re getting an opportunity to start out and, you know, and 

maybe we’ll get a chance to hear why people are saying they 

need the extra in order for an individual . . . And like I said, it’s 

a tool. And while I can make out this is saying if you don’t 

comply with the order, you have the ability for the minister, I 

guess whether it’s for the hunting licence, whether it’s fishing, 

to deny the request for a person that does not fulfill the order 

and does not arrange to make payments or whatever it is to, you 

know, the maintenance enforcement agency. And if you don’t 

make those provisions, it’s allowing that the minister may — 

may — you know . . . And I mean they’re talking about 

collecting 9 per cent that has not, according to what I’m 

understanding and if I have it correct. And I think I do from the 

information that was provided. 

 

So having said that, there’s an opportunity for the minister to 

notify, you know, the conservation officers that an individual’s 

licence, for purchasing a licence of the province of 

Saskatchewan has been cancelled for hunting or fishing. Now it 

doesn’t I guess at the end of the day . . . I guess if one’s 

purchasing a licence, that’s one way.  

 

But you know, it takes us to some other areas. This may be 

another tool that gives the ability for a maintenance order to be 

collected and for the agency to collect those I guess child 

support payments that are due and to make sure that the parent 

pays those due. It’s a tool. It’s just one more tool that the 

government has. And I think there’s quite a few opportunities 

right now that the maintenance agency has the ability for 

themselves to engage, whether it’s income tax, PST [provincial 

sales tax], GST [goods and services tax]. I think all these 

provisions are there . . . [inaudible] . . . They’re just asking . . . 

And I think it’s provisions. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And I don’t know who’s requested this. And I’m not sure, you 

know, why they’ve requested and if this is going to really give 

them more teeth. And maybe it does and they collect 1 per cent. 

Like I don’t know the numbers. There must be a reason why. 

But at the end of the day, you know, I wonder about this 

provision. 

 

And I know some people take hunting pretty serious. And they 

enjoy it as a sport and to relieve stress. And some individuals, 

you know, do the hard work, and that’s how they go out and 

relieve stress. They hunt and with buddies and whatever, fish 

with family. And, you know, they might be taking out these 

family members — I guess they’re their children — and I’m 

just saying these are things that a person has to look at. Will 

that impact them? And hopefully it doesn’t impact the quality 

of life when it comes to families, you know, that it doesn’t 

interfere with that. And I hope it doesn’t because sometimes 

that interaction between a parent and a, you know . . . It’s clear 

there’s an opportunity. 

 

So having said that, you know, and I look at . . . And I don’t 

know who’s going to deny it. Because if you go right now, the 

way the system is, and we look at where we go to get a hunting 

licence online, and I believe if you have a look at where we’re 

going . . . And that’s why I want to go back to some of the . . . 

where individuals would apply for their licence, and they might 

be banned from purchasing a licence. 

 

And if it’s in Tennessee where I believe right now we see the 

online system that’s caused a lot of grief and frustration with 

people that were trying to get fishing licences this past year . . . 

And I’ve seen some of the frustration with individuals, whether 

it’s our local co-ops that used to sell the licence. There was the 

local store. There was provisions for organizations to actually 

sell the licence to people coming in, outfitters. They handled it. 

Some people would just show up. They would buy their licence. 

Now they can’t and they have to go online, and we’ve seen 

what happened with that. That totally was a mess, and some 

people were very frustrated with the process. 

 

And it may get better, but again it goes to outsourcing jobs and 

everything else from our province, and revenue. And we’ve 

asked some tough questions about that whole process and the 

boggling of that whole licensing issue for, you know, a fishing 

licence and stuff like that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at that, it raised some 

other concerns that, you know, have you checked? And I’m 

hoping that, you know, due diligence was done with the Privacy 

Commissioner to make sure. Are you going to be, you know, 

presenting certain information to the individuals who, whether 

it be Tennessee or out of Saskatchewan, what controls will be in 

place that they don’t have information and privacy that they 

shouldn’t have access to? And I’m not sure what information 

they’re going to be sharing with them to say, yes, you can issue 

a licence or not. 

 

So that brings me to another, you know, area of concern, and 

I’m not sure, and I’m hoping, you know, that will be clarified in 

the near future with this bill and what exactly’s going on. So 

there are some interesting things that are, you know, developing 

here with wondering about privacy too and have they checked 

that out . . . [inaudible] . . . And on our side of it, I think we’ve 

said clearly, our leader has said, when we can work with the 

government to make sure it makes good sense, good common 

sense to work together to benefit Saskatchewan people, we will 

do that. Our children, we will do that. Our families, we’ll do 

that. And I think here’s an area where we could say, let’s make 

sure. 

 

But we want to make sure that we’re doing the due diligence 

that needs to be done, that we represent the people of this 

province. Both sides are doing the work that’s asked of them 

when we get asked to represent the people of the province. So I 

want to be clear on that. There are questions that need to be 

answered, and the government is the one coming forward with 

the new bill and new tools. They made sure . . . I’m hoping 



4100 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

they’ve consulted, they have the answers because if they don’t 

have the answers, it’s unfortunate if it’s later, it’s after the fact 

that these challenges come up. So I’m hoping we will deal with 

these things as we move forward. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have any further, 

more comments about this bill. We’ll see. I know my 

colleagues will have more time to debate it. So at this point, I’m 

prepared to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 104 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 

and debate the Bill 104, The Enforcement Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

Like every time we bring in legislation, we know that we have 

to change others, that automatically there’s a requirement that 

the Legislative Assembly has to, you know, follow through on 

some of the changes. And these changes will be . . . [inaudible] 

. . . and we know that. They have to happen. And they will 

happen. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have a lot of 

comments on this. They will happen the way they naturally 

happen. And the process will take care of itself, as it’s the law 

and we know that it has to be done that way. And we will wait 

for those provisions to happen. And they’ll make the changes 

that need to be changed within the bills. And that’s what this 

bill is about. 

 

So at this point, again, I am prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 

104. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 105 — The 

Informal Public Appeals Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Glad to rise tonight to join the debate on The Informal Public 

Appeals Act second reading or the adjourned debates of Bill No. 

105, the informal appeals Act. 

 

Referring to the minister’s second reading remarks, again the 

connection of this to the work done by the 2011 Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada recommending that The Uniform 

Informal Public Appeals Act be adopted by Canadian 

jurisdictions to govern the operation of such appeals in terms of 

spontaneous appeals made to the public around fires, floods, to 

assist a bereaved family with future education costs or to 

address . . . not addressing professional fundraising by 

established charitable organizations. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Warren, you better put down that water. 

We can hardly hear you. 

 

Mr. McCall: — My colleague from Cypress Hills is chiming in 

again. He’s reprising his act from late this afternoon. And I can 

assure him, I had probably a bit too much salt for supper, so 

there will be water powering this windmill yet, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But in terms of The Informal Public Appeals Act, again this . . . 

It’s sort of a sad thing where something that is so close to the 

ground, so community-driven would need legislation coming 

forward to govern it, Mr. Speaker. And again in terms of 

neighbours helping neighbours, community looking out for 

families in need, responding in a time of crisis, these kind of 

appeals are about as grassroots as it gets, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I know in my own family there have been times where that 

call has gone out for help in the case of the establishment of 

funds to help out with the future education costs of my niece as 

was the case 10 years ago. And I know that certainly when we 

as a family went through with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

again this was 10 years ago — our first thought wasn’t we 

better check to ensure that The Informal Public Appeals Act is 

being satisfied. And I guess it’s sad that you have to come 

forward with legislation like this. 

 

Again, this is responding to the Uniform Law Conference and, 

I’m presuming, instances where such appeals have not been 

properly handled or where the funds raised under these, in these 

instances was not properly distributed or accounted for. And 

that’s, that’s a sad business, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But in that 

case we I guess we have questions on the opposition benches as 

to how it is that a specific piece of legislation is required for 

these instances, how it is not covered off by other pieces of 

legislation that already govern the appropriate charitable giving 

situations or requests. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be 

looking to get some answers as to, aside from the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada, are there specific instances that have 

prompted the bringing forth of this legislation? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again in terms of defining: 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4101 

. . . public appeal for the purpose of the Act to limit the 

scope to sporadic and informal appeals, confirm that funds 

raised through a public appeal are held in trust, and 

establish a default scheme that will apply only where a 

public appeal is not regulated under legislation or a 

formally created trust. 

 

Again, we have questions as to whether or not the situation 

warrants such a complex response to what have been fairly 

straight-ahead propositions in past. 

 

The second reading speech of the minister references the fact 

that the Bill: 

 

. . . will establish a mechanism for disposal of surplus 

funds or an ability to provide refunds where needed. It will 

create a power for the courts to direct the application of 

surplus funds. It will set out the powers and duties of 

trustees, including investment of funds, further public 

appeals, and the transfer of funds to another body. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, what are the thresholds for the kind of 

funds being raised for then this legislation to apply? Does this 

create undue regulatory red tape, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms 

of again what are usually fairly urgent appeals that go out? And 

how is this not, if it does reach a certain size, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, how is it not covered off by existing legislation? All of 

these are questions to which we will seek answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again the minister references: 

 

Rather than hurdles, Mr. Speaker, this Bill seeks to 

remove the traps that have evolved so that the 

well-meaning trustees who commence an appeal are not 

made victims of their own good intentions. These forms 

will be available online and we plan to make them broadly 

available through local lenders and other community 

locations. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we would like to have a greater sort of 

explanation made of the specific circumstances that call forth 

this legislation. Again, the Uniform Law Conference of 2011 is 

referenced, but in Saskatchewan’s circumstance — where we 

pride ourselves as being volunteers, where we are a province 

that takes looking out for our neighbours very seriously through 

disasters, through personal loss — it would be a shame if, in the 

name of removing traps and guarding against hurdles, that we 

made the job of helping folks out all the harder to accomplish. 

 

So we’ve got lots of questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we 

will seek those answers to those questions as regards Bill No. 

105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. With that I’d adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Bill No. 106 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 106 — The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m just priming the pump, if I can mix the metaphors, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013, Bill No. 106, 

earlier my colleague from Saskatoon Centre had been 

referencing the fact that the surveyors at the reception had 

described themselves as the second-oldest profession in the 

world. Now I don’t know where the legal profession fits into 

the scheme of things, and I don’t know if politicians, is that the 

oldest profession in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I’m not 

sure. 

 

Anyway, I thank the surveyors for getting that into our mindsets 

as we approach these pieces of legislation, and realizing that 

there’s not just a great chain flowing out in front of the survey 

work to be done but the great chain rolling back through history 

as well. But with The Legal Profession Amendment Act, nothing 

like a law to help regulate the legal profession, Mr. Speaker, but 

a number of amendments being put forward for contemplation 

here. Again this is being proposed at the request of the Law 

Society of Saskatchewan. Fair enough. This is a great example 

of the interplay that exists in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

between professional organizations and the self- regulation that 

takes place therein with those organizations and the work of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

But the first thing that’s set out for being accomplished by the 

legislation is “. . . add a provision clarifying that in regulating 

the profession, the public interest is paramount over the 

interests of members being disciplined.” 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, it’s always good to clear that up and good to 

have these things clear, that the public interest in fact does take 

precedence over the interests of members being disciplined of 

the Law Society. Fair enough. Glad that they’ve got that more 

clearly iterated, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the society is being given more 

control over the number of elected members on its council 

to accommodate demographic changes and improve 

governance. The society is given the authority to regulate 

law firms as well as individual members. 

 

Pretty straightforward proposition there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Third thing that’s being contemplated with the legislation, the 

“. . . number of amendments to provide the society with the 

ability to recruit persons who are not members of council or 

lawyers to assist with investigations and hearings,” again 

providing greater expertise and greater flexibility for the 

organization as they seek to conduct appeals or to the various 



4102 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

proceedings attached with the society’s work. 

 

And again, interestingly, Mr. Speaker, the changes to the way: 

 

. . . that appeals are conducted from decisions respecting 

admissions of lawyers into the practice. Instead of an 

appeal to the full council of benchers, an appeal will be to 

a smaller panel known as the admissions panel. This will 

result in timelier decision making. 

 

Well we can only hope for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 

streamlining process, refining your procedure, it would seem to 

be fairly straightforward proposals being considered here in the 

legislation. 

 

One other item proposed by the legislation is: 

 

The legislative time limit for issuing discipline decisions is 

being removed to permit flexibility. The time period of 45 

days may be difficult to achieve in complex cases. The 

common law rules of natural justice require the decision to 

be delivered in a reasonable amount of time. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fair enough. And finally: 

 

. . . the statutory exemption from liability for good faith 

decisions is being extended to the Law Foundation and 

members of the Law Foundation to help encourage 

volunteers to undertake this very worthwhile activity. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be a fairly reasonable 

proposition there. And again good proposals in and of 

themselves and will hopefully enable the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan in the better to do its work of self-regulation and 

promotion of the profession. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2013. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 113 — The Powers 

of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la 

Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

tonight to enter into the debate on Bill No. 113, An Act to 

amend The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002. And of course this is 

a very important piece of legislation. 

 

It will be interesting when we get into committee to have a 

further full discussion around this because we all have heard 

stories of abuse of seniors or those who are in vulnerable 

circumstances. And what is the government doing about this? 

And this seems to be a pretty positive move. We do have some 

questions. Did they do proper consultation? Who did they 

consult with and did they take all the different perspectives into 

account? Were they actually listening to them? 

 

I don’t recall any public announcements about this. And 

sometimes, you know, I think there is a role for just public 

information on this, and that would be interesting to hear 

because all of us have some connections in some ways, some 

form with vulnerable folks, whether they be seniors or people in 

such circumstances. And so it’s important that their affairs are 

looked after in a fair and efficient way and that the accounting 

is done completely. So we’ll be interested in hearing more 

about the consultation process. 

 

But we’re hearing so much more about the financial views of 

seniors and vulnerable folk, that this is one I’m sure the public 

is very interested in hearing more about because I’m . . . even as 

an MLA, and it’s only just recently that people have come to 

me with questions around the Public Guardian, the Public 

Trustee and powers of attorney and all of that kind of thing, and 

what does that mean in terms of the provincial responsibility? 

 

We often just assume that everything will be looked after and it 

will be fine, but we know that often isn’t the case. And we want 

to make sure that people are looked after and sometimes they 

are, have limited financial resources, or in fact they may be 

quite well off. The situation is the same though, that they should 

not be taken advantage of. They should not be taken advantage 

of, and we have to make sure that is the case. 

 

Ironically though, I mean this bill does talk about the ability to 

make gifts, that the power of attorney, the attorney’s authority 

can extend to making gifts from the adult’s property. And this 

has been clarified in the bill. I’m quoting from the minister’s 

second reading debate. And that’s a very important area because 

that may be an area where it’s grey and fuzzy and we’re not 

sure if people are clear whether somebody can make a gift, how 

much can they make, and is there exploitation happening here? 

And the reverse is that if they’re . . . It’s quite appropriate to 

make gifts. So it’s not a bad thing to do that. So this is I think a 

worthwhile topic for exploring. And we’ll have more, we’ll 

have more questions on this. 

 

And then the other part that’s very interesting is that the Public 

Guardian and Trustee is given new powers to carry out 

investigations to ensure the accuracy of an accounting. And so 

if the accounting is not up to par, the court is given the power to 

remove the attorney. So this is very, very important. So while it 

seems to be a small and short bill, I think it’s very important. I 

think it’s one that we can think about in terms of our own 

families and our moms and dads, aunts and uncles who are 

maybe not able to make decisions as well as they have in the 

past, and there has been a power of attorney. And we want to 

make sure that everything is done up to standards, that the 

accounting is right and it is at a certain level that it’s easily 

understood and it’s done right. But at the same time, the idea of 

the gifts is an important one. I think that’s clear. 

 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4103 

Again, our job here tonight though while it’s . . . we reflect on 

the bills and we can just say yes, good or bad. But what are the 

consequences? Have the government in their consultations, (a) 

have they done consultations; (b) who have they consulted with 

and have they listened fully? Is this the complete suite of needs 

that many people have identified? I don’t know. We’ll be 

definitely looking into that. Because when you open up an Act 

like this, it’s important that we don’t come back to revisit it, 

you know, yearly, that here’s the time when we’re talking about 

this and it’s important that we get on with it.  

 

And as I said, you know, I’ve been to conferences about 

financial abuse of seniors, and we want to put a stop to this. 

And this kind of legislation is a good step forward in that way, 

but we want to make sure that it’s complete and that we’re not 

missing the boat when it comes to other issues that we should 

be talking about. 

 

So it’s one that, as I said, we can all relate to, and one that’s 

often a difficult discussion to have when we talk about powers 

of attorney and the Public Guardian and Trustee. The work they 

do, it’s not one that is often perceived as a positive, but I think 

it probably should be because we know these people are being 

looked after. And they’re our loved ones, and they should be 

cared for in a positive way. 

 

But I do think that we need to make sure that we have listened 

to all the different angles that people could bring forward, 

particularly when it comes to ways to have a financial 

mis-actions or actions that are not done with the right intent. 

And the whole avenue of gift giving is one such possibility. 

And again that whole sloppy accounting systems, you know, 

when we ask somebody to have the power of attorney, do they 

have the capacity to do that and will they do a good job? That’s 

the question at hand. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there will be lots 

of questions and lots of points that my colleagues would like to 

raise over the next weeks ahead. And we will be looking 

forward to seeing this in committee. I will be talking to a few 

people about this particularly because, as I said, in the last few 

weeks I’ve had people come forward with some particular 

questions on their own about this. And I think as our population 

ages this will be more and more a concern. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of Bill 113, The 

Powers of Attorney Amendment Act. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 114 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

The Deputy Speaker: — I once again recognize the member 

from Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

always wonder if you’re going to say, I barely recognize the 

member from Regina Elphinstone. But it’s always good to be 

recognized here on the floor of the people’s Assembly. 

 

Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 

Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 is at once a 

relatively small piece of legislation but has of course enormous 

implications, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

In reading over the second reading speech from the Minister of 

Justice as he’d introduced this piece of legislation in the Act, 

again it’s a pretty significant piece of legislation when you’re 

dealing with the way that . . . The end of a person’s life or the 

care that is provided when that person is no longer able to make 

informed decisions for themself is a pretty heavy subject but a 

subject that many, many families in this province of ours are 

well familiar with. And so, Mr. Speaker, when I read that more 

than 100 groups and individuals were consulted, including 

people in the area of health and mental health, advocacy groups 

for persons with disabilities, seniors groups, and many more, 

I’m glad to see that because it’s as serious a topic as we’ll 

consider in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and it certainly merits 

that serious consideration. 

 

In the second reading speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister 

references the fact that the Act will allow “. . . individuals to 

give advanced health care directives or to choose a person 

known as a proxy to make health care decisions for them in the 

event of their incapacity.” The minister goes on to state that: 

 

The Act also directs that the nearest relative can make 

health care decisions for an incapable person if there is no 

health care directive or proxy. If there is no nearest 

relative, two health care providers can make health care 

decisions. 

 

So these amendments being brought forward, Mr. Speaker, will 

hopefully close the gaps that have been identified in the existing 

legislation, but again providing for those powers to be executed 

in a way that works for the individual’s interest but balances out 

that need for response in these health care situations. 

 

Of the three gaps that are identified by the health care sector — 

and again referencing the 100 groups and individuals consulted 

— the first gap being identified involves decision making for 

day-to-day decisions respecting adults who are not capable of 

consenting to health care. Carrying on with the quote from the 

minister’s second reading speech: 

 

These are relatively minor decisions such as the decision 

to consent to dental work, for example. What constitutes a 

day-to-day decision will be listed in regulations after full 

consultation. The decision maker will be the caregiver if 

there is no readily available proxy or nearest relative. Mr. 

Speaker, again the regulations will prescribe who will be 

considered a caregiver. 

 



4104 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

So it begs the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of what 

those regulations will be and how those are constituted. We’ll 

be looking for those as we continue consideration of this 

legislation. We’ll be looking to get a better sense from the 

minister and officials as this legislation moves through the 

process as to precisely who are anticipated in those regulations. 

But again, Mr. Speaker, these are very serious decisions and 

demand very precise iteration for the people looking to put 

them to use. 

 

The second issue brought forward from the consultation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, “. . . concerns the ability to apply to admit a 

person to long-term care or accept placement of the person in 

long-term care.” Carrying on with the minister’s speech: 

 

Until now there was no clear legislation as to who would 

have the authority in this situation . . . the proposal is that 

the following persons could make the decision, in this 

order: personal guardian, proxy, nearest relative, or two 

treatment providers. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the seniors of this province who are, in the 

main, the individuals that will be affected by this legislation, 

you think about the different situations that present across the 

province, from seniors living in homes that with just a little bit 

of home care can make a better go of it and stay where they’re 

comfortable and where they’ve lived their lives, to leading up to 

crises points, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where it’s made painfully 

evident that that individual can no longer live in that home in a 

safe manner. Again who’s making the decisions around where 

that individual is going to be going? It’s very important to have 

that clearly outlined so that when you are as a family going 

though the kind of, what can be the kind of crisis entailed in the 

circumstances anticipated here, you need that information to be 

as clear as possible to do as good a job as you can for that 

person. 

 

The final of the three gaps identified by the legislation is the 

final amendment: 

 

. . . to clarify that an enduring power of attorney who has 

been appointed in accordance with The Powers of Attorney 

Act, 2002 does not have the authority to make health care 

decisions pursuant to this Act. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that’s the strict limitation. And 

delineation of those powers is very important because, again, 

these are decisions that have a very immediate impact on an 

individual’s life, and to make sure that the appropriate person is 

tasked with those decisions couldn’t be more important. 

 

I know that other of my colleagues will have questions for this 

legislation and that there’s some more work that we have to do 

in terms of not just seeking out . . . Again, if the hundred groups 

and individuals that is referenced by the minister, if that bears 

out, good on the minister and good on the government for 

making sure that consultation is there. But of course, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we’ll be doing our own due diligence as has 

been put forward to us as our job by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But with that, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 114, 

The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care 

Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

114, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care 

Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 115 — The Public 

Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

debate, Bill 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment 

Act, 2013, I just want to open up with a few comments. And I 

realize again where we’re going to go to protect our seniors and 

the bill changes some . . . modernizing the wording that we use 

today, and I guess more sensitive to wording that we would use 

today that’s acceptable to our seniors and to people in our 

province. 

 

But having said that, I want to talk about our seniors, how 

important it is, our seniors are to us in this province. And 

there’s seniors in this province facing many challenges. And I’ll 

be honest, the government hasn’t always done justice when it 

comes to dealing with our seniors, and I say that. But I’ll refer 

to the Bill and how important this Bill is to a name change and 

change of word. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s truly about the 

way seniors get treated — whether it’s long-term care, whether 

it’s more cost for drugs, more cost for taking an ambulance if 

they should need one in an emergency, whether it’s about 

affordability, whether it’s paying rents, whatever faces our 

seniors today, you know. 

 

And there are many challenges and frustration and concerns 

raised when I go back home. And you talk about respecting, and 

this is about respect and dignity, and that’s what our seniors 

want. And you know, they’re the pioneers. They’re the ones 

that have, you know, they’ve put in the hard work. They did 

their part for this province. And I know I think about my 

grandfather who was a war veteran and his brothers. They all 

did their part and they served. And they wanted to be treated 

with respect. And they want a better quality of life for 

themselves, for their children, and as their children even get 

older. 

 

So you know, this Bill talks about changing things and wording 

to accommodate, you know, and maybe provisions to say, yes it 

shows we used proper wording or wording that’s not as, you 

know — how do I want to say — insulting or making a senior 

feel . . . Already with the challenges they’re facing, it’s a 

wording that changes it to give them some respect that they ask 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4105 

for. And I agree with the changes in here. But sometimes, you 

know, it’s smoke and mirrors. And we can make little changes 

like this and that, you know, and maybe there are some good 

things going on in this piece of legislation and that will make 

some changes that protect seniors to make sure that nobody’s 

taking advantage of them. 

 

And nobody should take advantage of seniors, whether it’s 

changing names or having provisions, whether it’s a court order 

or whatever. Somebody looks after guardianship of a senior, 

their assets, what they have, what they’ve worked hard for that 

nobody . . . And I think this provision tries to change some of 

that to make sure that they are protected. And if that’s the case, 

that’s great. We say that. 

 

But having said that, I want to be clear. The record of this 

government has not always been . . . And we’ve heard it. We 

hear it time after time. Seniors come in. Families talking about 

seniors, the way seniors are being treated, disrespected, whether 

it’s call buttons not going off, whether they’re having to wait 

for services, that they . . . You know, that they respect those 

seniors, and not just in changing, modernizing some of the 

wording. There’s a lot more than just modernizing wording for 

our seniors. There’s a lot of respect that, I’ll be honest with you, 

they deserve. They deserve better. 

 

When we talk about it, and I, you know, I think about our 

leader. He’s talked about the growth plan and we want to pat 

ourselves on the back about how the province is doing so great. 

When it comes to our seniors, when it comes to our seniors, this 

government is failing our seniors. And they have to do a better 

job. They can sit here and say what they want. They can sit here 

and say what they want. 

 

And we can change the wording how you want it, but your 

actions and the actions that elders expect and our seniors expect 

by a government who pats themselves on the back and talks 

about the great things they are doing for this province . . . 

They’re doing? It’s about what the people of this province have 

been doing. It’s about what our seniors have been doing. And 

we should be respecting them and making sure they’re taken 

care of, not just with modernizing the wording to make sure that 

way. 

 

There’s a lot more work to be done, that they like to use. Well, 

start an action plan and get some work done. Because it’s time. 

It’s time. We’ve heard enough seniors talking about how 

they’re being treated, whether it’s in a hospital, long-term care. 

And I want to be clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I’ll go back 

to this Bill 115, and we’ll talk about it — but it isn’t about the 

front-line workers that we’re saying. And you know, and I’ve 

talked to some of them in P.A. [Prince Albert], and I’m 

watching what’s going on. And they’re doing their part, again 

just like we’ve heard families and entrepreneurs are doing their 

part in this province. Many people are doing their part. This 

government’s not doing their part. 

 

So we talk about our seniors. This government has to do a better 

job. You have to start respecting seniors, making sure that . . . 

They put in the hard work. They put in the time and they did 

their part. It’s time the government does their part and gets 

some action and gets some things done for our seniors in this 

province. 

Now having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there’s 

some provisions will give some protection, and that’s what 

they’re proposing in here, too, with a guardianship. And that’s 

fine, making sure we change some of the wording. But at the 

end of the day it’s clearly . . . That’s good. And these might be 

changes that are needed and the wording to . . . You know, 

some of the wording that was used 40, 50 years ago, you know, 

if you look at the way they worded things, yes, today maybe we 

wouldn’t look at it that way. And a senior wouldn’t appreciate 

being talked to like that. But having said that, we’ll change and 

modernize the words that we use today. That’s fine. 

 

But it’s also about the action. It’s not just about word change. 

It’s about the action — action of government, how you treat 

people. That tells a story. That’s the meaningful way you treat 

seniors. You make sure that they’re not suffering. You make 

sure that they have the staffing that’s there and the good job the 

staffing is doing, but it’s short. 

 

And we see, we hear the concerns that our seniors expect better 

care. We expect better care for our loved ones. We expect 

staffing that’s there to make sure the needs are met: that they’re 

getting fed three times a day, that they’re getting a bath, that 

they’re getting the provisions and the care that they come to 

respect in a province that talks about having so much, in a 

country that has so much. 

 

So this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has to do a better job. 

This may be a start with some wording and some changes. And 

I understand that, but clearly this government has to do better 

for our seniors. 

 

And at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn 

debate on Bill 115. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian 

and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:16.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4095 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4095 

 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4098 

 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4100 

 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4100 

 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4101 

 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4102 

 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4103 

 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4104 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4098 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


