




















































Hansard: March 07, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 29A  THURSDAY, MARCH 7, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2575 

 March 7, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I have the honour of introducing some 

women who are leaders and role models in Saskatchewan. 

Joining us today from the Women Entrepreneurs of 

Saskatchewan is Diane Weighill. Thank you. We also have 

Ballie Omar. We have Jana Al-Sagheer here, and Ramona 

Wijesinghe from the Regina Immigrant Women Centre. And 

last but certainly not least, I’d like to introduce Sharon Baldwin 

and Thelfa Yee-Toi from the Regina branch of the Canadian 

Federation of University Women. And with them is Pat 

Faulconbridge from the Status of Women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is International Women’s Day, a 

celebration of economic, political, and social achievements of 

women everywhere. As a female MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and a cabinet minister, I’m proud to help 

celebrate this important event and I want to thank these six 

women for setting a wonderful example in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m going to ask all members to help me join in welcoming 

Diane, Ballie, Jana, Ramona, Sharon, and Thelfa to their 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition it is my pleasure to welcome everybody 

from the Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan, the Regina 

Immigrant Women Centre, the Canadian Federation of 

University Women, and of course Pat from the Status of 

Women office. 

 

The work that you do in the community and around the 

province is really important to all of us. I know, as a female 

legislator, the work that you do informs much of the work that I 

do or that we do, that we bring to the House. And you serve as 

great role models. 

 

As we know, this year the theme in Saskatoon is around 

mentoring, and I know that many of you take that job very 

seriously in ensuring that younger women or women who are 

stepping into leadership roles have the support that they need. 

 

So thank you on this, the day before International Women’s 

Day, for all the work that you do. And I ask all my colleagues 

to join with me too, and the minister, in welcoming you to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and to the rest of the Assembly I’d like to introduce guests 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker: Marilyn Braun-Pollon, 

vice-president of Prairie and Agri-business with the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business; and her associate, 

Shannon Lussier, business counsellor for the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business. 

 

Ms. Braun-Pollon serves as a government relations and media 

spokesperson for the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business’s 5,250 members here in Saskatchewan. They are here 

today to join with us in the introduction of Bill 86, The 

Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act, our red tape 

reduction bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like all members to welcome these folks to the Assembly 

here this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

also welcome the people from the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business. We have relied on their advice and 

information over many years, both in opposition but also when 

we’re in government. And I know that the work that we’re 

going to be seeing in the bill today will build on work that’s 

been happening for many years within government to make 

sure that you look at the regulations and rules that are there. But 

I want make a special point of welcoming Marilyn, as she and I 

share many long-term characteristics. And she’ll have to 

explain that for us. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in relation to cellphone coverage, 

Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, along with the hamlet of 

Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nations as well as the 

community of Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring 

communities in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 

from all throughout the province. We want to thank them for 

their support. But especially the amount of people that have 

signed the petition that I’m presenting from these communities 

is certainly impressive. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I present 

the petition. Thank you very much. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would like to 

recognize International Women’s Day taking place tomorrow, 

March 8th. 

 

The official United Nations theme for this year’s International 

Women’s Day is, A promise is a promise: Time for action to 

end violence against women. This theme is particularly 

important in Saskatchewan with the recent release of a report 

from Statistics Canada which shows that our province has 

approximately double the national rate of violence against 

women — absolutely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s important in light of this report too, to thank the staff and 

volunteers at Saskatchewan’s 14 crisis shelters and five second 

stage shelters throughout the province that work tirelessly on 

behalf of the women and children who are impacted by 

violence. Their leadership in communities reflect the caring 

Saskatchewan that we are so proud to be a part of. 

 

International Women’s Day is also a time to reflect on the gains 

that women have made throughout the years. Women continue 

to enter into non-traditional fields of work and increase their 

participation in political and public life, but we still have much 

work to do. 

 

I would like to ask all members of this House to join in 

acknowledging International Women’s Day and thanking the 

staff and volunteers of the transition houses throughout the 

province for their dedication to and their advocacy on behalf of 

the women and the children in our province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

advise all members that tomorrow is International Women’s 

Day. International Women’s Day is observed on March 8th to 

celebrate the economic, political, and social achievements of 

women everywhere. In Saskatchewan, this year’s theme — 

Women as Mentors: Building Leadership Together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, International Women’s Day is an important 

opportunity for us to celebrate the many accomplishments of 

women in our province. For example, we know that women are 

playing an increasingly important role in the economic growth 

of Saskatchewan. According to a report by Sask Trends 

Monitor from last April, we know that the 71.7 per cent 

employment rate in Saskatchewan for women aged 15 to 64 is 

well above the national average of 68.9 per cent. And more and 

more of these working women are assuming leadership roles in 

their respective organizations. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, in every corner of this province, women 

are working together to share their knowledge, build their 

businesses, lend their voices to boards and committees, and 

help our province grow. Their contributions are helping to 

make Saskatchewan the best place to live, to work, to raise our 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 

recognizing International Women’s Day. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Remembering a Canadian Music Icon 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The girls are out to Bingo and the boys are gettin’ stinko, 

And we think no more of Inco on a Sudbury Saturday 

night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the famous lyrics of a Canadian icon 

country folk legend, Stompin’ Tom Connors. My good friend 

and Canadian performer Gordon Stobbe often described 

Stompin’ Tom, whose songs and lyrics are part of the Canadian 

fabric, as the Shakespeare of Canada. 

 

Stompin’ Tom was a patriot who spent his life listening to the 

experiences of everyday Canadians and shared those stories 

through music. Connors was born on February 9th, 1936, in St. 

John, New Brunswick, but spent the majority of his life touring 

throughout Canada. And he died Wednesday, yesterday, at the 

age of 77. 

 

In his own last letter to fans, Stompin’ Tom described his 

journey as: 

 

It was a long hard bumpy road, but this great country kept 

me inspired with its beauty, character, and spirit, driving 

me to keep marching on and devoted to sing about its 

people and places that make Canada the greatest country 

in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to encourage my fellow members to 

take a moment to remember Stompin’ Tom. I would encourage 

each member to take some time to listen to “Bud the Spud” or 

“The Hockey Song” or any of the iconic songs that Stompin’ 

Tom wrote, and remember the incredible love he had for his 

country. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Stompin’ Tom 

Connors for the gift of his music and his dedication to the 

people of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, today I rise in the Assembly to 

honour the Canadian icon, Stompin’ Tom, who sadly passed 

away yesterday. Stompin’ Tom was a Canadian country folk 

legend that was well known to so many Canadians, especially 

hockey fans. His icon hockey song was often heard playing 

over the sound system at NHL [National Hockey League] 

games across the country, getting both fans and players excited 

for the game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Stompin’ Tom now has 61 recorded albums, 10 of 

which have yet to be released to the public. His songs will 

continue to be made available worldwide and remain a legacy 

to his career, his life, and his beloved country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his astounding accomplishments also include 

receiving the Order of Canada, both the Queen’s Golden and 

Diamond Jubilee Medals, and he was the subject of a postage 

stamp in 2009. 

 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join me in honouring this 

great Canadian and offering condolences to his family, friends, 

and fans. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Nurse Leadership Conference 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this week nurses from across Saskatchewan are taking part in a 

conference to discuss leadership in the nursing profession. This 

includes registered nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, and 

licensed practical nurses. They work at all levels within the 

health system, from front-line caregivers to managers, 

educators, and policy-makers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend these nurses for participating 

in this conference. I believe it offers them a great opportunity to 

learn more about their leadership role in the changing health 

care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nurse leadership is vitally important if we want to 

succeed in transforming our health care system. Today we have 

a shared commitment to support the principles of better health, 

better care, better value, and better teams. Mr. Speaker, I can’t 

stress enough the valuable role that nurses play in the health 

care team in Saskatchewan and providing quality care for 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking our 

nurses for their ongoing contributions to the health care system 

in this province, and I wish them the best at their conference. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Entertainer Honoured for Contributions to Province 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

recognize entertainer, actor, and humanitarian, Mr. Bob 

McGrath, who was presented with the Saskatchewan 

Distinguished Service Award in Saskatoon on February 28th. 

 

Mr. McGrath is well known everywhere for his role on the cast 

of Sesame Street, but is also an icon right here in Saskatchewan 

for his many years of charitable involvement with Kinsmen 

Telemiracle. Through his work hosting Telemiracle 36 times, 

Mr. McGrath has graciously assisted thousands of 

Saskatchewan individuals, families, and organizations by 

helping it to raise nearly $100 million. Mr. Speaker, his work 

has had a huge impact because these funds enable 

Saskatchewan people to acquire special needs equipment that 

improves their quality of life greatly. 

 

The Premier presented Mr. McGrath the Saskatchewan 

Distinguished Service Award, which recognizes non-residents 

of the province who have made outstanding contributions to 

Saskatchewan and the development of the provincial economy, 

culture, and our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that this Assembly recognize Mr. McGrath’s 

distinguished service to the people of this great province and to 

thank him for all that he has done for Saskatchewan’s most 

vulnerable citizens. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Yorkton Receives Sustainable Community Award 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

happy to rise in this Assembly today to recognize and applaud 

the city of Yorkton on receiving an award from the Federation 

of Canadian Municipalities. The city of Yorkton received the 

Sustainable Community Award that recognizes projects that 

demonstrate environmental responsibility and excellence in best 

practices as it relates to sustainable community development. 

 

Yorkton received the award in the water category for their 

municipally led water treatment plant project built in 

partnership with the federal and provincial governments. It 

focuses on treatment, distribution, consumption, and quality of 

water. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this innovative project ensures that backwash 

water is not flushed into the sewage system where it would 

substantially and unnecessarily increase the amount of water 

being treated in the sewage treatment plant. This project has 

saved the city $3 million on infrastructure already, and it is 

estimated it will save over $6 million in treatment costs over the 

life of the water treatment plant. When this project is finished, 

the plant can treat up to 22 million litres of water per day, and 

the project site will have public green space area, including a 

trout pond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members applaud the city of 

Yorkton on their award from the Federation of Canadian 

Municipalities and on their innovative project. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, people are concerned about the P3 

[public-private partnership] model for private building, 

operation, and ownership of public facilities and services. The 

NDP [New Democratic Party] MLAs have been listening 

carefully, and we hear that people are worried that the city of 

Regina is being forced into building a new water treatment 

plant via a P3 privatization model because federal funding 

comes with privatization strings attached. With the federal 

government’s restrictions on accessing infrastructure dollars 

only through P3s, they are sending a clear message to 

municipalities — it’s their way or no way. 

 

The Premier announced last fall his plans for SaskBuilds, a 

no-money-down, expensive way to build infrastructure like 

water treatment plants and schools. To the minister of 

Municipal Affairs: will the province follow the federal model 

and force municipalities to use a SaskBuilds P3 model to access 

provincial infrastructure resources? 



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly over the 

last number of years, the last number of years we’ve seen 

growth in this province, unprecedented growth — 80,000 more 

people moving to the province. And with growth, Mr. Speaker, 

comes challenges, challenges with infrastructure whether it’s at 

the municipal level. I know the city of Regina is looking at a 

water treatment plant, and they’re looking at options, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’re looking at infrastructure throughout the province. What 

we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is looking at all the options that will 

fund infrastructure, as other provinces have done. Other 

provinces, most every other province in Canada has a P3 

project, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s municipal or provincial. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, even their brothers and sisters in Manitoba 

welcome P3 projects, Mr. Speaker. It’s only the tired, old NDP 

that don’t want to look at anything positive or new in this 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s why there’s 

only seven of them sitting over there right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to see that that minister 

has challenges. Mr. Speaker, the concerns about using only P3 

privatization models are wide and varied. Some are concerned 

about the ownership of public infrastructure, arguing that if 

taxpayers are paying for a new water treatment plant, they 

should also own the building at the end of the day. Others raise 

concerns about how expensive the building model can be. P3s 

virtually always cost more for the taxpayer in the long run. 

 

New Democrats believe that Saskatchewan municipalities make 

sustainable, smart growth choices when they’re given the 

chance. To the minister: why doesn’t the Sask Party trust 

municipalities to decide what’s right for them rather than 

pushing its own agenda? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, in most 

other jurisdictions, whether it’s the provincial government or 

the municipal governments in those jurisdictions, have entered 

into P3 agreements. You just have to look in Winnipeg, for 

example, where the mayor speaks glowingly of P3s. Mr. 

Speaker, in Alberta they’ve been used many, many times on 

major infrastructure undertakings such as ring roads around 

Edmonton, a ring road around Calgary, Mr. Speaker. The 

savings have been huge, Mr. Speaker. We are looking at those 

examples to further some of the infrastructure challenges we 

have here. We are not ruling out P3s — absolutely not, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact we’ll be moving forward with P3s. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic because when they 

were in government, they had a P3 secretariat in CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. Or does he forget 

that as well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the mayor of Regina 

said the city was applying to the federal government with a P3 

model because they could only access federal funding by 

proposing this privatization. That kind of limitation is not about 

funding. It’s about a government blindly forcing their agenda of 

privatization. Here’s what the CJME radio reported from 

Monday’s meeting: 

 

During Monday’s meeting Mayor Michael Fougere 

admitted he doesn’t necessarily agree philosophically with 

the idea of P3s. The vote hinged on the practicality of 

securing money from the feds. He and several other 

councillors admitted they aren’t comfortable with the 

federal government essentially forcing municipalities to 

take on a P3 which have proven contentious in the past. 

 

My question to the minister: why would the Sask Party go 

down an uncomfortable road for our elected municipal leaders? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t quite 

know the basis for the question. I mean there’s PPP Canada 

[Public-Private Partnership Canada], Mr. Speaker. Many 

jurisdictions have applied to PPP Canada. PPP Canada has put 

out resources on the municipal level in other provinces on the 

provincial level, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would say it would only be the NDP that would not want to 

take advantage of a program that’s helping new municipalities 

and provincial governments deal with some of the infrastructure 

needs, Mr. Speaker. It would be really interesting to see, if they 

ever got back in government, would they completely ignore the 

program which is hundreds and hundreds of millions put out by 

the federal government for P3 projects, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Other provinces have entered into agreements. Other 

municipalities have entered into agreement, Mr. Speaker, and 

we hope to do the same here in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has been down this 

road before. You might remember the P3 secretariat, Mr. 

Speaker, a pet project started by the Sask Party government 

after the 2007 election. The P3 secretariat failed and was 

quickly abandoned, but the Sask Party government is stubborn 

and refuses to admit its mistakes. 

 

It’s wasting taxpayer money in resurrecting the P3 secretariat 

scheme this time called SaskBuilds. This government is blindly 

bulldozing ahead with a plan that has already failed. It’s 

holding municipal support as ransom until municipalities get 

behind the Sask Party’s privatization agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: will he stop 

SaskBuilds and design a co-operative, merit-based approach for 

municipal infrastructure funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to speak for 

what the Premier would have to say on this subject, but I think 

we’re moving very positively leading forward, Mr. Speaker, 

with SaskBuilds. SaskBuilds has been set up for about the last 

four or five months. We are exploring financing options for 

many of the infrastructure needs that we have here in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I find it really interesting. When the Leader of the 

Opposition asks me, do I remember the P3 secretariat, I would 

put that to him. Does he remember the P3 secretariat that they 

set up when they were in government, Mr. Speaker? Did they 

set it up because they were going to completely ignore any of 

the information, or were they intentionally moving forward 

with a P3, perhaps in the future? They seem to forget a lot of 

stuff about ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] and now he’s forgetting a lot of stuff about P3s 

as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Creative Industries 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Almost a year ago, 

the Sask Party cut off at the knees an important part of the 

creative industries of our province; they killed the film and 

television employment tax credit in the provincial budget. Since 

then we’ve seen the stubbornness of the Sask Party, as they’ve 

been willing to sit back and watch the exodus from our 

province of film workers and their families. After there was 

strong opposition to their short-sighted decision, the 

government scrambled to fix their huge mistake and announced 

a consultation process with all creative industries. 

 

So it begs the question: why in this consultation process has the 

government failed once again to listen to the needs of the film 

industry, an industry Saskatchewan people said loud and clear 

that they support? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

and thank you to the hon. member for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, this government for the better part of the last six to 

eight months has been consulting with our creative industries 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan in finding out where 

government could offer a new mechanism for support in the 

creative industry sector. 

 

Now during that consultation process, Mr. Speaker, SMPIA 

[Saskatchewan Media Production Industry Association], who 

represents the film industry in this province, put forth a 

proposal suggesting what this new mechanism should look like, 

and I quote, “The program needs to place a greater emphasis on 

indigenous production.” Mr. Speaker, Creative Saskatchewan is 

going to do that. It said, “It should support greater 

Saskatchewan expenditures to promote industry sustainability,” 

Mr. Speaker. Creative Saskatchewan is going to do that. 

 

It says, “It needs to meet sector requirements while not 

participating in what is seen as a bidding war.” Mr. Speaker, 

what we’re seeing in the province of British Columbia right 

now is that government is going to spend in excess of $300 

million this year in film tax credits, Mr. Speaker, and the 

industry out there is saying they’re at 80 per cent 

unemployment. We’re not going to participate in that bidding 

war, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also said, SMPIA said, “It cannot be a tax-related initiative,” 

Mr. Speaker, Creative Saskatchewan will not be a tax-related 

initiative. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People in the film 

industry, despite their understandable mistrust of this 

government, participated in good faith in these consultations. 

Many of them stuck around even without employment because 

they want to stay in Saskatchewan where their families and 

their roots are, and they had to remain hopeful that the 

government would heed their concerns. But once again, their 

needs were ignored. For example, the government is taking one 

of the last vestiges of support for the film industry, SaskFilm, 

and reallocating its funding into the broader Creative 

Saskatchewan. How can the minister get up and say with a 

straight face that Creative Saskatchewan supports the film 

industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, what we do know with 

respect to the film tax credit, it is in existence in this fiscal year 

as we speak. Mr. Speaker, this government, on behalf of the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, are going to spend just in excess of 

$8 million this year in support of the refundable film 

employment tax credit. Mr. Speaker, that’s a higher amount 

than in nine of the previous 14 years that the film employment 

tax credit has been in existence in this province. We also know 

we’re going to spend probably an approximate $5 million next 

fiscal year and $3 million the year after. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Arts Board 

has repurposed $1 million in a loan program they had in 

existence to provide as an incentive now, as a grant program for 

our creative sector. Mr. Speaker, this government is spending 

more on the film industry this year than in nine of the previous 

14 years that the film employment tax credit has been in 

existence. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we know that of the 496 productions 

that received funding through the film employment tax credit in 

the last 14 years, 288 of them, Mr. Speaker, have received 

$60,000 or less with respect to that film employment tax credit. 

Right now they have an additional million dollars that they can 

apply for, with a $60,000 limit to help out those indigenous 

production companies here in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. We are not turning our back on the creative 

sector. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

Ms. Chartier: — But you have turned our back on the film 

industry. The minister does not seem to get how very different 

the creative industries are. For instance, marketing for a film 

happens long before a film is even produced. In the music 

industry, the marketing happens after the recordings are made. 

 

The governments new one-size-fits-all grant program is not a 

workable solution for the majority in the film industry. But I am 

hearing from people across the creative industries that they are 

happy to collaborate, but the only way that works is if there are 

actually resources to do so. 

 

Can the minister assure those in the creative industries that 

there will be new dollars attached to Creative Saskatchewan in 

the upcoming budget to truly support all the creative industries? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, we have been working in a 

collaborative fashion with the creative industries in this 

province. We’ve had some very, very fruitful discussions. And 

I’ve had many meetings with the hon. member, the critic, and 

have kept her apprised of the situation as we’ve moved along, 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to these negotiations. 

 

Now I do know that the NDP think that there’s a pot of money, 

an unlimited pot outside the legislature somewhere, Mr. 

Speaker, that we can provide funding on an ad hoc basis for any 

program in the province, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact we 

know, we know what the Leader of the Opposition said a year 

ago. The Leader of the Opposition, the official position of the 

NDP, said they would take money from farmers and they would 

take money from municipalities to fund the film industry in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to do that. I can assure 

the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, we have provided an additional 

$1 million in this fiscal year, and she can stay tuned for the 

budget on March 20th. I think she’ll be pleasantly surprised. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Community Pastures 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I asked yesterday if 

the Minister of Agriculture would sit down and listen to the 

Community Pasture Patrons Association and hear out their 

reasonable request for a program that works. Instead of saying 

he’s listening, it was disappointing to hear a minister of the 

Crown express partisan criticism of a democratically elected 

leader of a farm organization. It’s not a very good start to 

building a working relationship with a new patrons association, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I will ask again. The patrons association are very concerned 

with the aggressive timeline this government has set for 

off-loading the individual pastures. To the minister: will he stop 

with the partisan insults and respectfully consider the concerns 

of the Community Pasture Patrons Association? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question. We certainly are in the process of 

trying to set up a meeting with Mr. McCreary, but at the 

meeting in Saskatoon, the public meeting of pasture patrons and 

others where I was invited to speak, I made it very clear that 

regardless of what Mr. McCreary’s group does, we will be 

dealing directly with the pasture patrons. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what 

the Community Pasture Patrons Association is, is the patrons, 

so I’m glad to hear that the minister will be dealing with them 

directly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the timeline for transitioning these PFRA [Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration] pastures to the patrons is 

just not workable. The Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association 

passed a resolution last month. They called on this government 

to delay the transition of the first 10 pastures for another year. 

These producers know the timeline is unworkable unless the 

province sits down and figures out the right transition plan. And 

the Stock Growers Association passed a resolution last May 

that they want to see management of the PFRA pasture system 

be passed on to the province or patron management. These 

producers know the PFRA management was key to the 

pasture’s success. 

 

Why won’t the minister listen to the patrons association, the 

Cattlemen’s Association, and the Stock Growers Association 

about the timelines and process? Why won’t he listen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question as well. I’ve made it very clear on 

numerous occasions that we have negotiated an extra year with 

the federal government. We did that in the middle of the 

summer. Originally the first five pastures were due to be 

transferred January 1st, 2013, now no pastures will be 

transferred until 2014. That is one additional year, Mr. Speaker. 

We negotiated that with the federal government, and I’m not 

sure what more the member wants. 

 

We’ve asked the federal government if they’re interested in 

further setting back the program another year and there is 

certainly no interest in that on their behalf. It’s not our 

timetable, Mr. Speaker, it’s the federal government’s. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I do commend 

the minister for the hard work he’s done in getting those 

timelines extended to date. I know that’s a good effort. 

 

The minister says that it’s all about the patrons best interests but 

his actions do belie his words. The Manitoba government, on 

the other hand, has offered a common sense and balanced 

arrangement for the taxpayers and the patrons. These patrons 

have been encouraged to form a provincial organization that 

will oversee the management of each individual pasture. 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

They’re not being charged new rents because the government 

recognizes they are getting good value under the federal 

program and want to see it continue, Mr. Speaker. In addition 

and equally important, there will be no job loss for the 

managers who help maintain the herds. 

 

What is the minister’s problem with following the common 

sense, reasonable model of our neighbours in Manitoba? Why 

can’t he take that to the producers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate the question. I always enjoy an opportunity to clarify 

some of these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not going to run the 1.6 million acres of 

additional pastures that we’ve received back from the PFRA 

system. It’s not the most economical or efficient way on behalf 

of the patrons. If we operate these pastures, we know that the 

costs will be substantial to the patrons. If they operate them 

themselves, they can build in some efficiencies that we just 

can’t do as government. And we are not going to absorb the 

costs of operating these pastures as the PFRA did. We have 

taxpayers other than just the patrons of the pastures to be 

responsible to as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All along the 

minister has said the province cannot design a cost-recovery 

model to operate the community pastures. However the 

minister’s expecting producers, many who are nearing the end 

of their farming careers, to dip into their retirement savings to 

buy lands and then operate these pastures on top of that. Based 

on the model that’s currently being proposed, that’s completely 

unaffordable.  

 

The minister can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. Why on the 

one hand is the minister saying the government can’t afford the 

community pastures, and on the other hand tell the patrons they 

can somehow afford to operate them on their own? Which is it, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — We’re not asking the producers to raise 

the money to purchase these pastures, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve 

done right from the start is give the producers an option to 

purchase them if they so desire. Otherwise we will lease them 

to the patrons groups at the same rate that the province leases 

pasture land, similar pasture land to individuals. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Prince Albert Bridge 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Since 

the fall sitting, the Saskatchewan Party finally released its 

choice to not proceed with a second bridge in Prince Albert. 

This is after the city had to go to the extent of launching a 

campaign to build a second bridge. 

That campaign was backed up by the chamber of commerce, 

the RMs [rural municipality] around the city, and of course all 

the people who live in and around Prince Albert. And they all 

know that a second bridge is essential for the well-being of the 

entire region. The Sask Party government has totally abandoned 

Prince Albert and they refuse to listen to all of the voices 

calling for a second bridge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party abandoned the city of 

Prince Albert and refused to even consider building that second 

bridge? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructures. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 

today is recycle day, Mr. Speaker. So we’ve answered a number 

of these questions, whether it’s in Ag or in Highways, before 

but we’ll take another shot at it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a study was done up in Prince Albert where we 

put some money in the city of Prince Albert and a couple of the 

RMs put money in. It wasn’t driven by the Ministry of 

Highways or any of the municipalities. It was a joint study: 

combined, Mr. Speaker, to cover whether a bridge was needed, 

a second bridge was needed in Prince Albert.  

 

That study came back, Mr. Speaker. It says that the bridge right 

now as it is will serve the needs of that area for a number of 

years. Not to say that if there is huge economic growth — 

which there probably will be under our government over the 

next number of years, Mr. Speaker — that a second bridge 

couldn’t be looked at into the future. But in the forecast that 

they’ve put forward, Mr. Speaker, it said that there wasn’t a 

second bridge.  

 

I would challenge the member opposite: if they had a study 

commissioned and it was clear that the second bridge wasn’t 

needed, would they put taxpayers’ money into a second bridge? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll tell the people of Prince 

Albert that the minister called their project a recycled project, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a very important, a very important issue for the entire 

northern part of our province and for that region, Mr. Speaker. 

In 2011 the member from Prince Albert Northcote said, “One 

big thing that I won’t let drop off the table is that we need a 

second bridge as we continue to grow, and I will push hard.” 

 

Since then those local Sask Party MLAs hid in their bunkers so 

they wouldn’t have to repeat their record. Then they crawl out 

of hiding to make a big non-announcement, Mr. Speaker, a big 

non-announcement. The member from Prince Albert Carlton 

told a local paper, quote, well pre-election and during the 

election campaign, I was very strong on the second bridge for 

Prince Albert. 

 

Why won’t the two members from Prince Albert stand up for 

their constituents and support that second bridge for Prince 

Albert and region? 



2582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will say that both 

members from Prince Albert and members from around Prince 

Albert have pushed hard, Mr. Speaker. They have told us, Mr. 

Speaker, that you know, we need to look at that. We have done 

that. We have looked at it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I find it very, very curious. The member opposite that asked 

the question was the minister of Highways in the former NDP 

government, and what did he get done for northern 

Saskatchewan? Absolutely nothing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party MLAs for 

Prince Albert and area have literally done nothing for the 

second bridge, nothing at all. They are abandoning their 

constituents, just like the Sask Party is abandoning Prince 

Albert. The member for Northcote said just days before the 

provincial election that the second bridge is inevitable but now 

they say otherwise. We in the NDP know a second bridge is 

needed for the economy, for the safety of drivers, and for the 

future growth of the city and the entire area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Minister of Highways and this Premier: 

when will this government start listening to Saskatchewan 

people and focus on the real infrastructure needs like the P.A. 

[Prince Albert] bridge instead of pet projects like the Premier’s 

new hardwood flooring or three more politicians? Will you 

stand up for the people of P.A.? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

When he had the chance to get a bridge done in Prince Albert, 

he didn’t do it. When we first talked about three more 

politicians, he was for it, Mr. Speaker. You know, he’s all over 

the map, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the 

MLAs from Prince Albert and surrounding area work extremely 

hard, an awful lot harder than the MLAs that were from that 

area for the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member opposite has got a loud voice, and he’s yelling 

from his seat. And the member from behind from Cumberland’s 

yelling from his seat, Mr. Speaker. What did they get done in 

their constituencies when they were in power? Not hardly 

anything, Mr. Speaker. In fact in Prince Albert they tore apart 

the bridge, and they wouldn’t even repave it, Mr. Speaker. That 

was Prince Albert’s responsibility to pave it. You wouldn’t 

even fix the bridge that was in place. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 86 — The Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move Bill No. 86, The Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Economy first reading of Bill No. 86, The Regulatory 

Modernization and Accountability Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Passage of Bill No. 85 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure today to have a private members’ debate on this very 

important piece of legislation that’s before us in the House. And 

it’s important that we think of it as a significant piece of 

legislation that will govern how our workplaces operate over 

the decades ahead. And we must have that second look at it to 

make sure we are doing exactly the right thing that is needed to 

move our province forward. Now our province has been going 

forward. We all know that. We acknowledge that, and we think 

that’s a wonderful thing. But it has done so, it has done so 

under the existing labour laws that we see today. 

 

So we’re asking the question, why the rush? And many people 

are joining in and asking that very basic question. In fact one of 

the questions I have right off the bat is, who is standing with 

this government to say let’s get this done by May long 

weekend? We’re not hearing that outcry that says it’s good, it’s 

done. It’s perfect, let’s move ahead. And in fact we’re asked . . . 

A lot of people are saying, let’s take some time. Let’s get this 

right. Nobody is saying that the concept of one large piece of 

legislation is wrong. But people are saying, let’s get it right. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that what was really telling was a 

letter that came out yesterday from Hugh Wagner. It was 

published in the Leader-Post, and I want to refer to it because I 

think it sets the stage. Now this minister, unlike the previous 

Labour minister, had actually involved both business and labour 

leaders in an advisory capacity to make sure they get the 

legislation right. And in fact they had several meetings, I 

understand, and I understand there was great common 

understanding. But the issue remains: some of these folks think 

we’re moving too fast. And I want to read from this 

commentary that was printed in the Leader-Post yesterday, 

March 6th. And the heading is “New Sask. labour law: why the 

rush?” And it’s written by Hugh Wagner, and I quote: 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2583 

As labour leaders, business leaders and government we 

have a responsibility to work together to maintain a stable, 

balanced, and fair work environment for all people in 

Saskatchewan. We have been charged to preserve the 

rights and freedoms of choice we all enjoy resulting from 

the solid foundation of labour legislation we have built 

together over the past 70 years. 

 

So he sets the stage in saying this is really a critical piece of 

work, that we have to make sure we get it right. And there’s 

been a lot of steps that have gone before this that really makes 

us ask the question: are we in too big of a rush to do this? 

 

And I just want to take a step back and talk about how this was 

launched. You know, actually it was ironic because during the 

campaign we did not hear anything about this kind of omnibus 

legislation. And in fact it was launched last May 2nd, and a bit 

of a surprise. Nobody saw this coming. Nobody had asked for 

it. The minister couldn’t answer the question: who’s calling for 

such a piece of legislation? A lot of those questions were left 

unanswered. And so the summer was spent in response to “A 

Consultation Paper on the Renewal of Labour Legislation in 

Saskatchewan,” a relatively thin piece of work, but it had 

180-some questions and some were quite wide-ranging; some 

were quite alarmist. 

 

And I know the minister said that some . . . They had not really 

had any intention of actually following through when they 

talked about the stat holidays, that type of thing — do we have 

too many stat holidays? They had no intention of cancelling stat 

holidays. But it left a lot of people wondering what was really 

behind this government’s motive to do this, and why. Why the 

hurry? Because essentially what had happened was that people 

were to respond to this and other points that they wanted to 

raise by the end of July. And of course announcing at the 

beginning of May, ending in July, that 90-day window really 

was problematic because of course as you know, July in 

Saskatchewan is seen as a holiday month. The kids are out of 

school. People are travelling, enjoying the warm weather. And 

it wasn’t really the best consultation process. And that was a 

concern we raised that they weren’t going to get the best work. 

 

And in fact the only way you could provide feedback to this 

government was through a written response. This government 

had no interest in actually going out and talking to the people 

and talking to all sorts of people. They were going to just let the 

mail come in. And of course we saw it. Apparently there was 

quite a significant number of responses. Many, many — in fact 

we understand the number is over 2,000 — were actually a 

photocopy of a fax that was sent in. So there’s some questions 

about how credible was the response but, fair enough, they are 

the government. They took it, and then we all went away until 

early December, on the Tuesday two days before the wrap-up 

of the session, to actually see the legislation. 

 

And of course that was a real problem because we just didn’t 

have time to respond in the winter session at all. Of course we 

understood why they took so long because there was an awful 

lot of work to do. Here you have some . . . Now they were 

looking at 15 pieces of legislation. In the end 12 pieces were 

essentially used. We understand that actually the number is 

closer to over 30. Thirty-three pieces of legislation is impacted 

by the new bill, which is some 184 pages. And of course how 

many hundreds of regulations will be impacted as well? It’s a 

huge piece. It’s a huge piece. And we’re saying, let’s take the 

time to get it right. We’re not saying that, stop it; throw it out. 

We’re saying, let’s fully understand what the consequences are. 

 

Now what is interesting, yesterday in the House I asked the 

question . . . For example, the government in its press release 

and information that it sent out at the final days of the session 

about what was in the bill and what was going to be out of the 

old legislation, highlighted some things but clearly didn’t have 

— and it is a communications problem — didn’t highlight all 

the things that were being left out. So yesterday I asked about 

Sunday, Sunday being now out of the labour standards. And of 

course that, it may be a faith issue, but we also think and 

perhaps even bigger of importance, more importance, is the fact 

it’s really about work-life balance, work-life balance, because 

we know Sunday is the anchor of the weekend. It’s a day that 

the schools are closed. 

 

Now the minister said, and this is what he replied — and it 

seemed like he was fully aware so it wasn’t an unintended 

consequence; it was intended — that they would remove the 

Sunday and that we would then be having pretty much an 

unstructured weekend throughout the week. 

 

He says, and I quote: 

 

There have been court challenges with regard to Sunday 

being a religious holiday and the Act has been amended in 

compliance with rulings of the courts in our province and 

elsewhere. 

 

So we know though, there has been battles about Sunday and 

there has been battles about Sunday opening. And that has been 

an issue around the faith issue. We’re not sure if there’s been 

challenges around Sunday as part of the weekend, but the 

minister seemed to imply that across Canada no other province 

has Sunday as part of a designated, as part of their days of rest. 

In fact we know of three other provinces, three other provinces 

where it is the case that Sunday remains as part of the weekend. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re not getting clear answers from this 

government. We’re not getting straight answers about this 

government. So we are nervous about what are going to be the 

implications of this bill. 

 

And as well, another example of the government not giving 

straight answers, when we asked about this in May, about how 

much was this going to cost, and the minister was very clear, 

very clear that the costs of this were going to be absorbed by 

the existing labour budget, that they could do everything 

in-house and there would be no extra cost. But we soon found 

out when we got back to the legislature in October, November 

that that was not the case, that in fact that it was going to cost at 

least $700,000 more, at least $700,000. And we don’t know 

how much more, and what will be the impact on the budget in a 

couple of weeks. 

 

My guess is that we’re going to be hovering around $1 million 

for this project that was sold to us as essentially being no cost 

because they had everything in-house. And that clearly wasn’t 

the case. It clearly wasn’t the case. So we’re saying, is this well 

thought out? Has this been well researched? And why not take 



2584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

the time to do a good job because it is so clearly, clearly 

important to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Now I want to say, to read a little further from Mr. Wagner’s 

commentary because it’s so critical that we get this right. And 

this is how labour and business view it, and I quote: 

 

We are all part of the “Saskatchewan advantage” and the 

biggest economic boom in our province’s history. We 

have the lowest unemployment rate in the country and 

more people are moving to our province than ever before. 

 

[All of this has been done] All of this has been achieved 

under our current labour legislation — there clearly is no 

crisis requiring a hasty fix. 

 

He goes on to say, “modernization . . .” And I quote: 

 

Modernization of laws is a good thing, but it requires 

thoughtful and inclusive review and that will take time. 

 

There is no harm in taking time, but there is a worrying 

potential for real damage if passage of this new legislation 

is rushed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we need to take that time. We see the fiasco, 

what happened with the essential services legislation that was 

rushed. And here we are six years later with it still in court, and 

there’s no end in sight. There’s no end in sight what will 

happen with essential services. So why not take the extra 

months and get this right? I think the minister has made some 

steps by having an advisory committee. But I urge him and we 

urge him to listen to his members on his advisory committee 

that say, let’s take the time to really study this. 

 

There are many questions. One of the questions I have, Mr. 

Speaker, is so you have a piece of legislation, and one of the 

pieces that they’ve proposed is the indexing of the minimum 

wage. And we think that’s a good idea. We would rather see it 

in the legislation, that phrase, that part, but they’re saying it’s in 

regulations. Well where are the regulations? We haven’t seen 

the regulations. Now we’re hearing the minister say it may be 

sometime in the summer. Mr. Speaker, there are literally 

hundreds of regulations, literally hundreds of regulations. 

 

Now I have to say that there are some places where it’s 

important to have good, strong regulations. And I’m thinking of 

occupational health and safety, particularly when it comes to 

the mining regulations in terms of how the safety factors in 

mines are operated. All of those are very, very critical. 

 

But some of the things should be in legislation. So we’re 

saying, what’s the rush? Let’s get this right. We’ve seen it when 

it’s gone wrong, horribly wrong: as I said, essential services. 

And we can’t see a much better way ahead when you have 

partners saying, let’s take the time; let’s take the time to get it 

right. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we’re very concerned, we’re very 

concerned that this government, by focusing its resources on 

this, is not tackling the priorities of this province that it should 

be. And I’m thinking of three particular areas. One — and the 

minister and I are in agreement on this — one is occupational 

health and safety. We have a horrible record here in 

Saskatchewan that needs much more attention and needs 

resources to be tackled. 

 

We also have the issue around making sure First Nations and 

Métis people are fully engaged in the workplace, fully engaged 

in the workplace. That’s hugely important. That has to be done. 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, one thing I’ve been hearing a lot is 

about the temporary foreign workers, and we have a bill before 

the House on that. Curious why that’s not part of this bill, 

because labour standards for anybody who works should be in 

this bill. So we have clear, clear priorities. 

 

And the other issue I have that I need to raise today is around 

the resources for enforcing this bill. What will happen? Will 

there be more occupational health and safety inspectors? Will 

there be more labour standards inspectors to help with this? 

How much will this really cost? And will this happen? So, Mr. 

Speaker, I am happy to move today the motion that’s before 

this House. And I’ll read this now: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its disagreement with the 

government over the pace, scope, and necessity of 

rewriting workplace laws of the province and calls on the 

government to delay the passage of Bill No. 85 until the 

fall sitting. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call the vote I would ask the 

government members to turn down the general rumble, please. 

It has been moved by the member for Saskatoon Centre: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its disagreement with the 

government over the pace, scope, and necessity of 

rewriting the workplace laws of the province and calls on 

the government to delay the passage of Bill 85 until the 

fall sitting. 

 

I recognize the member for Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll happily 

speak to this. And I have to say right at the beginning that I do 

not support the motion. Mr. Speaker, to delay the passage is 

typical of the NDP. They want to delay everything. Delay, 

delay — let’s take a long time — in their hopes that maybe with 

a new leader they might get back into power somewhere along 

the line and then they don’t have to do anything. This is 

completely different than what this government wants to do. 

 

This government wants to move this province forward. And the 

way we move the province forward is by going over these 

things, taking the antiquated things that the NDP would never 

ever do, and move forward on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have way more people working in this 

province now than what we’ve ever had. Our population is now 

at an all-time high — 1,086,564 people. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s grown by 23,024 people in the past year alone. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And the catch is, Mr. Speaker, we want to make these laws, 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2585 

these procedures easy for people to go and see what their rights 

are — for all of the working people within this province, for the 

employers, for everyone. We want to see them be able to go on 

the Internet, because pretty well everybody has the Internet 

now, and simply find out what their rights are. You know, when 

you went in there before and looked, it was a very convoluted 

system. What we are trying to do is put in a system to make it 

look . . . so people can go in there and look and see what their 

rights are. The employers can go in and see what their rights 

are. 

 

Now obviously a lot of people were tired of the tired, old NDP 

because that is why, the last two elections, we have moved 

forward. And they’ve seen this province moving forward. This 

is what the people want. They want this province to move 

forward. Actually our population has increased in this province 

for 26 consecutive quarters. So, Mr. Speaker, when you take a 

look at this, it makes it far easier for the people to see what their 

rights are. 

 

Now the member from Saskatoon Centre says, well it’s a 

surprise. Well you know, I guess it’s a surprise that the 

so-called ruling party of Saskatchewan is sitting there with only 

nine members. Maybe their new leadership campaign will 

change some of that. But you know something? I actually doubt 

it. I doubt it. You know, when you actually look at what, you 

know, the possibility of their future leader, Ryan Meili, is 

saying, like I mean he wants to move Saskatchewan back to 

where the government actually owns a whole pile of things. 

Like you know, he wants to run it back to where they’re 

running their own bank, their own pharmaceutical company. 

For all I know, you know, maybe they want to get back into the 

shoe business, the box business, the potato business. Who 

knows? 

 

You know at that time, at that time when they were doing that, 

Saskatchewan always had an out-migration of people. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not what this government is about. This 

government is about moving, moving forward, making things 

simple for people to work in this province, to raise their 

families in this province, to enjoy this province of which I’ve 

always felt is the best province in Canada. I’ve said it in this 

House many a time before and I’ll say it again: the reason I got 

involved in politics was because I wanted to see my children 

working in this province. And I’m proud to say, now that both 

of them are out of university, they are working in this province. 

They want to learn what their rights are also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, when you take a look at all the things 

that have happened within this province, like I mean we’re 

sitting here with the lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada, 

Mr. Speaker . . . The employment for women has increased by 

5.1 per cent in this province. It’s hitting an all-time high for 

women working within this province just as we’re talking about 

national women’s day is tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everything here shows a province that is moving 

forward and that is why we don’t want to delay on what the 

member from Saskatoon Centre’s brought forward. We don’t 

want to delay on it. Let’s move forward. We have the highest 

small-business optimism in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you want to sit back and you want to look at 

the former, at the former government’s record, you take a look 

at their out-migration which was what they were actually 

famous for — well that and potatoes and various other things 

— their out-migration. Like take a look at their numbers. In 

1996 there was 990,240 people in Saskatchewan; in 2001, 978, 

925 people; 2006, 968,157. Mr. Speaker, that old, tired NDP 

government who never wanted to move anything forward at any 

speed, they were taking and driving our people out of this 

province. This government is not about that. This government, 

Mr. Speaker, is to have people working within this province 

and moving this province forward. 

 

Let’s take a look at 2011. You know, after the short time that 

the Saskatchewan Party was in, they were already up to 

1,033,381. You know, Mr. Speaker, people when they sat there 

and looked before, when they looked at Saskatchewan, they 

were moving with their feet. They were moving out of this 

province. The Saskatchewan Party is working on moving this 

province forward. I just have to keep saying that because it is 

the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have the Saskatchewan advantage. The Saskatchewan 

advantage is open to everybody. We are very fortunate to be in 

a province and in a country where somebody can come from 

poverty, from a poverty-stricken family, and turn themselves 

into millionaires. We are not like some of the dictatorships, 

some of the countries that some of the members on the other 

side might follow along with. We believe in free enterprise — 

free enterprise for all people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the things that have 

happened in just the very, very short time we have been here, 

Mr. Speaker, we have moved this province forward. And to 

have the NDP opposition sit there and say, no, slow down, slow 

down, well I’m sorry; we will not slow down. Let’s move it 

forward and keep this province going. 

 

Now when I go back and I sit there and look at the various 

different things that have happened . . . Like I mean our oil. 

Take a look at the oil. Everybody’s seen that old map. You 

know back when the NDP was in power you could’ve sworn all 

the dinosaurs died over in Alberta. They didn’t . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They’re still here. About nine of them. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — They did. And this is mentioned by some of 

my colleagues. Yes, there are still some dinosaurs in 

Saskatchewan, but they’re on the other side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

After the Saskatchewan Party got in, oil started to flow. Potash 

mines started to be built in this province, Mr. Speaker. Under 

the NDP, they tried to run their own potash mines, and how did 

that work out? It was kind of like their potato factories. 

 

So I have to say, Mr. Speaker. there may be a change, there 

may be a change with one of their new leaders but, Mr. 

Speaker, I really don’t think so. I think that they are going to 

still stick with their old philosophy, try and move things as 

slowly as possible, and still stick their heads in the sand. And 

maybe like the dinosaurs, they’ll just finally die out. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise in support of this motion today. And I’m going 

to use my brief 10 minutes to talk a little bit about an 

experience I had in my office, maybe in mid-January I think it 

was, where I was contacted by SGEU [Saskatchewan 

Government and General Employees’ Union], some of the staff 

from that particular union, Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Union. And they made an appointment to come to 

my office to come and speak to me about some of their 

concerns with this Saskatchewan employment Act. 

 

And I really appreciated them taking the time to come and share 

some of those concerns with me because it gave me a much 

different appreciation of the impact of this bill and some of the 

changes in this bill that I wouldn’t have had if I hadn’t taken the 

time to listen to them and hear what they had to say. 

 

There was, I think, three gentlemen . . . two gentlemen came to 

my office and they were . . . You know, this is something very 

new to them, but I think they’ve been working hard at getting 

the courage to get up and speak to this and their concerns. 

They’ve been working really hard to study the bill, study the 

effects of the bill on their particular workplace and the changes 

that it might impact on them. And I will share some of those 

with you. 

 

I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that as we discussed the bill, I said, 

oh well, you know, this is really good information that you’ve 

brought. And they had a package that I’ll be referring to, some 

really good information. And I said, have you had a chance to 

talk to any other MLAs? And they said, well actually you’re the 

first one that we’ve spoken to so far, but we have made 

appointments to speak to some other MLAs. And they said, 

unfortunately a couple of the Saskatoon MLAs had agreed to 

speak to us, but then we got a call recently and they cancelled 

that appointment. 

 

And I just want to talk about that for a couple of minutes, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think that’s a sign of a government that’s not 

listening. And if our own MLAs are not taking the time to meet 

with these people and have them come in and at least listen to 

the concerns, then we have a government that’s not listening. 

So I think the members know who they are. There were some 

who had agreed to speak and got instructions somewhere that 

they weren’t supposed to listen to these union members. It’s a 

sad state of affairs, but I think it reflects where this government 

is right now in its legislative agenda. 

 

And so for the record, Mr. Speaker, I just want to speak about 

some of those concerns here so that perhaps the members who 

are in this space right now and aren’t visiting might take a 

couple of minutes to just hear some of the concerns of this 

particular government employees’ union. These are the people 

that work for our government, the people that put in their 

careers looking after the public service and taking care of the 

programs that are important to the people of Saskatchewan. So 

maybe I could highlight a couple of their concerns in the short 

time that’s left for this debate. 

 

First of all, the one concern they are concerned about is the 

scope of union membership. And their point is that this 

proposed bill goes much further than any other legislation in 

Canada to take workers out of scope. That’s significant, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not something that’s unimportant or trivial. And I 

think, you know, we’re hearing from the members opposite, 

they don’t even refer to the bill in their comments. They refer to 

stuff that has nothing to do with the substance of this bill. So 

I’m concerned they haven’t taken the time to maybe think about 

it and think about the impact of some of these provisions on the 

working people, including the government employees of this 

government. 

 

So first of all, under Bill 85, the new definition of managers and 

workers of confidence has been significantly broadened. And I 

did want to take a little bit of time to comment on the 

International Labour Organization who have, based on their 

comments, many of these changes will be ruled out of order at 

that level. And I suspect they would be found unconstitutional 

when you look at the right of freedom of association under our 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms. So this is what we’re being 

forced to because the members opposite aren’t taking the time 

to listen to what the concerns are, consider them deliberately, 

and then provide feedback to their cabinet minister so that he 

can make a reasoned and principled approach to this labour bill. 

 

The current Saskatchewan trade union Act has two types of 

exclusions. First of all, “a person whose primary responsibility 

is to actually [and I’m emphasizing actually] exercise authority 

and actually perform functions that are of a managerial 

character.” And the second exclusion currently is that “a person 

who is regularly acting in a confidential capacity . . .” and again 

I emphasize the word regularly. So there’s two things there in 

the current trade union Act where we see there are exclusions 

for people that are deemed to not be . . . They’re taken out of 

scope. 

 

What we have now under Bill 85 is the new section 

6-1(1)(h)(i)(A). And first of all they say you will be excluded 

from a union if your “primary responsibility is to exercise 

authority and perform functions that are of a managerial 

character.” Secondly, the confidential part of that: 

 

a person whose duties include activities of a confidential 

nature in matters relating to any of the following [and 

there’s four areas]: 

 

labour relations; 

business strategic planning; 

policy advice; 

budget implementation or planning. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you think about that, it is quite likely 

that anytime a government worker is asked to participate in the 

lean exercise that this government is so enthralled with, they 

could be considered out of scope, because they are doing 

activities relating to policy advice. Is that the intent of this 

government, is to exclude everyone who is involved in the lean 

exercise from the union? That’s the logical extension of the 

way this bill is being drafted, Mr. Speaker. And until these 

members take the time to listen to those concerns, consider 

them, and provide that feedback to their minister . . . The 

backbenchers have every opportunity to do this. And that’s 

their job as MLAs is to listen to concerns of the bills that are 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

being implemented and introduced in this legislature. And if 

they’re not going to do that, they’re not meeting the 

requirements of their position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

So the problem with a lot of this definition is that it’s not clear. 

What does business strategic planning mean? That could have a 

significant impact on people’s lives and on their rights to 

associate and the freedom to associate. And without any kind of 

guidelines or clear lines what separates, for example, normal 

operations from budget implementation, if somebody is asked 

what supplies are needed in the coming year, is that budget 

planning, and is that confidential? 

 

One of the main points . . . And I’m not going to be able to 

address all the points that the SGEU has made to me. I strongly 

encourage the members opposite to take the time and read 

through these materials and actually meet with some of those 

members because they have some very compelling points. 

There’s nothing in this legislation that was demanded by those 

people. 

 

We don’t know who the minister is consulting with and who is 

pushing him to make these changes, but we do know there are 

some significant concerns that are going to impact the 

workplace. And we’re hoping that the backbenchers will take 

the time and listen to the members of the union, read their 

materials. And some of them apparently have met but, I think, 

what I was told is many haven’t. We’ll see what the union has 

to say about the reception they’ve received. 

 

Changes in Bill 85 that would exclude greater numbers of 

employees from union membership can be seen as contrary to 

the principles of freedom of association according to the 

International Labour Organization. On the decisions that have 

come from that body, it’s clear that managerial staff really 

should be limited and they should be limited to persons who 

have the authority to appoint or dismiss. 

 

And as the minister knows, there are all kinds of supervisory 

functions being performed in any workplace, any workplace 

that you go to. Does that mean they should be excluded from 

union membership? Absolutely not. And that’s not what the 

International Labour Organization has ruled. And I think he 

will learn that the hard way if he continues with this bill in the 

courts. 

 

The second thing that the SGEU pointed out about ILO 

[International Labour Organization] decisions is that if you 

have an excessively broad interpretation of the concept of 

worker of confidence, which denies workers their right of 

association, that will limit trade union rights. And in small 

enterprises it could even prevent the establishment of trade 

unions which is very contrary to the principle, the 

Charter-protected principle, of freedom of association. 

 

So that’s just one of the areas that they commented on. The 

other one that was of grave concern to the government 

employees of this province is that the bill will create instability 

and division in workplaces by splitting bargaining units into 

units of supervisors and employees. As we know, as has been 

the norm, it’s not antiquated; it is working, Mr. Speaker. We 

hear members opposite commenting on how this is 

old-fashioned. It’s not old-fashioned. It’s good fashion and 

makes total sense. It’s working. No one is asking for it to 

change. Why is that a bad thing? 

 

All employee bargaining units have been the norm in 

Saskatchewan and across Canada for decades. There’s been no 

significant problems with this approach. I challenge the 

minister to provide us with some of the problems with the 

current approach. There appears to be no rationale for such a 

dramatic departure from existing legislation and established 

precedents. 

 

And there’s a big difference between management and 

supervision. And sure, sometimes the lines could get fuzzy. 

That’s when we have to take time and sit down and look at the 

particular fact situation. We know courts do that all the time. 

You take time and look at the individual situation. But the way 

this goes, it goes way too far. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I 

haven’t had enough time to speak to the other concerns. Again I 

encourage members to take the time to read this material 

honestly and then take time to consider those requests. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

implementing the new Saskatchewan employment Act clearly 

defines the rights, responsibilities of employees, employers, and 

unions. Mr. Speaker, we are very lucky and blessed in this 

province to have such a hard-working workforce, and the 

province appreciates all their hard work in building the new 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The people of this province appreciate the approach and the 

common sense solutions that this government is putting 

forward. The population of this province voted in the last 

election overwhelmingly for the direction that we’re taking the 

province. Even rank-and-file union members voted in majority 

for the Saskatchewan Party. The vast majority of the 

population, at 64 per cent, voted for the direction that we would 

like to take the province. Three of my hardest working 

volunteers in my campaign were union members. My seatmate 

was a union member as well before being elected to this 

Chamber. 

 

This Act, Mr. Speaker, will educate employers, employees, 

about employment standards and occupation health and safety 

in Saskatchewan. It protects workers by enforcing compliance 

of employment standards and occupation health and safety 

legislation and regulation through inspection and investigations. 

This legislation will encourage workplaces to adopt best 

practices in areas of employment standards, occupation health 

and safety, and labour relations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the new legislation, our government will 

continue to deliver the young workers’ readiness certificate 

course. 

 

We will work with Workers’ Compensation Board to develop 

injury prevention strategies through WorkSafe Saskatchewan. 

This is common sense, fair, and balanced strategies to improve 

the well-being of the workers in Saskatchewan. And we’ll 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

educate injured workers about the workers’ compensation 

system and the role of the office of Workers’ Advocate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has increased the minimum wage 

by over 25 per cent in five years. That’s the third highest 

after-tax income for full-time minimum-wage earners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to protecting 

workers in this province. Why would we want to slow down on 

the process of making it safer to work in Saskatchewan? We are 

committed to eliminating the workplace injuries through 

WorkSafe Saskatchewan and this is why the rank-and-file 

members of this province have supported us in the last election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007 we have reduced our workplace injury 

rate by nearly 20 per cent, and in 2011 the time-lost injury rate 

was 3.05 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we know that the most 

important thing is that everyone return safe at the end of the 

day. That is why, Mr. Speaker, our government workplace 

inspections has increased from 3,621 in 2006 under that 

government to 4,578 under this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in continuing our protection of workers in this 

province, we introduced The Workers’ Compensation Act in 

2012. It eliminates inconsistencies, clarifies legislation 

application, and improves the benefit of injured workers. Mr. 

Speaker, the maximum wage rate for the upper limit of earnings 

used for the calculation of benefits will increase from 55,000 to 

59,000 for new claims. Mr. Speaker, the maximum wage rate 

was last increased in 2005. It improves benefits for injured 

workers by increasing the maximum insurable earnings. Mr. 

Speaker, this legislation provides for the introduction of a 

system of indexing to ensure benefits are adjusted annually. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Saskatchewan employment Act contained 

provisions that include the indexation of the minimum wage to 

provide security for minimum-wage earners and ensure 

predictability for business owners in the province. Introduction 

of two new leave provisions: organ donation and leave to attend 

citizen ceremonies. Reduction of qualification period for 

maternity and parental and adoption leave has been changed 

from 20 weeks to 13 weeks of service. This is the balanced, 

common sense approach that the Saskatchewan people expect, 

recognizing that no individual or group may be compensated 

differently on the grounds of any prohibition identified within 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of the Saskatchewan labour legislation 

hasn’t been reviewed in at least 20 years. Mr. Speaker, The 

Trade Union Act and The Labour Standards Act were last 

reviewed in 1990s. When that was last reviewed, if you turned 

the radio on back then, you might have heard Nirvana “Smells 

Like Teen Spirit.” Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if you were into 

the grunge movement back in the ’90s but maybe you 

remember other songs that were playing on the radio when it 

was reviewed such as “Tears in Heaven” by Eric Clapton. 

 

Now if you’d wait until the last time The Labour Management 

Dispute Act was reviewed in the 1980s, if the radio was on you 

might have heard “Beat It” by Michael Jackson, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s how long back you have to go to find the last time that 

we reviewed some of these Acts. And four Acts that haven’t 

been reviewed since the 1940s or ’50s, including The Wages 

Recovery Act, back then, Mr. Speaker, if you turned on the 

radio you would have heard “Long Gone Lonesome Blues” by 

Hank Williams. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not Hank Williams, 

Jr., that’s senior. And when he was on the radio, they also 

reviewed The Employment Agencies Act, The Fire Departments 

Platoon Act and The Building Trades Protection Act. That’s 

how long back you have to go to see when the last time 

government reviewed these Acts. 

 

Also on the radio, we also had the Saskatoon Centre MLA that 

was on the radio. It was on December 5th, and he wasn’t 

singing about Bryan Adams’ “Summer of 69,” Mr. Speaker. 

No, Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote what he was on the radio talking 

about: “A former set of bills that were easily understood 

because they had a title and you knew the minimum wage was 

under the minimum wage Act.” Well, Mr. Speaker, that might 

make sense for the former Labour minister. Unfortunately that 

was repealed in 1969. 

 

So this is just one of the many examples of where we haven’t 

reviewed these Acts and they’re not simple to find. If the 

former minister of Labour could not easily remember where 

Acts were found and referenced it in present day, an Act that 

was repealed in 1969, you knew that we were on the right path 

of bringing all these Acts into one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale spoke to 

Bill 85 on Monday, March 4th in adjourned debates. She 

quoted the new Saskatchewan employment Act which I 

encourage all members on that side to have a read. It’s only 184 

pages. Here’s her quote from the adjourned debates: 

 

In prescribed workplaces with more than 10 employees, 

or for prescribed categories of employees, an employer 

shall grant to employees in the workplace or in the 

category of employees two consecutive days off every 

week. 

 

That’s her reading the Act. Then her question was, “So I am 

correct in saying that employees will no longer be entitled to 

two days off a week?” Mr. Speaker, if she would’ve took the 

time in the last three months to read the 184-page report, she 

would’ve had the answers to her own questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know they’re busy on the other side. They’ve 

got a leadership race going on and there’s only nine members. 

But you’d think they would find time to read a 184-page Act 

over a three-month period in order to understand what is getting 

proposed and they would have the answers that they’re asking 

for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP believe the minimum wage should be 

increased and that not everyone is bettering from the current 

level of prosperity being experienced in Saskatchewan right 

now, particularly minimum wage. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

combined with the increase to basic personal taxes exemption, 

the child tax credit, the Saskatchewan low-income tax credit, 

when you add all those things up we’ve dropped over 100,000 

people off the tax rolls, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact our government has increased minimum 

wage five times — on January 1st, 2008, again in May 1st, 

2008, May 1st, 2009, September 1st, 2011, and on December 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2589 

1st, 2012. We’re also committed to indexing that, the minimum 

wage. This is something that the NDP have campaigned on and 

when they were in government for 16 years did not touch — 

they promised to do it after convention after convention — but 

they promised they would index the minimum wage. They 

refused to. This government is acting on that and we will index 

the minimum wage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just the motion that’s on the floor: “That this 

Assembly expresses its disagreement with the government over 

the pace . . .” The pace. After three months of this Act being out 

there, they’re concerned about the pace. The scope, the scope of 

this. Well we just saw two examples where members didn’t 

have the time to read the report. We had the former minister 

looking at Acts that were repealed in 1969. We have another 

member that would have answered her own question if she 

actually read the report or read the Act. And to delay this bill 

that will delay safety in this province is . . . 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Time has expired. I recognize the next 

speaker. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to wade 

in on the motion here that my colleague from Saskatoon Centre 

has put forward, that I will be supporting. 

 

Today I’m going to take the opportunity to talk about lost 

opportunities. So if the government really wanted to modernize 

labour legislation, they would take the time to listen to all kinds 

of people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things, and I mentioned this the other day in the 

debate on The Saskatchewan Employment Act, but a few years 

ago in 2005 the federal government was embarking upon a 

consultation process on labour standards, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And they put out a discussion paper in February of 2005. They 

toured 13 cities across Canada and came out with an interim 

paper, and then almost two years later finally came up with a 

report. 

 

So that is a good example of a government taking some time to 

listen to people. They accepted not only written briefs, but a 

designated high-level committee took the opportunity, took the 

opportunity . . . Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thought you were 

about to rise on your . . . 

 

So the federal government took the opportunity to really review 

what was going on, listening to people and reaching out to 

organizations too who might not normally be someone, a group 

who would think, well I should be participating in a labour 

force discussion. There was a breast-feeding organization. 

Breastfeeding Committee for Canada spoke about 

breast-feeding breaks because the International Labour 

Organization actually has said that those are things that are 

important. 

 

The members opposite are laughing, actually. But we talk about 

the new Saskatchewan here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have, 

here in Saskatchewan we have — well in Canada — the 

Canadian Paediatric Society recommends exclusive 

breast-feeding to six months and sustained breast-feeding to 

two years and beyond. The World Health Organization 

recommends the same thing. The one thing that has been 

acknowledged in the literature, when a woman returns to work 

it becomes incredibly difficult to sustain breast-feeding, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And so one of the things that was presented to the federal 

Labour Code actually, the people who were reviewing the 

federal Labour Code, one of the recommendations from Judge 

Harry Arthurs was: 

 

Part III should provide for short breaks during working 

hours to afford nursing employees reasonable time off, 

without pay, to breastfeed a child and/or express milk on 

the work site. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this is a lost opportunity to 

think about how we engage and support women in employment 

and modernize our labour standards, or all our labour Acts, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This was a lost opportunity to talk to people 

who could have provided some good information about what is 

needed in Saskatchewan today to support employees to be the 

best possible employees and the best possible caregivers as 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There’s something else we have here in Saskatchewan that’s 

been on the books for quite some time, which is a very good 

support. It’s section 44.2 of labour standards which provided 

people in Saskatchewan job protection to stay home with sick 

children — up to 12 days of job protection. Other jurisdictions 

have it entrenched as family responsibility leave. But this is 

something we could have looked at, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to point out to the members opposite that close to 70 per 

cent of mothers of children under five are in paid employment 

here in Saskatchewan, and we have labour force shortages here 

in Saskatchewan so we need those mothers in the labour force 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we need to think about 

mechanisms to best support employment. And the bottom line 

about employment standards is that it’s legislation to set fair 

and reasonable minimum standards to ensure that all workers 

are treated fairly and with respect in the workplace. 

 

But the reality is, and this is with 2009 stats, that show 10.2 per 

cent of employees here in Saskatchewan are low wage. Most of 

them happen to be women. Most of them have limited 

education, with 40 per cent having completed high school. And 

most are not unionized. So they depend on public policy to be 

able to do their work well and to ensure that they have fair 

workplaces, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I want to point out . . . I talked about section 44.2 which 

currently exists, which is a very good section. And many people 

aren’t aware that they can’t be fired for calling in to work and 

saying that they have a sick child. The Act currently reads, the 

Act that this government is amending is 44.2: 

 

Except for just cause unrelated to injury or illness, no 

employer shall dismiss, suspend, lay off, demote or 

discipline an employee because of absence due to the 

illness or injury of the employee or illness or injury of a 

member of the employee’s immediate family as defined 

in section 29.3 who is dependent on the employee . . . 



2590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is . . . I am glad to see, I think 

the government is maintaining that same intent, but they have 

edited that. They say, “Subject to subsections (2) to (4), except 

for just cause unrelated to injury or illness, no employer shall 

take discriminatory action against an employee because of 

absence.” 

 

So I’m not sure. We still have more questions, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

not quite sure if this change to discriminatory action is stronger 

or weaker. I think laying out what you can’t do is probably 

stronger but we still have questions about that. 

 

But as I said at the start of my speech, I wanted to talk about 

lost opportunities. Having worked with many lower waged 

employees, I know one of the lost opportunities in this 

particular piece is perhaps setting aside paid days — a day or 

two of paid employment — for employees when they have to 

care for a child or an elder. That is the reality of many people’s 

lives. In working with lower -waged employees, I can tell you 

stories. 

 

I remember one woman describing for me when she had sick 

children. This is a single mother. She had a 10-year-old and a 

12-year-old. And we all know . . . Well we all get sick. That 

happens occasionally. But anybody who has children knows 

that children tend to get sick more frequently than adults. 

They’re still building up those little immunity systems. And so 

when your child is sick and you have to make a choice between 

staying home or giving up the paycheque, it can be very hard. 

 

So back to this woman with the 10- and the 12-year-old. She 

told me stories about making the tough decision, about 

propping her sick kid up in bed. She had no family in 

Saskatoon. What she had to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when she 

had a sick child, because she didn’t want to give up her wages, 

her low wage, she would . . . If one of her children was sick, 

they would be in bed alone at home by themselves with a 

portable phone next to them because she couldn’t give up her 

lost wages. 

 

The other thing that I’ve heard from employees too is there are 

some workplaces that provide paid sick days for you as the 

employee but don’t recognize family responsibility leave. And 

many people in their collective agreements have family 

responsibility leave, but the average lower waged employee 

does not have family responsibility leave. So when they have 

. . . When your workplace will allow you to take a sick day for 

yourself, what that often fosters, if you don’t have that 

opportunity to take it when you have a sick child, is you lie, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And people don’t feel good about lying to 

their employers. But again if you’re making $10 an hour and 

you have to make the decision between staying at home and 

taking care of your little one or going off to work or giving up 

your paycheque, it’s a very difficult decision. 

 

So there was an opportunity here to reach out and talk to 

different organizations that support family, and perhaps 

consider entrenching family responsibility leave in our labour 

standards, and perhaps entrenching a day or two of paid leave 

for families, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m concerned about all 

employees. And we heard a lot of talk from the other side just 

talking about unionized employees, but the reality is this Act 

deals with all people in Saskatchewan, whether you have a 

union or not. And again, and again this is about making sure 

that we are setting the bar. This is about minimum standards. 

 

And I think many members opposite don’t realize that not 

everybody has a union in their workplace to support them and 

bargain and get what they need. So we need to ensure that our 

labour standards, our labour standards are as strong . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . You know what? I have someone 

across the way speculating that perhaps I’m saying that small 

businesses are bad. That is not at all what I’m saying. In my 

experience in working on work-family balance, it was small 

employers who were some of the most supportive. And I would 

completely . . . Small employers were some of the most 

supportive of their employees when it came to work-family 

balance. But the reality is labour standards are designed to 

ensure that we have protection for all employees and we are 

lifting and supporting employees out of problems when they 

have them. 

 

I hear a lot of chatter over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is 

not relevant and is absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

This government had a prime opportunity to do good things and 

they chose not to do so. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to join in this very 

important debate. And I feel it’s, on both sides of the House, 

it’s very important. I know the . . . I believe the members 

actually are in quite favour of this bill because they also talk 

about passage of Bill 85 until the fall sitting, just want it 

delayed for a little while. But I’ll probably . . . I’ll try to explain 

to them why they don’t need to have it delayed. 

 

Now we know with 3,800 or over 4,000 submissions, now they 

did submit prior to . . . They actually read the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, which was good. But after we actually presented the 

legislation, they didn’t make a submission. So I’m guessing that 

they probably feel that this is a pretty good bill, and the 

workings of it. 

 

Now I know with their leadership convention going on, they 

have been quite busy with that. And they have, you know, 

they’ve been quite preoccupied, and it is very telling on the 

caucus. It would keep you very busy, very stressed; you 

wouldn’t be able to submit. But they still have time, and I’m 

pretty sure who gets in there . . . Possibly I think Mr. Meili’s 

indicated that he would probably submit a submission, and he 

would be quite willing to if he gets to be leader. And we also 

have time. 

 

The Minister of Labour has assured me, because I just talked to 

him a little bit ago, saying that they would still . . . They’re still 

accepting submissions. They’re still accepting information 

because this is, this bill does affect a lot of people, Mr. Speaker. 

It affects, you know, some of the most important part of 

Saskatchewan, the working people — whether union, 

non-union, the working class of the people — which we all on 

both sides of the House fall into that category where we’ve all, 

you know, worked for employers, have been employees. I have 

myself. I had employees. I’ve also been an employee. I’ve been 

a union member. And I worked for the railroad company. Our 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2591 

union I think was out of Chicago at that time. I mean it was a 

very good union. They treated us very well, you know. We 

worked there. And they would, looking at this legislation, 

would feel it’s fair. Because what we’re doing is, for employees 

and employers, we’re rolling it into one Act instead of having 

to go to three different Acts. 

 

You know, when you’re looking for information there’s a small 

. . . And the member opposite talked about small business. For 

small business it would be quite easier, I think, to be able to go 

to one Act when you’re looking through the regulations than to 

have to go through one Act and realize, you know what? Now it 

just says, moving, you have to go and reread another Act. And I 

think we’ve got that from employers and employees that this is 

way better, that you . . . One Act. One Act. It should be rolled 

in together. So when you’re doing it . . . 

 

And we’ve also did other things. I understand — not 

understand; which we are, we are indexing the minimum wage. 

We’re adjusting to that, you know, because the member 

opposite talked how important it is for low-income people. 

Well we’re trying to address that with this. And if you hold this 

bill up, if you hold this bill up till fall like you said you would 

like to hold it to fall, you will be holding that up for the 

low-income workers that you said that you’re working. We 

want to get this Act out there so that people can keep working 

to help the employees and the employees. 

 

And I know that we will work very well to get this bill passed 

before May, by May 17th, and I expect that we expect that we 

may. As you look at this bill and study it more and talk to 

people, I think you will see that this will help both employers 

and employees as we move forward. Because that’s what grows 

this province, is the two units of people working together, you 

know, employees, employers. 

 

My constituency, the employment rate has jumped 

considerably, you know, with the potash mines coming on 

board, Mr. Speaker. You know, very good, union paid jobs in 

the potash industry — very good, you know. And I know that 

they’re doing mine expansions at the Allan, Colonsay mine. 

Lots of trade people have been working there for a number of 

years and working with the mine expansion. And all the trades 

— well-paid, well, nice, good-paying union jobs, extra jobs for 

the communities. 

 

You look at Watrous and Lanigan and Young and Drake and 

Jansen. The towns are growing. The houses are being bought 

up. People are coming back. The population, as we all know in 

Saskatchewan has grown. So with this we need to keep moving 

forward with our legislation to help employers and employees 

so we can keep this great province moving forward. And this 

legislation helps in that respect, helps both employers, 

employees. 

 

Also low income. We’ve also looked at the adjustment . . . 

[inaudible] . . . with minimum wage, different things along 

them lines. Worker safety, that’s in the bill there. You know, 

the compensation Act, you know, we’ve rolled this in. 

 

We’ve had, from what I understand from the Minister of 

Labour, now over 4,000 submissions — 4,000 submissions. So 

you know that the people of this great province are interested in 

this bill because it does affect them, and they are putting their 

submissions in. So we’ve had plenty of time. The Minister of 

Labour has been working very hard to make sure that that has 

been done, that he’s met with the groups, that they consulted 

and gathered the information, and now it’s time for this bill to 

move forward so this province can move forward with the 

employees and the employers. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So I find it a little ironic that they’re just making a motion 

saying, well just delay it till fall. But let’s, you know, we want 

to get work done, and we need this province to grow. And 

we’re being told by employers and employees, you know, keep 

this great province moving forward, and that’s what we’re 

doing with this piece of legislation. So that’s why I’m hoping 

that the members opposite understand that as we move forward 

in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, there’s also legislation in this bill, has legislation to 

protect individuals searching for work. You know, then there is 

at times you will get, from recruitment service providers, that’s 

starting to grow, there’s legislation in here to deal with that. 

And we got that from the submissions that were dealt with this. 

That is in the Act, you know, working to protect workers. 

 

And that’s what this bill is. In it there’s a reduction of the 

qualification period from maternity, parental, and adoption 

leave from 20 weeks to that . . . a recognition that no individual 

or group may be compensated differently on the grounds of 

anything prohibited, identified within the Saskatchewan human 

rights. So you know, it deals with the big picture. 

 

It deals with all the employers and all the employees working 

together trying to make this a good place to work. Because 

when you talk to all businesses, I mean, you want to have your 

business grow. You have to treat your employees good. You 

have to work with them, and they have, all the businesses 

around my constituency. And when I door knock and we go 

into businesses, I mean, the employees are, you know, they 

work quite well with management to work together as the 

businesses grow. Because as the businesses grow, well so does 

their pensions, so does their wages, so does their benefits and 

the security that goes with that package of your employer and 

employee. 

 

And I’ll tell you what: you know, they talk about what’s been 

happening. My office, I’ve had hardly anybody, I don’t think 

I’ve had anybody really, talk against this legislation. They say, 

you know, we like what’s been happening and how you’re 

trying to work with employers and employees of bringing that 

group together. And they’re working together as a group to help 

grow this great province as we keep moving forward. 

 

You know, like I said, my constituency, I mean the jobs that 

have grown over the very number of years of any kind of job — 

service providers, whether it be in the potash industry and the 

side industries that go with it, you know, and also in the 

farming industry as it’s been growing in all the value-added 

crops that are being grown, Mr. Speaker. You know, as this bill 

moves forward, I mean, it helps everything. It helps this 

province just as we keep moving forward and that is what this 

legislation speaks for. And you know, the Minister of Labour 



2592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

has met with countless groups, poured over the submissions and 

did an excellent job . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. I 

recognize the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

government received over 4,000 submissions in relation to The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. Furthermore the Minister of 

Labour Relations and Workplace Safety formed a minister’s 

advisory committee. The new Saskatchewan employment Act is 

based upon extensive consultations with the committee along 

with a thorough review of the submissions. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP have no credibility 

when it comes to consultations on labour legislation. To the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana, why did the NDP fail, fail to 

consult with affected groups when they amended The Labour 

Standards Act in 2001, The Trade Union Act in 2004, and The 

Labour Standards Act in 2006? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana? 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think what 

we’re talking about here is the failure of this government to 

introduce legislation that makes sense for the working people of 

Saskatchewan. So the failure here is introducing legislation that 

will likely be challenged by the International Labour 

Organization. It’s legislation that fails to meet the Charter 

requirements for the freedom of association. So that’s what 

we’re concerned about, is those kinds of failures in this 

legislation, the failure of this government to consider reasoned 

amendments and take some time to make it right. That’s what 

we’re worried about. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question for the other side. Of course we’ve seen this 

government conduct many styles of consultation, you know, 

whether it’s branding of the cattle, the environmental code. In 

fact the environmental code, while we disagreed with it in many 

ways, took some time. And they went out and met with people, 

and to date it’s been relatively well-received. In fact it took 

several years. 

 

To the member from Carrot River: why the rush? Why the 

rush? He talked about population, everything else. Why can’t 

we take a few extra months and make sure we get it right? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you. I’d like to thank the member for 

his question. And as I said before when I was talking about this 

bill, Mr. Speaker, we want to see things happen. We want to see 

Saskatchewan moving forward. If we’re going to be like the 

NDP, nothing would ever happen in this province. So 

consequently we’re moving this forward. It has been consulted 

on, and actually there’s more than 3,800 submissions, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s actually been up to 4,000 submissions. But you 

know, the catch is, Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn’t even make one 

submission, so they should not be talking. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And first of 

all, I’d like to thank the members opposite for agreeing that this 

is a piece of legislation that has to be passed this year. So thank 

you very much for agreeing with that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is proud of its record on labour 

legislation. Since ’07 our government has increased minimum 

wage from 7.95 an hour to $10 an hour. This is an increase of 

over 25 per cent over five years. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act will index minimum wage, 

which according to the member from Saskatoon Centre will, 

and I quote, “. . . take politics out of minimum wage increases.” 

Now we see the same member requesting that we delay the 

index of the minimum wage by slowing down this bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: why 

did that NDP caucus insist upon delaying the index of 

minimum wage, something themselves they described as a 

victory to all people in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What we’re 

talking about here is lost opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

lost opportunities to not only support those employees who are 

making minimum wage, just not with wages but there are many 

ways to support employees, including family responsibility 

leave, including breaks for things like breastfeeding. What is a 

modern economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This is what our debate 

and our concerns are today, that this government has plowed 

ahead. And without really taking an opportunity, they’ve 

completed missed an opportunity to do some very good things 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of the 

things that we are really puzzled with here is why this 

government is rushing ahead and plowing through with this bill 

when they haven’t yet fixed the problems with their last labour 

legislation. We see the essential services legislation has already 

been to the courts. We’ve already found out that they got it 

wrong because they didn’t listen. They plowed ahead and 

passed bad law. And now here they are doing it again. 

 

So my question is for the member from Carrot River Valley: 

why is your government stubbornly plowing ahead when you 

haven’t yet fixed the essential services legislation? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — I want to thank the member for the 

question. And I would like to say, as I said in my previous 

answer, we have been moving forward on this because we want 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2593 

to see Saskatchewan moving forward. 

 

Most of Saskatchewan’s labour legislation hasn’t been 

reviewed in at least 20 years. Mr. Speaker, let’s move this 

province forward. You know, we don’t want to sit back forever 

like the previous administration did and not do anything, some 

of them dating back to the ’40s. Mr. Speaker, let’s move this 

province forward. We’re not rushing at this but we’re putting it 

on a good timeline. And I again ask, if the NDP was so 

concerned about it, why didn’t they, why did they not submit 

anything on the 4,000 reports that came in? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale quoted a section of The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act which clearly indicates that 

employees are entitled to two consecutive days off each week. 

Moments later the same member asked the following question, 

and I quote, “So am I correct in saying that employees will no 

longer be entitled to two days off in a week?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly the NDP does not understand this new 

piece of legislation. So to the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale: is the NDP requesting the delay of the passage of 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act because your entire caucus 

needs time to sort out your confusion? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What we’d 

like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re asking the government to slow 

down because we believe the people of Saskatchewan should 

have an opportunity to participate in creating a modern set of 

labour standards and other labour legislation. We believe the 

people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’m having some difficulty 

hearing the member from Riversdale. The member from 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you. We want this government to 

listen to the people of Saskatchewan in a meaningful and 

thorough way, which involves actually meeting with them in 

person, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and encouraging public 

submission. 

 

Let’s take a page out of what the federal government did in 

2005-2006 and put in a real consultation process. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

One of the problems we in the opposition have with this 

particular initiative from the members opposite is the way that 

consultation has been flawed top to bottom on this. The last 

time they got consultations so wrong on a piece of, or a suite of 

labour legislation, Mr. Speaker, we wound up getting a free trip 

to the Supreme Court, which yet has to be fixed by that 

government. So with this piece of legislation we see as late as 

this week, the advisory council appointed by those members, 

the advice that the advisory council is referring, not being 

listened to. My question is to the member from Carrot River 

Valley: if they’re going to appoint an advisory council, why 

don’t they listen to their advice? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — I want to thank the member for that 

question. Mr. Speaker, we — like I keep on saying, as I have 

said before — we are moving this province forward. We’re 

working with the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

You know, this new Act, this new Act is going to be very 

simple for people to go through and look at, whether they’re . . . 

It’ll define the rights and responsibilities of employees, 

employers, and unions. This is what this Act is for: to make 

things simple so people can understand it. Even the people from 

across the aisle can actually go in there and understand it. It’s 

going to be that simple. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, the new Saskatchewan 

employment Act streamlines 12 pieces of outdated labour 

legislation into one comprehensive document. The need to 

modernize Saskatchewan labour legislation was apparent, as 

most of our province’s labour legislation hasn’t been 

comprehensibly reviewed in 20 years. In fact four Acts haven’t 

been reviewed since the 1940s and ’50s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the need for change is obvious, and our 

government is moving forward with this legislation. To the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale: is the NDP requesting our 

government to delay passage of this Act because they failed to 

hand in their submission on time? Are they asking for an 

extension on their homework? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and 

Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Hickie.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and the Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased to engage in this important debate. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

remind the Assembly:  



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

That . . . NDP Leader Thomas Mulcair’s contention that 

the western Canadian . . . [resource sector and energy 

sector] is responsible for the decline in central Canada’s 

manufacturing sector which Mr. Mulcair has referred to as 

Dutch disease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a robust and dynamic natural 

resource sector. Our natural resource sector is one of the driving 

forces in our strong economy and provides many Saskatchewan 

people with jobs. This sector is also one of the reasons that 

there are more people working in Saskatchewan than ever 

before. 

 

[12:00] 

 

In 2009, Mr. Speaker, Canada’s natural resources accounted for 

11.1 per cent of total Canadian gross domestic product. The 

energy sector accounted for 6.7 per cent, mining 2.7 per cent, 

and forestry 1.8 per cent. 

 

Canada’s resource sector directly employed 759,000 people in 

that year. This accounted for 5.2 per cent of the total direct 

employment in Canada. 

 

The resource sector accounted for 23.8 per cent of total capital 

investment in Canada in 2009, a dollar value of $73.6 billion. 

The energy sector accounted for 20 per cent or $62.2 billion. 

Mining accounted for 3.2 per cent or 9.8 billion. Forestry 

accounted for point five per cent or 1.6 billion. 

 

Natural resource sector accounted for 46.7 per cent of Canada’s 

total exports in 2009, a dollar value of $168 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. Energy resources accounted for 21.6 per cent or $77.9 

billion. The value of mining exports was $66.4 billion, 18.5 per 

cent of the Canadian total export value. Forestry accounted for 

23.7 billion in exports, 6.6 per cent of the national total. 

 

Saskatchewan merchandise exports are up 11 per cent over last 

January and were ranked number one in Canada. The dollar 

value of natural resource sector was $133 billion in that year. 

For comparison purposes, the automotive sector followed with 

a gross domestic product value of 15.3 billion, and the chemical 

product sector had a gross domestic product of $12.8 billion. 

Natural resource exports, which include energy, forestry, and 

mining, had a positive balance of trade of $69.5 billion. 

 

Saskatchewan’s per capita energy production is the highest in 

Canada. We account for roughly one-quarter Canadian primary 

energy production, and this is no small achievement for a 

province with only 3 per cent of the Canadian population. 

 

Saskatchewan’s primary energy production comes from coal, 

oil, natural gas, hydro, uranium, wind, and biofuels. 

Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada and one of the 

few jurisdictions in the world, Mr. Speaker, with commercial 

production from all these sectors. Mr. Speaker, we are also one 

of only four provinces in Canada that produces more energy 

than it consumes. 

 

Just one of our natural resources . . . Uranium contributes to our 

strong economy. Saskatchewan’s current uranium reserves are 

the energy equivalent of 19 billion barrels of oil or 4 billion 

tonnes of coal. Our province produces 17 per cent of the world 

uranium, and the second largest producer in 2011 behind 

Kazakhstan. Saskatchewan has the richest uranium deposits in 

the world and some of the largest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Uranium mines employ more than 3,000 people in 

Saskatchewan, over half of which are in the North. This is over 

3,000 individuals who have the utilization of one of our natural 

resources, uranium, to thank for their job. Not only that but 

Saskatchewan producers have a very good record both on 

environmental protection and worker health and safety. 

 

Our government’s goal is to ensure a fair return on resources 

for Saskatchewan people while maintaining economic 

competitiveness with other producing jurisdictions. We’ve 

always supported Saskatchewan’s natural resource sector, 

unlike the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. In 1990 the 

NDP stated that uranium mining is something that the New 

Democratic Party does not approve of. Its policy is to slowly 

phase out all three Saskatchewan mines and prevent new ones 

from getting started. 

 

Mr. Speaker, policies like that would mean 3,300 less jobs in 

Saskatchewan, and as I mentioned, more than half of those in 

the North. If we return to policies like that, Mr. Speaker, 

economic momentum in this province would cease. The cost of 

such policies is huge — the loss of direct and indirect jobs as 

well as the loss of revenue. That kind of mentality holds back 

growth. It holds back the benefits of growth like more jobs. The 

New Democrats don’t seem to understand that with growth 

comes greater revenue for the province, and greater revenue 

enables the government to better support those most vulnerable 

among us. Peter Prebble, an NDP candidate in 2011, is quoted 

as saying, “The Saskatchewan sale of uranium overseas is an 

immoral act.” Mr. Speaker, what’s immoral is to deny 3,300 

people jobs in this province. 

 

Uranium is just one of our natural resources, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. There are others that contribute significantly to our 

economy. Saskatchewan is home to 50 per cent of the world’s 

potash reserves, and our potash industry directly employs over 

4,500 individuals and contributes to the livelihood of many 

others. At current levels of demand, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan could supply the world demand for several 

hundred years. Saskatchewan’s potash industry routinely 

accounts for roughly 30 per cent of the world’s population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our natural resource sector employs people 

directly, but there are spinoffs, secondary and tertiary jobs that 

the sector supports. There are the individuals who work in a 

mine. Then there are the individuals who build the mine and the 

individuals who have the executive positions here in 

Saskatchewan, like Potash Corporation which has maintained 

many executive positions in this province. There are people 

who work at the coffee shops where the miners get their coffee, 

the individuals who work in retail where individuals who work 

in the natural resource sector purchase their clothing, or the car 

salesman, Mr. Speaker, the architects who design their houses, 

the servers in restaurants, and the list goes on and on. 

 

Our natural resource sector also brings tax dollars into our 

province, tax dollars that support social programs and support 

individuals who are in need, social programs like SAID, the 

Saskatchewan assured income disability program that offers 



March 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2595 

financial support to individuals with disabilities. 

 

The over 4,500 individuals the potash industry employs is just 

the start. Industry estimates project $13 billion in expansion 

expected from now through 2020. BHP Billiton’s Jansen 

project could be the largest mine in the world, employing over 

1,000 people. K+S, an over $3 billion investment will add 300 

permanent jobs on top of the 1,000 construction jobs in the 

Bethune area. Potash demand is only going to increase due to 

an increase in world food demand and a growing world 

population. New expansions will be the first to market resulting 

in opportunities to capture more than the current world market 

share for Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population is at an all-time high. 

We’re the second fastest growing province in Canada. The 

province’s population has now increased for 22 consecutive 

quarters, and in the past five years, Saskatchewan has grown by 

nearly 80,000 people. People are coming to Saskatchewan 

because it’s a great place to live, a great place to work. People 

are coming to Saskatchewan for the opportunities, and the 

resource sector is one of the areas that afford people those 

opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government wants to ensure that these 

opportunities continue. Saskatchewan has been rated as the best 

place in Canada for oil and gas investment based on the 

opinions of petroleum executives and the managers in the 

annual Fraser Institute survey. Saskatchewan is the second 

largest oil producer in Canada and the sixth largest oil producer 

among all American states and Canadian provinces. 

Saskatchewan has set a new record for the number of horizontal 

wells drilled in 2011 and broke that record in 2012. The 2012 

figure was up 2 per cent over 2011, at 2,036. 

 

2012 was also the best year on record for crude oil production, 

with an average of 473,000 barrels per day produced for a total 

of 172.9 million barrels. Saskatchewan’s remaining oil reserves 

are currently estimated at 1.2 billion barrels. The industry 

invested an estimated $4.7 billion in new exploration and 

development in Saskatchewan in 2012. The upstream oil and 

gas industry accounted for approximately 34,000 direct and 

indirect jobs in 2012, a 3 per cent increase over 2011. Revenue 

from the sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas rights for 

2012 calendar year was $105.7 million. The net effect of all this 

is predictable. When the oil patch is doing well, Saskatchewan 

is doing well. 

 

According to the Petroleum Services Association of Canada, oil 

and gas drilling in Saskatchewan is expected to increase by 11 

per cent. This is the highest percentage increase in the country. 

With a record of economic growth and one of the lowest 

unemployment rates in Canada, Saskatchewan is a place of 

unparalleled opportunity. These opportunities include 

employment and educational opportunities. 

 

The natural resource sector is training Saskatchewan residents, 

and we’ve invested a record $2.8 billion in post-secondary 

education, including over $46 million in funding for First 

Nations and Métis education and training. This represents a 20 

per cent increase from the previous year. 

 

The natural resource sector provides jobs to Saskatchewan 

people, but it also provides educational opportunities including 

many for First Nations individuals. First Nations and Métis 

institutions such as the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies, the Gabriel Dumont Institute, the Dumont 

Technical Institute, and the First Nations University of Canada 

are playing a leadership role in recruiting and training for many 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal students. Many of the programs these 

institutions offer link directly into our resource sector and their 

success of their students. 

 

We have helped to ensure these institutions have the funding 

necessary to facilitate student success. We will continue to 

work with our partners across post-secondary system so that 

Saskatchewan students including First Nations and Métis 

students get the training they need to succeed in their careers. 

 

As I indicated at the beginning of my speech, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan has a robust and dynamic resource sector. Our 

natural resource sector is one of the reasons we have a strong 

economy. Our natural resource sector is also one of the reasons 

why there are more people employed in Saskatchewan than 

ever before. And there is potential for growth — growth that 

would mean more jobs for the people of Saskatchewan, growth 

that would mean more educational opportunities for the people 

of Saskatchewan, growth that would mean greater prosperity 

for the people of Saskatchewan. This prosperity would benefit 

all of Saskatchewan including our First Nations populations. 

 

The world is looking for energy security and food security. 

And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is poised to be a leader in 

these sectors. Our natural resource sector is an important part of 

our economy and provides the people of our province with a 

multitude of opportunities. Mr. Speaker, the world is looking at 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It is my duty pursuant to rule 26 to advise the 

Assembly that this item of business has been previously 

adjourned three times and that every question necessary to 

dispose of the motion will now be put. It has been moved by the 

member for Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its disagreement with NDP 

Leader Thomas Mulcair’s contention that the western 

Canadian energy and resource sector is responsible for 

the decline in central Canada’s manufacturing sector 

which Mr. Mulcair has referred to as Dutch disease. 

 

All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:12 until 12:18.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2013 

[Yeas —43] 

 

Morgan Stewart Duncan 

Krawetz Boyd Eagles 

McMorris Cheveldayoff Harpauer 

Toth Huyghebaert Doherty 

Marchuk Reiter McMillan 

Heppner Harrison Wyant 

Tell Elhard Hart 

Bradshaw Bjornerud Brkich 

Hutchinson Makowsky Ottenbreit 

Campeau Wilson Norris 

Ross Kirsch Michelson 

Doke Jurgens Steinley 

Hickie Lawrence Tochor 

Moe Parent Phillips 

Docherty   

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays— 2] 

 

Nilson McCall  

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Mr. Speaker, 

members for, 43; members against, 2.  

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned to 

1:30 p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:21.] 

 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2575 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2575 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2575 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2575 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2575 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Women’s Day 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2576 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2576 

 Remembering a Canadian Music Icon 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2576 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2576 

 Nurse Leadership Conference 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2577 

 Entertainer Honoured for Contributions to Province 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2577 

 Yorkton Receives Sustainable Community Award 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2577 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public-Private Partnerships 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2577 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2578 

 Support for Creative Industries 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2579 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2579 

 Community Pastures 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2580 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2580 

 Prince Albert Bridge 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2581 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2581 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 86 — The Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2582 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Passage of Bill No. 85 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2582, 2592 

  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2584, 2592 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2586, 2592 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2587 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2589, 2592 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2590 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2592 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2592 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2593 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2593 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2593 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2593 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2596 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


