




















































Hansard: December 04, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 24A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4391 

 December 4, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — In accordance with provisions in section 14.1 

of The Provincial Auditor Act, I table the 2013 report volume 2. 

 

And in accordance to section 80.3 of The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act, 2007 and in accordance with the 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, I table the Legislative Library annual report for 

the period of April 1, 2012 to March 31st, 2013. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly, producers and industry representatives 

seated in your gallery. I’d like to recognize first — and I ask 

them to wave when I introduce them — Levi Wood from the 

Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association; Wayne 

Truman, SaskCanola; Murray Purcell, Saskatchewan Irrigation 

Projects Association; Tim Oleksyn, producer from Prince 

Albert and Chair of the Ag Development Fund board; and Dave 

Marit, president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. And I also want to recognize the entire SARM 

board of directors and I hope I don’t miss anybody: Tim Leurer, 

Rod Wiens, Doug Steele, Norm Nordgulen, Don Taylor, 

Harvey Malanowich, and Ron Stevens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier today we learned that Stats Canada has 

estimated Saskatchewan’s 2013 crop production is a record 38.4 

million tonnes. This surpasses the growth plan target we had set 

for 36 million tonnes by 2020. The credit for this 

accomplishment goes to our producers and our entire industry. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking these industry reps for 

all they do for our province, congratulating them and all 

producers on this significant achievement, and welcoming them 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 

behalf of the official opposition, we too want to congratulate all 

the producers in Saskatchewan for a fantastic crop year and 

production year. And I also want to welcome these individuals 

from the various groups here from Western Canadian Wheat 

Growers, SaskCanola, the irrigation board, Ag Development 

Fund board, and the SARM board for all your contributions to 

the industry here in Saskatchewan. And we want to welcome 

you to your Legislative Assembly. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 

Relations. 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I would like to introduce 

a couple of people that are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

staff members in my office and the Minister of Government 

Relations office. We have Meaghan Kosloski, administrative 

assistant, and with Meaghan is Linda Roy. Linda’s a senior 

administrative assistant, and she’s accompanied today by her 

husband, Guy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Linda’s had a lengthy career in public service, 

including stints in Education, Advanced Education, and Health. 

And in 2007, she joined the staff in the building here, Mr. 

Speaker, as administrative assistant in Advanced Education. For 

the last 18 months, I’ve had the opportunity to work with her. 

 

And the reason I’m telling you this, Mr. Speaker, is because 

later this month, Linda will be retiring. Mr. Speaker, her and her 

husband, Guy, I think are planning on spending much of the 

cold winters in sunny Arizona. They’ve purchased a property 

down there, and they’re very much looking forward to it. And I 

would ask all members to not only welcome Linda to her 

Legislative Assembly but also to wish her well in her 

retirement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you a few special guests that are in the galleries 

today. 

 

We have in the east gallery, Mr. Larry Hubich, president of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, and also Heath Smith of 

the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] staff. And in 

your gallery, we have Kirby Benning, president of the 

Saskatchewan firefighters here again, well for the second day in 

a row. So I ask all members in joining me in welcoming them to 

their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to join with the member opposite in welcoming these three 

individuals to the Assembly today. Mr. Hubich and Mr. Smith 

are no strangers to the people here, but I would like to take this 

opportunity to thank Mr. Hubich for his contribution to the 

advisory committee over the last year. And I’d like to thank all 

of the people that participated on that, and would of course like 

to recognize and welcome Mr. Benning back who was of 

course, as people know, here yesterday and no doubt will have 

some interest in legislation that’s being introduced later today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

Assembly, two individuals seated in the eastern gallery. I’m 

speaking of Nathaniel Cole and Taylor Apperley. Now 

Nathaniel is an activist, he’s a community-minded individual, 

and it’s good to see him here today in his Legislative Assembly. 

 

But you’ll forgive me, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a special 

word of how good it is to see Taylor Apperly here today in her 



4392 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

Legislative Assembly. I’ve known Taylor since before she was 

born, and she’s now a second-year university student at the 

University of Regina. And she comes from a pretty proud line 

of community activists. Her grandmother used to be active 

helping Allan Blakeney in north central Regina. She used to 

help pinch the perogies for the annual bake sale. Her mother 

works with me in the Regina Elphinstone-Centre constituency 

office and does a tremendous amount of work for the people of 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre and Taylor, who’s got the mind and 

the heart to carry that proud tradition on. So it’s really good to 

see Nathaniel and Taylor here today at their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

my honour and privilege to introduce my better half to her 

Legislative Assembly, my wife, Leane Durand, sitting in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, she is a 10-year 

businesswoman in Saskatoon, recently featured as a huge 

entrepreneurial success with her editorial that was on the front 

page of the National Post about a month ago. So very proud of 

her. Very proud that she is promoting Saskatchewan in many, 

many ways and also, one foot at a time, improving the footwear 

in Saskatchewan. So thank you very much to my wife for all of 

her support while I’m down here working on behalf of the 

people of Saskatoon Sutherland. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater support for 

anti-bullying initiatives. And we know that bullying causes 

serious harm, and the consequences of bullying are devastating, 

including depression, self-harm, addictions, and suicide, and 

that other provinces have brought forward legislation and 

various tools and programs showing swift and effective 

government action. We know that bullying is a human rights 

issue, one of safety and inclusion. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan children from bullying because lives of 

young people are at stake and that this government must 

do more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

because the leaders and residents of northern Saskatchewan are 

concerned about seniors’ care in the North. The Croft report of 

2009 showed a serious shortage of long-term care beds for 

seniors, and the problem has only gotten worse. The seniors 

have done their part for this province, and it’s time for the 

government to do their part. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to treat northern Saskatchewan senior 

citizens with respect and dignity and to immediately invest 

in a long-term care facility in the La Ronge area. 

 

And it’s signed by many northern Saskatchewan residents. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 

the gym at Sacred Heart Community School in north central 

Regina is now quite literally falling apart, has been closed 

indefinitely, and is no longer safe for students or staff. The 

petitioners are well aware that there is a temporary solution that 

has been provided in refurbishing the old sanctuary at the old 

Sacred Heart Church, but they call for a permanent solution. 

 

The petitioners also point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Sacred 

Heart Community School is the largest school in north central 

Regina with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of whom are First 

Nations and Métis. They point out that enrolment has increased 

by 100-plus students over the past four years and that 

attendance and learning outcomes are steadily improving. And 

they point out that as a matter of basic fairness and common 

sense, Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to 

immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 

of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Collaborative Emergency Care Model a Success 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand in the 

Assembly today to speak about the success of the Maidstone 

Collaborative Emergency Centre during its premiere months. 

The success of the new model or new care model which opened 

in September is terrific news for the Maidstone community and 

Prairie North Health Region. 

 

The 24/7 CEC [collaborative emergency centre] model was 

introduced to address the challenges of providing health care in 

rural communities. This model of health care delivery ensures 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4393 

the community has access to stable, reliable primary health 

care, reduces emergency room visits, and increases patient and 

provider satisfaction. 

 

Of the patients seen at the Maidstone CEC during its first two 

months, less than a quarter had to be transferred to hospitals in 

Lloydminster or North Battleford for more intensive care. The 

remainder were able to get the care they needed in the comfort 

of their own community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this model was the first of its kind in 

Saskatchewan. Introducing this innovative model of health care 

delivery in our province was the result of collaborative effort by 

many partners to improve patient care, and it was great to see 

Maidstone lead the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to commend the Maidstone 

Health Complex, Prairie North Health Region, and all other 

supportive partners on a successful implementation of the CEC 

model. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Remembering Catherine Charles 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a heavy heart that I 

stand to recognize the life of Catherine Charles.  

 

Catherine Charles was a deeply respected elder of the Lac La 

Ronge Indian Band. She became known for her large family 

gatherings attended by many children, grandchildren, and 

great-grandchildren. She was and is a pillar of our community. I 

am lucky to have been included among the many community 

members Catherine welcomed as part of her extended family. I 

am grateful for the love and support she gave me. 

 

Over the years, Elder Catherine played an important role 

providing guidance and support on many topics and issues that 

affected our communities. She fought hard to overcome 

adversity, personal tragedy, and the struggle facing Aboriginal 

women. Elder Catherine showed her love of children and 

community through the La Ronge school committee, and also 

as a representative with Indian Child and Family Services. In 

her lifetime, Catherine served on many boards and committees 

within our community. 

 

I was honoured to have nominated and presented Catherine with 

the Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Medal last December at 

the family Christmas meal. Elder Catherine was an insightful 

woman. After winning the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal in 

2005, she humbly suggested there was much yet to be done for 

her people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to please join 

me in recognizing the kindness, wisdom, and caring spirit of 

Elder Catherine Charles. She will be truly missed. I and many 

others will have her in our hearts and prayers. Tiniki, Catherine. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Record Harvest in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

earlier today StatsCan released the 2013 crop production 

numbers, and I’m pleased to report that Saskatchewan 

producers have harvested the largest crop in the province’s 

history at 38.4 million tonnes. This is a 40 per cent increase 

above 2012 production, a 48 per cent increase above the 

10-year average, and a 63 per cent increase since 2007. Mr. 

Speaker, this record crop is not possible without the hard work 

of everyone involved in our agriculture industry across 

Saskatchewan, especially our producers. 

 

In 2012, as part of the Saskatchewan plan for growth, we set out 

an ambitious goal of increasing crop production by 10 million 

tonnes, from 26 million tonnes to 36 million tonnes by 2020. 

Many people thought it couldn’t be done. But, Mr. Speaker, our 

producers have achieved the goal in just two years by producing 

this 38.4 million tonnes this year. 

 

And while we know the weather plays an important role in 

producing a record crop, we should not discount the innovation 

and technology that goes into producing a successful crop. 

Saskatchewan is home to one-third of Canada’s agriculture 

biotech research. Our producers are world leaders in adopting 

new technology and research, and it certainly showed this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we achieved this growth plan goal, we know 

there is more work to do to maintain this level of production. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join me in thanking our 

producers for their dedication and commitment and to 

congratulate them on producing the largest crop in 

Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Professor Wins Community Service Award 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Monsieur le Président, je tiens à féliciter un de 

mes électeurs fransaskois qui a récemment reçu un prix très 

spéciale. 

 

[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate one of 

my Fransaskois constituents who has recently received a very 

special award.] 

 

Professor Wilfrid Denis was presented the Margaret Dutli 

Professional and Community Service Award last month for his 

activism in the Fransaskois community. This special award 

aims to acknowledge sustained involvement in and commitment 

to community service by a St. Thomas More faculty member. 

 

Professor Denis has worked tirelessly trying to secure 

community minority rights and encourage the thriving 

Fransaskois culture and language rights in this province. He has 

been an advocate, spokesperson, and policy maker for the 

French community for over three decades. 

 

Dr. Denis has been a Saskatoon Francophone School Board 

member and was involved in the creation of the first French as 

first language school in Saskatoon. He’s also a member of the 

provincial Fransaskois foundation and Chair of the fundraising 



4394 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

committee of la Fédération des Francophones de Saskatoon. Dr. 

Denis has helped raise over a quarter of a million dollars for the 

creation of a Fransaskois community centre. These are several 

examples of how Dr. Denis has contributed to his community in 

his 30-plus years of leadership. 

 

His intense engagement with the Fransaskois community has 

made Professor Denis an invaluable contributor to the St. 

Thomas More College’s mission and a deserving recipient of 

the Professional and Community Service Award. 

 

I ask all members to recognize the tireless work of Dr. Denis in 

shaping and contributing to the Fransaskois community in this 

province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 

 

Honouring Whitewood Volunteer Firefighter 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend I had the 

honour of attending a retirement service for a constituent of 

mine, Mr. Gordon Johnson of Whitewood. Gord is retiring after 

donating his time as a volunteer firefighter for a remarkable 54 

years, Mr. Speaker. He has also managed the duties of the 

Whitewood volunteer fire department as fire chief since 1968. 

Mr. Speaker, you can be sure that he has jumped from a dead 

sleep on many nights, as well as raced out in all kinds of 

weather, in response to fire calls over the years. 

 

Volunteer firefighters like Gord are invaluable to a community, 

Mr. Speaker, and we owe them many thanks for the work they 

do in addition to their regular jobs. We also thank their wives 

and families for their ongoing support. 

 

Many volunteer firemen trained under Gordon’s leadership and, 

thanks to his dedicated efforts, the local volunteer fire 

department grew into one that can respond to a variety of fire 

and rescue calls with some of the best vehicles and equipment 

available. While Gordon never asked for recognition or thanks, 

it was an honour for his fellow firemen from the Whitewood 

volunteer fire department to invite the community to honour 

him last weekend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Mr. 

Gordon Johnson and all the volunteer firefighters across this 

province for his contributions and their contributions to 

volunteer firefighting in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

2014 Saskatchewan Winter Games 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to share some good news about the 2014 Saskatchewan 

Winter Games, which will take place February 16 to 22 in 

Prince Albert. The games will bring approximately 1,800 youth 

athletes from across the province to compete in 16 different 

events during the week-long event. 

 

On Friday my colleague from Prince Albert Carlton and I were 

privileged to attend the announcement that the 2014 

Saskatchewan Winter Games would receive up to $125,000 

from the Saskatchewan Games Council. The funding will be 

matched by the city of Prince Albert host organizing committee, 

which would take the maximum amount received up to 

$250,000. The Winter Games organizers plan to use the funding 

for facility upgrades and new equipment purchases ahead of the 

2014 event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this funding is a tremendous opportunity for the 

games to leave a legacy for all sports happening in the city of 

Prince Albert, as nearly all of them will receive some sort of 

support from the grant. Al Dyer, chairman of the Prince Albert 

2014 Saskatchewan Winter Games, feels the legacy the updates 

and new equipment will leave will provide better competition 

for all sports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

Saskatchewan Games Council for their generous contribution 

and in wishing the 2014 Winter Games organizing committee 

all the best for a successful event. Thank you Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Festival of Trees in Estevan 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 

weekend, Estevan’s St. Joseph’s Hospital Foundation hosted its 

first ever Festival of Trees, which I attended. It was a fantastic 

weekend to ring in the Christmas season that included plenty of 

seasonal activities, as well as a beautiful hall full of decorated 

trees and Christmas ornaments. 

 

The well-attended dinner featured a great traditional Christmas 

feast and allowed people to support the St. Joseph’s Hospital 

Foundation through an auction of the decorated trees donated to 

the event, as well as many other auction items. Guests were also 

treated to a special Christmas performance by the well-known 

musical comedy act, The Arrogant Worms. 

 

The event did a great job of raising awareness about the 

meaning and purpose of the Hospital Foundation and was also a 

great way for the community to give back to the local hospital 

that maintains and saves the lives of family and friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Festival of Trees was a huge success, thanks to 

the great work done by event organizer Becky Conly, Greg 

Hoffart, the sponsors, and volunteers from the community. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the St. 

Joseph’s Hospital Foundation and all those involved in this 

successful event. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Emergency Room Wait Times 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a fair bit 

of discussion about emergency rooms over the past few weeks. 

The auditor’s report released today contains some very 

concerning information about the state of emergency room care 

here in the province. Even if you don’t count the length of time 

it takes from showing up at the ER [emergency room] to being 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4395 

triaged, nearly half of the patients who show up in the 

emergency room are not seen within the recognized minimum 

standard time frame. To the Premier: how on earth is it 

acceptable that nearly half of emergency room patients in our 

province are waiting longer than the recognized minimum 

standard time frame? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Provincial Auditor has made a recommendation to the 

Saskatoon Health Region as it relates to triaging emergency 

patients. Mr. Speaker, the health region accepts those 

recommendations. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the health care 

system in this province will be incorporating much of those 

recommendations within the emergency room, emergency 

department wait time initiative, which has set a goal for this 

province to eliminate waits in the emergency department by 

2017. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have identified a number of ways to improve 

the flow of patients within emergency rooms by reducing those 

people that are in the hospital waiting for either discharge or 

admission to long-term care in Saskatoon Health Region. That’s 

down 22 per cent over the last two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also looking at doing some innovative 

things around primary health care, Mr. Speaker, increasing the 

hours of primary health care such as the Meadow clinic here in 

Regina that is open from 9 to 9, seven days a week, and over 

the course of December will in fact be open until midnight, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We also have integrated a new bed management system that 

will significantly help the flow of patients in emergency rooms 

and free up emergency room physicians to deal with new 

patients that come in. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, even if you leave out the length of 

time it takes for someone waiting to see a triage nurse, Mr. 

Speaker, nearly half of the patients who show up in emergency 

rooms are not seen within a time frame that is recognized as a 

minimum standard. That’s shocking, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

not acceptable. We know it’s far worse, Mr. Speaker, if you 

actually include the length of time people wait in the triage line. 

 

The auditor says that processes are not in place to address this 

problem, and in her report she calls on this government to put 

processes in place that do not exist, Mr. Speaker, in order to 

address this issue. To the Premier: when will the government 

put processes in place in order to ensure that emergency 

patients in our province are not waiting for unacceptably long 

periods of time? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — As I have mentioned before, Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatoon Health Region does accept the findings 

of the Provincial Auditor and will be working to implement 

those as well, Mr. Speaker. The system as a whole will be 

looking to incorporate the findings of the Provincial Auditor as 

we work towards a province-wide zero wait time initiative 

within emergency departments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite in the past have talked about a national 

paper that came out from the Canadian association of 

emergency room physicians. Mr. Speaker, they identify a 

number of ways to improve emergency care. I’ll talk a little bit 

about those. 

 

Improving primary care access. Mr. Speaker, we’re doing that 

through initiatives like the Meadow primary clinic. 

 

Improving EMS co-ordination. Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Health 

Region at St. Paul’s for example has reduced the handover time 

from emergency personnel through EMT [emergency medical 

technician] to the emergency room staff by 90 per cent. As well, 

STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] here in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing significant turnover time, reducing 

the turnover time because the helicopter will now be able to 

land right at the hospital. 

 

And engage in process improvement management. Techniques 

such as lean have shown that many hospital and ED [emergency 

department] processes can be simplified. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

leading the way in Canada on this front. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Health minister is suggesting 

that everything is great and that we’re leading the way. It is the 

Provincial Auditor who says that the processes are not in place 

and nearly half of the people showing up at the ER are not 

receiving care within a recognized minimum standard time 

frame. The auditor also says, Mr. Speaker, the way that this 

government measures wait times in ER doesn’t actually reflect 

the reality that patients experience. 

 

The government only calculates ER wait times after patients 

have been triaged. But we know the length of time that the 

patient can wait for the triage can be significant. The health 

region says most patients wait at least 25 minutes and the 

auditor talks about patients waiting over an hour just to be 

triaged. ER times shouldn’t be something that this government 

manipulates in order to make the picture look rosier than it 

actually is. 

 

My question to the Premier: when will this government start 

accurately reporting ER wait times? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, just as soon as the Leader 

of the Opposition starts to accurately portray the picture that is 

actually taking place in Saskatchewan. The Provincial Auditor 

has identified this in Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatoon Health Region accepts the findings of the Provincial 

Auditor and is working to make improvements. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we have begun a province-wide initiative to eliminate 

wait times within emergency departments by 2017. We’ve 

brought together all the health regions just in the last three 

weeks in this province, Mr. Speaker, to start to put together the 

benchmarks that will be used province-wide so that we have a 

consistent measure across the province, Mr. Speaker. 



4396 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

So, Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that this needs to be 

improved and that’s why we’ve set a target that nobody will 

wait for emergency department services by 2017. We’re not 

afraid to set those goals, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we don’t 

disregard the findings of the Provincial Auditor on this front. 

And we will be implementing this, and we will be achieving our 

goal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor accurately 

describes the situation. Recommendation here on page 232: 

 

We recommend that the Saskatoon Regional Health 

Authority accurately measure and report the total wait 

time, starting from the patients’ arrival into its emergency 

departments until the time they see a physician [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

The auditor reports that one of the big problems affecting our 

emergency rooms is that patients are waiting far too long to be 

admitted to the hospital. The auditor found that 40 per cent of 

ER beds are occupied by patients waiting to be admitted to 

acute care beds. Four out of every 10 emergency room beds 

occupied by people just waiting to get into a regular hospital 

bed. 

 

The auditor notes that the government has a goal to reduce the 

time that ER patients wait to be admitted to acute care beds, but 

she says, “It has not yet identified action plans or established 

processes to achieve this goal.” My question to the Premier: 

why not? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor is 

correct, and not just in Saskatoon Health Region, to have a 

province-wide goal to, not just Saskatoon Health Region, to 

have a goal of having no ER, emergency department waits by 

2017. It’s a province-wide goal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s why, just in the last three weeks, after the Provincial 

Auditor would’ve completed their work on this important file, 

Mr. Speaker, we had a stakeholder session, a two-day session in 

Saskatoon where we brought together all health regions and 

other stakeholders like the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association], like the Canadian association of emergency room 

physicians, like SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], and 

other organizations, Mr. Speaker, to identify a plan forward on 

how we achieve no waits in emergency departments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that meeting just took place in the last number of 

weeks. We’re collecting the information from that two-day 

session and that information will be put forward to the public so 

that we can have a plan to achieve no waits in emergency 

departments by 2017. We’re not afraid of those goals. We’re 

not afraid of setting those plans and having a plan to actually 

achieve it, unlike the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

Seniors’ and Long-Term Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Health minister has 

repeatedly referred to patients who are in hospitals waiting for 

placement in a care facility as bed blockers. The Canadian 

Association of Retired Persons recently said the term bed 

blocker is offensive. “It belies a worrisome attitude toward a 

certain population of patients. I’m not being hypersensitive. I’m 

worried that they are not going to give them priority, that they 

won’t be treated well.” 

 

We’ve seen many examples of that worrisome attitude, Mr. 

Speaker, and many examples of seniors not being treated well. 

One such case was the Phillips family which had to pay $1,000 

per week, Mr. Speaker, for private care aids to care for their 

mom in hospital, Sylvia, someone the Health minister would 

refer to as a bed blocker. To the minister: will he stop using this 

term, bed blocker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with respect 

to the member’s question, I appreciate her question. We are 

certainly very much concerned about those people who are in 

beds waiting for placement either in long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker, or perhaps to be discharged back to their home with 

the proper supports, Mr. Speaker. That is absolutely a certainty 

by this government that we are concerned about those 

individuals. And I will endeavour to choose my words more 

correctly, more properly in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the reason that seniors are 

occupying beds in hospitals is because there is nowhere else for 

them to go. The minister has admitted that this government has 

hardly added any new long-term care beds despite having six 

years and record revenues with which to do so. No wonder 

Barbara Blyth, the senior from La Ronge who was pushing for a 

much needed seniors’ care facility, said recently, “To stand up 

in the legislature and say, oh we’ve been aware of the problem 

for some time, my question then is, then why the hell haven’t 

you done something about it?” To the minister: how does he . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It’s true. Even the Deputy Premier 

can’t get away from that and neither can the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale. The member knows to use appropriate 

wording in the House and I would caution her not to use that 

kind of wording in the future. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think it is evidently . . . It’s clear to the people of this 

province that this government has undertaken significant work 

in just six years of government, knowing that not all of the 

problems left by the NDP [New Democratic Party] have been 

fixed. Mr. Speaker, we have invested nearly $1 billion in health 

care capital and maintenance, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 

in the process of building 13 long-term care facilities across this 

province, Mr. Speaker, long neglected by the NDP. Over $230 

million invested into those projects, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

and significant dollars put into maintenance of our existing 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4397 

facilities, whether they be long-term . . . That is, Mr. Speaker, in 

comparison to the NDP who only invested $300 million in their 

last six years. We wouldn’t be in this position of trying to dig 

ourselves out of this problem had they only invested more 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, in their six years, last six years of 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Landfill Management 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan take 

their water quality very seriously. So it’s no wonder people are 

concerned that some landfills in the province could contaminate 

sources of drinking water and affect the safety and health of 

Saskatchewan families. In her report released today, the auditor 

found that this government is not properly regulating landfills. 

In nearly half of the landfills classified as moderate to high risk, 

the auditor found they didn’t even have environmental 

monitoring requirements. And that’s on page 213, Mr. Speaker. 

The result could be severe water contamination. 

 

To the minister: why is this government leaving people open to 

the risk of drinking water contamination by not putting in place 

proper environmental monitoring of landfills? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d be pleased to take this question on behalf of the 

government. We thank the auditor for her report and the 

recommendations. Mr. Speaker, in this regard we generally 

accept all of the auditor’s recommendations and are working 

towards implementation. And we will implement 

recommendations as part of the development of a solid waste 

management strategy for the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that this 

government has heard these concerns. The government’s own 

Water Security Agency acknowledged in their State of the 

Watershed Report in 2010 that 18 of the province’s 29 

watersheds are under moderate- to high-intensity stress from 

landfills. Let me repeat that. Sixty-two per cent of 

Saskatchewan’s watersheds are under moderate- to 

high-intensity stress as a result of landfills. Now today the 

Provincial Auditor is saying that this government needs to do 

much more to protect ground and surface water from 

contamination by landfills. 

 

To the minister: when will the government stop ignoring this 

problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Again we thank the auditor for her report, accept the findings of 

the report. Mr. Speaker, the solid waste management strategy 

will incorporate the Environmental Code which will help 

facilitate a more efficient regulation of waste management in 

Saskatchewan. We recognize that need for enhancing the 

landfill management program and have already undertaken 

some initiatives, Mr. Speaker. We’ve created a dedicated 

landfill section within the Ministry of the Environment, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’ve implemented an annual compliance plan 

that addresses monitoring, inspections, and follow-up, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think this government has indicated 

that we are prepared to meet that challenge and are working 

hard to do so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been told that landfill 

contamination is a significant problem in Saskatoon. Even 

though the landfill is downstream from the water intake system, 

what we’ve been told is that contaminated water from the 

landfill is flowing into the river upstream from the water intake 

system. To confirm this, we put in an FOI [freedom of 

information] request. But this government has delayed the 

release of any documents until next week after the fall 

legislative session concludes. 

 

With the Provincial Auditor confirming that landfill 

contamination is still not receiving the attention it needs from 

this government, the fact that the government is delaying 

release of internal documents on this is highly concerning. So 

my question to the minister: what does he know about landfill 

contamination of the river in Saskatoon, and what is this 

government doing about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t think anyone can make the claim that this 

government doesn’t take water very seriously within the 

province, Mr. Speaker. We put together a 25-year water security 

plan for the province, Mr. Speaker. We began testing our 

pristine northern lakes for the first time, Mr. Speaker, when the 

members opposite chose not to do so, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 

instituted a five-year boreal watershed management strategy, 

Mr. Speaker, something that unfortunately the members 

opposite failed to put in place during their time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the auditor, we accept the findings 

of the auditor, Mr. Speaker. We are implementing 

recommendations to develop a solid waste management strategy 

for the province, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that our environment is 

protected for this generation and the next. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Financial Reporting 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government’s two sets 

of books don’t even meet basic standards of accounting, made 

clear again today by our Provincial Auditor. Today’s auditor’s 

report is scathing and condemning, highlighting an appalling 

dismissal of accountability by that government. The auditor 

called the accounting of that government, the books of that 

government, misleading and wrong, and in today’s report the 

auditor states the books are “not reliable as they contain 



4398 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

significant material errors.” 

 

That’s because in part, Mr. Speaker, the auditor says the 

province ran over a half billion dollar deficit in the GRF 

[general revenue fund] instead of the false spin of surplus that 

they pretended and boasted about to the public. And the auditor 

said these two sets of error-filled books cause confusion and are 

inappropriate. 

 

How can that government continue to ignore the Provincial 

Auditor and table cooked, inaccurate, misleading books? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

What we’re committed to is . . . We’re committed to full and 

transparent financial accounting to the public of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even at the time of the NDP in government, there 

was a position taken by the Government of Saskatchewan, 

which we have followed, which is to produce two sets of 

statements, Mr. Speaker. The General Revenue Fund, which I 

have often referred to as the operating account or the 

chequebook account, Mr. Speaker, that’s where the public 

monies come in and are disbursed accordingly to the ministries. 

On the other side, Mr. Speaker, are the financial statements, the 

summary financials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite who has asked the question 

has asked that we only follow the summary. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve taken a different approach. We’ve taken a different 

approach because we want to ensure that both of the statements 

are presented. And, Mr. Speaker, we do exactly that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in an unprecedented step, 

the auditor has for the first time ever issued an adverse opinion 

on the financial statements. Mr. Speaker, this is no small matter. 

The auditor says adverse opinions are rare and “should cause 

concern for legislators and the public.” The significant errors in 

these sets of books shows that the public’s being spun incorrect 

information by that government. And the auditor says today in 

her report that this should be a red flag for the public. She says, 

“Readers should not rely on the financial results reported in 

these statements.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an appalling failure of transparency and 

accountability by that government. How can that government 

knowingly report incorrect information with their cooked and 

misleading books to the people of our . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. In the past, Speakers have made a 

decision, Speaker Kowalsky, that the term “cooked” was not 

parliamentary. I would ask that the member withdraw it and 

apologize. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Withdraw and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — How can that government knowingly 

report incorrect information with their incorrect, misleading 

books to the people of our province, forcing the auditor to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member stated that the 

government was deliberately providing incorrect information 

and then said it was misleading. Again, the member has been 

here long enough to know which words he can use and which 

he can’t, and the context in which he is using them. Again I ask 

that you withdraw those remarks and apologize. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Withdraw and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — You’re done. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, if there are people 

watching this display, they would tend to look at the summary 

financial and wonder what the member opposite is actually 

asking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a new position, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 

Public Accounts . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s the Public Accounts 

document from March 31 of this spring. And I want to read one 

paragraph, Mr. Speaker, about the summary financial 

statements which the member opposite has asked that we follow 

only, Mr. Speaker. And this is the opinion of the auditor then, 

Mr. Speaker. It says this: 

 

In my opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in 

all material respects, the financial position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan as at March 31, 2013, and 

the results of its operations, changes in its net debt, and its 

cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with 

Canadian public sector accounting standards [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

That is the position of the auditor on summaries. We have had 

20 years of not qualified statements on the summaries and 

we’re going to continue to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s bizarre that that 

government would brush off an adverse opinion of the 

Provincial Auditor. If this were a publicly traded company, this 

would be unacceptable, would impact trading, would have a 

direct impact on the board of directors and administration, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that government knows that the errors in these books are 

huge. In one of its two sets of books, the government is found to 

have understated the province’s debt by over $6 billion — $6 

billion, Mr. Speaker. She finds that they understated expenses 

and liabilities and overstated a surplus when they actually ran a 

deficit of more than a half billion dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the auditor raises a red flag and says the 

books are “materially incorrect,” the public has serious cause 

for concern about the lack of transparency and accountability 

from that government. How can this government stand by these 

books that mislead Saskatchewan people, hiding the true state 

of the province’s finances . . . 

 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4399 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — If the member wants me to continue to 

intercede and use up question period time, he can continue to 

use wording that . . . The auditor’s words were not those words 

that you used. You quoted the correct . . . If you wish to argue 

with me, you will do so from outside of the Chamber, Mr. 

Member. And that goes for all of the members. Now I ask the 

member to again withdraw the remarks and apologize. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Withdraw and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, for decades now the Government of Saskatchewan 

has operated on two systems. In fact, Mr. Speaker, to begin 

with, prior to 2004, the former NDP government only operated 

with the General Revenue Fund budget, Mr. Speaker. And they 

operated it the same way we do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have never said and nor did the New Democratic 

government ever say that the General Revenue Fund statements 

were a replacement for the summaries. They are simply not, Mr. 

Speaker, and the auditor is indicating to us that there are two 

issues that she has that would create a situation that are different 

than the other two that were there before the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our position and the position of the accountants 

within Finance is that we disagree with that, Mr. Speaker. We 

have followed the rules that have been in place. There are 

agreements in place, and we have followed them to the letter, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 128, 

The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 128, The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 

2013 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government 

Administration Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 129, The 

Executive Government Administration Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 129, The Executive 

Government Administration Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive 

Government Administration Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 130, 

The Executive Government Administration Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 130, The Executive 

Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013 be introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask 

for leave to make a motion regarding the Ombudsman. 



4400 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

a leave to make a motion regarding the Ombudsman. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Ombudsman for Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That pursuant to section 3 of The Ombudsman Act, 2012, 

Ms. Mary McFadyen be appointed Ombudsman for 

Saskatchewan; 

 

And further, that pursuant to section 27 of The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act, Ms. Mary McFadyen be appointed 

Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner with both 

appointments effective April 1, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That pursuant to section 3 of The Ombudsman Act, 2012, 

that Ms. Mary McFadyen be appointed Ombudsman for 

Saskatchewan;  

 

And further, that pursuant to section 27 of The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act, Ms. Mary McFadyen be appointed 

Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner with both 

appointments effective April 1, 2014. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Does the Assembly approve the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To ask for leave to move a motion 

regarding committee membership. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding committee membership. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Committee Membership 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Russ Marchuk be substituted for that of 

Rob Norris on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved a 

motion: 

 

That the name of Russ Marchuk be substituted for that of 

Rob Norris on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 126 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 126 — The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

pleased to rise today to join in the debate on the introduction of 

Bill 126, An Act to amend The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Act, 2009. The seizure of criminal property is a fairly new 

legislative initiative in criminal law proceedings, Mr. Speaker. 

And this is something that has followed, I guess, through with 

difficulties in law enforcement when it relates to criminal 

activity where there’s offenders making a lot of money 

basically from criminal activity but being able to keep that 

profit even though they’ve been convicted of a crime. 

 

And quite often I think this comes in the context of places like 

where there’s illegal grow ops or different kinds of drug 

activities and sales of drug activities, where people use the 

proceeds of crime to purchase houses, cars. And in the example 

of grow ops, the houses themselves that are purchased are used 

to produce the illegal chemicals and the illegal drugs that are 

then sold for further profit. 

 

So over the years, lawmakers and law enforcement officials 

have expressed frustration with the inability to seize this 

property that’s gained from illegal activity, even though the 

criminals have been convicted in a court of actually breaking 

the law. So we’ve seen a gradual progression through the last 

few years of different types of laws introduced to allow the 

seizure of criminal property. And the law in 2009 was that type 

of law where the law then was to provide for the seizure of 

criminal property. 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4401 

And I know that law enforcement officials have had difficulty 

with some of the aspects of this law and so, at this point in time, 

the Minister of Justice has indicated that this will actually 

enhance and balance, ensuring that there’s due process for the 

criminals or the individuals who’ve been charged with these 

crimes and who have profited from them, and ensuring that 

there is due process as well. 

 

So there’s a few things that the bill has presented that are going 

to, first of all, I think enhance the process itself and, secondly, 

ensure that due process is followed, which is always very, very 

important in any criminal justice system. And then that the 

actual proceeds of those crimes are forfeitable in a way that is 

fair to the public and also fair to the criminals themselves. 

 

So some of the changes that we see would be a sort of a 

streamlining of the legal documents that are required. So at this 

point in time, the extensive documentation that is required 

would not be done unless the respondent opposes the 

application for the forfeiture. So what that does is that it 

prevents a lot of unnecessary paperwork if indeed the 

respondent is choosing not to oppose the forfeiture of their 

property. And on the other hand though, to ensure that their 

rights are protected, the respondent will receive notice of the 

intention to seize his property, and if they oppose, it has to go to 

a full court hearing. So in most cases the matter to ensure 

balance is that if they decide they want to oppose the forfeiture 

order, then they have time to go to court and then all the full 

preparation of all the legal documents would be required. 

 

The new process here that’s being initiated is going to be 

limited so this wouldn’t happen in every context but it would 

happen in the context of seizure of . . . It would be limited to a 

monetary limit, which seems to be fair also. Mr. Speaker, at this 

point the limit is being set. Well we don’t know what the limit 

is going to be set, but we’re told that in Alberta and in British 

Columbia, the limit is at $75,000. 

 

So it would be helpful in the minister’s comments to understand 

whether or not that is the intent, but I’ll guess we’ll have to wait 

until we get the regulations which, as you know, Mr. Speaker, is 

something that is of concern I guess. Because we always see the 

ministers giving their second reading speeches, they provide 

general highlights of what will be happening under the new bill, 

but we never really seem to get the full detail of what’s going to 

be proposed under the regulations. 

 

So we know that if the value is set at $75,000, according to the 

minister 80 per cent of Saskatchewan seizures would fall under 

this dollar threshold. So we know that if that’s what they 

choose, which we’ll have to wait and see, that we would be 

looking at 80 per cent of all the seizures for proceeds of crime 

would be following this expedited process. So that’s something 

that we will look for once the bill is passed, and then we have 

an opportunity to look at the regulation. 

 

Also under this new Act, we see a direction for the seized 

funds. And they’re going to be retained in a separate fund — 

the criminal property forfeiture fund — and what this will do is 

support police operations in the province and the Victims’ 

Fund, which provides programming to victims of crime. 

 

And I just want to take a moment at this point, Mr. Speaker, to 

point out that the victims of crime procedures, or the funding 

for the victims of crime is woefully inadequate in this province 

in certain circumstances. And an example of that is when a 

victim of crime receives physical damage to the extent that 

they’re never able to work again and that they’re permanently 

disabled, they’re brain injured. And in those instances, an 

individual who uses a car to run into somebody and cause those 

kinds of damages, they would be covered, but when they use 

their fists or their feet, as in the case of Kutler Lange, there is 

no ability for an award to help the young individuals like Kutler 

Lange. And I’ve spoken about him before in this legislature. 

The victims of crime fund just doesn’t cover the kind of costs 

that he would have received had he been hit by a car criminally. 

So there’s a huge inequity in the way that the victims of crime 

fund is being administered. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And there are other jurisdictions, and indeed Saskatchewan 

used to have a fund for rehabilitation or protection of the 

catastrophic victims of crime. And certainly when I’ve spoken 

to judges about this issue, Mr. Speaker, at the time that the 

criminal trials are happening for these victims, the judges don’t 

feel that they have adequate time within the criminal court 

system to have a hearing and understand the true actuarial 

import of the damages that are done to the individual. And 

those types of hearings are complicated and would require a fair 

bit of evidence to the criminal court judge, so quite often they 

simply don’t feel that the criminal system is up to it. 

 

But when you move it over to the civil court system, in most 

cases these are young individuals who are impecunious and 

simply do not have the wherewithal to bring a civil trial to 

fruition, and knowing full well that the perpetrator of the crime, 

who is often also impecunious, won’t be able to provide the 

payment because there’s no insurance fund that’s available for 

that type of payment. 

 

So these young individuals are caught both ways. The criminal 

justice system is letting them down and the civil court system is 

letting them down. And then thirdly, I would suggest this 

government is letting them down because they’re not 

introducing legislation that would offer a fair and equal and just 

system to provide assistance to those victims of crime when 

people in motor vehicle accidents are provided that kind of 

assistance. So this is a clear inequity in the criminal justice 

system. 

 

And you know, when you see this kind of bill that provides the 

proceeds of the forfeitures to go into the Victims’ Fund, I would 

suggest that that’s really not enough, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

laudable in and of itself, but those types of funds simply won’t 

assure that folks like Kutler Lange are able to live a life of 

decency, and their families as well who are often very impacted 

by these types of horrific crimes that seem to . . . You know, the 

criminal justice system does its part, but the damage that’s left 

for these individuals is lifelong and significant. And even 

though the perpetrator may do the time that they are allocated 

for their crimes, they can move on with their lives. But these 

victims can’t, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the real injustice that we 

see. 

 

So we see just basically the main point of this new Act is to 



4402 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

establish an administrative seizure process that will operate in 

addition to the existing court process. And we’re glad to see 

that the government is trying to ensure that the profit from 

crime is dealt with and that any profit from crimes is actually 

put back to the people of Saskatchewan through the police 

operations and the Victims’ Fund. 

 

And we know that, you know, the way police remuneration is 

dealt with in this province is certainly more fair than what 

we’ve heard about remuneration for fire protection workers, and 

it’s difficult to see the inequities in that sense, Mr. Speaker. 

And we would hope that again police operations are supported 

by something like this, and we want to ensure that firefighters 

also have opportunity to secure adequate living wages and fair 

and equitable wages in the same fashion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think at this point, that’s the highlights from my 

perspective on this bill. Certainly more of us will want to have 

an opportunity to comment on it. It was just recently released. 

And until that point, Mr. Speaker, I think I would move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 109 — The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise into the debate on Bill 109, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013. And it’s an important piece of legislation because, 

you know, as we know, investment is critical to the province of 

Saskatchewan and that we get it right and of course that these 

kind of things also have a major interplay with the federal 

government because of the tax incentives that are in play. 

 

And we understand now that the federal government is backing 

off on some of the tax incentives that have been in place for a 

number of years for these funds. So we need to monitor the 

ability of these corporations and make sure that these funds can 

attract new investment. It’s pretty important that they do. We 

see the kind of good work that these funds do and that 

investments do in our province. And clearly when an economy 

is doing well, it’s critical that entrepreneurs and the business 

community take advantage of the pools of money that are out 

there, and if there can be a good working relationship between 

the two, then it’s important to be able to do that good work and 

make sure investment happens in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I do want to reflect on what the minister responsible had to 

say about this back on November 26th. He talks about that the 

Act be amended so it can prescribe in regulation a percentage of 

pooled funds’ annual capital that must be invested into 

innovation type of investments, and that the minister will set the 

form by which tax credits will be issued to investors in the 

future, and some other housekeeping that goes along with that. 

 

So it’s really important that we do think about this in terms of 

innovation. And you know, today we had folks in the gallery 

today from the agricultural sector. And the point was made in 

terms of not only are we living within the challenges of our 

natural environment and the weather and such, but you know, a 

big factor in how we succeed is the innovation and what we do, 

and whether that’s been agriculture and health, anywhere where 

. . . in mining with resource extraction, that if we can encourage 

that kind of entrepreneurial, innovative way of approaching 

business. This would be really important. So he talks about the 

great track record. The minister talks about our researchers, 

developers, entrepreneurs already have a great track record of 

introducing or improving products into the Saskatchewan 

marketplace. And I agree that’s a great record, and as the 

minister says, we need to do more. And that’s very important. 

 

I note that he talks about how these labour-sponsored venture 

capital corporations have been prudently supporting provincial 

businesses. In fact they’re investing funds from more than 

40,000 Saskatchewan people. So that’s a good thing. That’s a 

really good thing. So we need to make sure that we keep this 

going, that we have a way of stimulating our innovative sector 

and how we can make sure that not only do we have the 

inventions, the ideas, the approaches to how we can be more 

effective, how we can meet more needs, that in fact that we take 

that invention to innovation and have it . . . applications within 

the economy. 

 

And so this is a critical piece. And when you have funds that 

are supported by some 40,000 people, clearly, clearly this is 

important legislation to make sure. It is unfortunate and I’m not 

sure what the reasons were that the federal government backed 

off on some of the tax incentives, but we need to make sure that 

there is still work that they can do. 

 

So the Minister of Economy is suggesting that we want to see 

the various funds increase the amount of innovation 

investments in the portfolio by up to 25 per cent by 2016. And 

that’s only a few short years from now, so this is very, very 

important. So this is critically important. 

 

It does seem though that more power is being given to cabinet 

to pass regulations, and that is a worrisome trend that we see 

with this government, that they actually have . . . that they’re 

doing more with that. 

 

So as we have said many times and we will continue to say it, 

where it makes common sense to support a government 

initiative, then we will be there. And of course in this kind of 

investment we want to make sure it makes common sense, and 

we’ll be there. If not, we’ll have questions because we don’t 

want to allow this government to continue on some of their 

paths that they’ve seemed to have chosen where they’re being 

more secretive, more dismissive, and that’s unfortunate. You 

can’t . . . This needs to be transparent and accountable, 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4403 

especially when you come to this kind of investment 

environment. So that’s hugely, hugely important. 

 

So we have a lot of questions about, who have they consulted? 

Where is the ideas? Where have they come from? Is this the 

right track for investment? So those will be the kind of 

questions we have in committee on this. Have they listened to 

the people involved? And what was their advice? Did they 

listen to it? Did they not? We have concerns that quite often 

they seem a little dismissive about it, and we have some 

concerns about that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many of my colleagues will 

want to speak on many topics today. But this particular bill, Bill 

No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 

Amendment Act, 2013, I move that it be adjourned, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 108 — The 

Athletics Commission Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to speak to Bill No. 108, An Act respecting the 

Athletics Commission and Professional Contests or Exhibitions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation has been brought forward at the 

request of many groups throughout Saskatchewan. And it’s 

clearly legislation that is based on precedents from other 

provinces and I think states in the United States where the rules 

are created that govern the activities of sports that have a certain 

possibility of injury involved in them. And traditionally it’s 

been sports like boxing or wrestling that have been involved in 

this, but in the last few decades there have been an increase in 

the number of sports that are effectively violent contests 

between individuals. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to understand why this 

type of legislation is important for the people of the province, 

but also more importantly why it’s important for those who are 

contestants in the various battles that may occur, also those 

people who rent the venues where these activities may take 

place and also where the general public stands as far as coming 

to be a spectator related to some of these activities. 

 

Now ultimately I think the big question for the hosting of these 

kinds of activities in Saskatchewan relates to the ability to 

provide insurance coverage as it relates to the particular event. 

And I think the types of insurance and insurance coverage that’s 

been available usually will have a clause that relates to the fact 

that the activity is regulated within the province where the 

activity takes place. And up until this point when this legislation 

was brought forward, we have not had regulation in this 

particular area. 

 

Now it ends up being that there will be, the way this legislation 

is drafted is that there will be a special commission created 

which is called the Athletics Commission, and this particular 

commission’s job will be to regulate and supervise professional 

contests and license and permit these and then enforce the Act 

and the regulations that are set out in this Act. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now practically, the commission will be citizens of the 

province and maybe some from outside of the province who 

understand these particular activities, but it’s very clear that the 

powers of the commission will be delegated to officials or 

employees of the commission. And as I said before, some of the 

main activities will be issuing the licences that allow the 

activities to go forward, setting up special permits. If something 

goes wrong, then their job will be to investigate what happened 

and why things went wrong, and also then to keep track of these 

activities and what things have gone well or what things have 

gone wrong. 

 

What we know is that this is an area where people are willing to 

spend much money to attend the events. We see some of these 

events that are hosted in other provinces or states in North 

America, and people are willing to spend quite a bit of money. 

And so what this legislation does is sets up the procedure 

whereby Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, or entrepreneurs from 

other places who want to do business in Saskatchewan, will be 

able to rent the largest venues that we have in the province and 

host the kinds of fights or martial arts activities that are to be 

licensed here. And as I said, the reason that the industry, if I can 

call it that, pushes for legislation like this is because that they’re 

concerned to make sure that they are fully insured to cover any 

kind of injury that may occur. 

 

I think it’s important in a jurisdiction where these activities 

haven’t taken place in any official capacity that we will have 

good legislation that provides the regulation, that provides the 

rules, that makes sure that all of these activities are done 

appropriately. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why is it important that we have this good 

legislation? Well we know that in activities that are presently 

taking place in the province, people are identifying issues that 

have arisen. We know last week that there are now 200 hockey 

players that are involved in a lawsuit against the National 

Hockey League. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a . . . It’s those kinds 

of injuries, the concussions and some of the others that are the 

concern and that relate to some of the kinds of activities that 

will be regulated under this athletics commission. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that making sure that we have a very 

robust system, that we’ve taken all of the best rules from other 

jurisdictions, will give us some assurance that people attending 

events in Saskatchewan will be seeing things that are done in an 

appropriate way, and also that those people who participate in 

these events will have some of the best protection possible. 

 



4404 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

Now unfortunately, I don’t think that setting up an athletics 

commission is going to be an insurance policy against 

something going wrong. And so I know that there would be 

some people who say, why are we even allowing these kinds of 

activities in our province? So I know that that perspective 

exists. I think that our role here is to make sure that we have the 

best system in place and make sure that it’s here and available 

for the public. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other ways of doing 

the kind of thing that we’re doing here. We know for example 

that there are many places where each municipality has their 

own rules and sets up their own methods of dealing with this. I 

think that given the size of Saskatchewan, having a 

province-wide athletics commission makes sense, but we have 

to acknowledge that it would be possible to allow for 

municipalities to set up their own system and follow some 

province-wide rules. 

 

Ultimately the questions are the ones that relate to the liability 

for any injuries that may happen. What happens if there are the 

brain injuries that come from these sports as well? How will 

they be dealt with? Also I think that it will also relate to how 

the forum or the whole place where this activity takes place will 

be regulated. We know that quite often there are crossovers or 

there are connections with some of our liquor and gaming rules 

as it relates to these types of contests, and that will have to be 

monitored as well. I assume that there would be some 

interconnection between this legislation that creates the 

Athletics Commission and some of the rules as it relates to 

liquor and gaming. 

 

Another question that arises is one that we have to ask all the 

time. Where there are First Nations jurisdictions, will they be 

part of this particular legislation or will there be some 

accommodations? Has there been consultation around activities 

under an athletics commission that may or may not take place 

on a First Nation? Some of these are the kinds of questions that 

we all need to look at as we proceed with what we have here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are, as I said, entrepreneurial options 

and opportunities that this type of legislation will provide. We 

had a number of guests in the legislature that clearly identified 

that. And what we’ll have to make sure is that everything will 

be done in a straightforward manner to protect our 

Saskatchewan people who may want to be participants and 

spectators as it relates to this legislation. 

 

Now it’s interesting. One other piece around the protection of 

the actual participants in these events is clearly something that’s 

been learned from other jurisdictions. And that’s where the 

minister set out in his second reading speech where he said that 

“The commission will . . . be responsible for tracking 

competitors’ fighting histories and ensuring safety protocols are 

enforced.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this goes to this not necessarily new-found but 

very much emphasized situation now where head injuries and 

the information about head injuries becomes crucial in 

monitoring sporting activities. And it’s true in hockey or 

football or lacrosse or other sports, but as it relates to these 

contests, these physical contests, it’s even more crucial. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the people who will be appointed to 

do this kind of work, to be on the commission, and then the 

staff that they hire will be diligent in enforcing these kind of 

safety protocols. But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s an area where we 

can’t do enough to emphasize the fact that there is a 

responsibility to protect the participants in these types of 

activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation itself has been presented around to 

people who have some knowledge of this activity. I know that 

we will have some chance over this winter to review the 

legislation even in more detail and talk to some of the people 

who may have some questions about it. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that that will be entirely appropriate. 

 

From my initial review, they appear to have captured most of 

the issues that are of concern. I think there would be one area 

that may be helpful for all of us is to understand how the 

insurance policies work as it relates to the certification or 

regulation by an athletics commission. And that may be 

something we can get before the next, before the spring session 

or that we may be able to discuss when it goes to committee. 

But at this point, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments, and 

I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 102 — The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a quite a short bill, but it effects some issues 

that are of great importance to people who are building new 

properties or improving old properties. And so I think it’s 

important to talk a little bit about why some of these changes 

are being made and why we need to look at them as carefully as 

possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Builders’ Lien Act is the legislation that we 

have in our province to protect workers and contractors who do 

activity to improve a property. And that improvement could be 

taking bare land and building a brand new building, or it could 

be going to a building and putting on an addition or putting on a 

new roof or doing lots of different activities. And effectively 

what the Act does, it allows for anybody who makes an 

improvement to a property to put a lien or a warning on the 

property if they don’t get paid for the work that they have done 

or that their company has done. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, most often The Builders’ Lien Act 

becomes an issue when something goes awry, when something 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4405 

doesn’t quite turn out the way everybody expects. And it’s like 

some of the projects we’ve been hearing about in the last month 

or two where they cost way more money than people 

anticipated than when they started. And people start looking 

around. Well who is causing the problem on this? 

 

But let’s just talk about a pretty practical situation where you’ve 

bought a house and you’re interested in improving it before you 

move in. So you hire a contractor to put in new windows. You 

hire another contractor to put on the new siding. And you hire a 

roofing contractor to put on a new roof on your house. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, all of those people have the ability under The 

Builders’ Lien Act to file a claim against the property when 

they’re not paid for the work that they’ve done. 

 

And I think that all three of those types of activities, you can try 

to get a fixed price contract for getting them done — fixing 

windows or putting on siding or putting on a new roof — but all 

of them have aspects when you’re dealing with an old house 

that may entail surprises. And when surprises arise, costs go up. 

And it’s those situations where the costs have gone up and the 

original person who purchased the house who is trying to get all 

these done doesn’t have enough money to do the job. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now why am I telling that story? Because when it relates to a 

house or a property, often to get the money to pay all the 

contractors, you have to go to the bank and borrow sufficient 

money to pay these people who are doing the improvement as 

well as paying for the original property itself. But what this 

legislation does is add in, as somebody who improves the value 

of the property, a land surveyor. 

 

Now traditionally land surveyors haven’t been included because 

it’s not obvious what they do to increase the value of the land. 

But as somebody who’s dealt with land surveyors over the 

years in my professional law practice, you always knew that 

once you had an official survey of property, it made a big 

difference in how you dealt with the purchase or sale of the 

property, how you dealt with assisting people in borrowing 

money by putting a mortgage on the property. And in many 

instances, you couldn’t even do any of those activities unless 

you had the land survey done. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, obviously there have been some situations 

that have happened in Saskatchewan where land surveyors have 

done their work — and it’s sometimes quite expensive to get all 

of the appropriate boundaries created and put on a map — and 

then they haven’t been paid. And because they weren’t included 

under The Builders’ Lien Act, they were the ones that were 

sometimes or often stuck on the outside without being paid, 

even though they were a crucial part of the whole project. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, what this legislation does is add that definition 

in here so that the definition of improvement includes the 

services of land surveyors. 

 

Now the next change to this legislation relates to inflation. I 

think that would be the simple way to put it. And traditionally 

there was sort of a nominal amount for contracts that were 

involved with builders’ lien, and whoever originally drafted this 

legislation must have thought it was around $100,000 because 

they ended up putting in the fact that you could basically have 

99 per cent completion if it was something less than $1,000 that 

was outstanding. And so what this particular provision does is it 

says 99 per cent of the total price or of the value of the contract 

is what is completion, and you don’t have a choice of using the 

term $1,000. So, Mr. Speaker, it costs a lot more to build these 

days. I think we all acknowledge that, and this legislation 

acknowledges that. 

 

Now the third change in the legislation is another practical one, 

and it relates to the limitation period as to when you can apply 

for money that’s been held in trust under this, under The 

Builders’ Lien Act. And traditionally it’s been one year, and this 

has now been changed to two years. And practically, that’s a 

reasonable change in that often there’s a fair amount of 

negotiation and back and forth between the contractor and the 

owner and the general contractor and others involved in a 

project, and sometimes one year is not enough time to get all of 

the various negotiations completed. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this short bill allows for these kinds of 

changes to be made. They’re practical changes. They do relate 

to making sure that people are properly paid for the work that 

they’ve done. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that they will end up 

providing some additional remedies for some of the people who 

participate in these projects. 

 

Now there may be some others who feel like they should be 

included in this builders’ lien amendment Act, and I know that 

we’ll have some time over the winter to hear from anybody who 

has a perspective that would maybe engender an amendment to 

this legislation in the spring. The reason I say that is that The 

Builders’ Lien Act isn’t one that’s opened up very often, and so 

if there are others who want to join in along with the land 

surveyors and correct some problems, I encourage them to get a 

hold of the minister and see if some other changes can be made. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, with those comments, I think that we’ll look 

forward to hearing from people over the winter and getting 

ready for a number of further discussions. And at this point, I’ll 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 103 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and speak to The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2013. And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

changes that are made in this legislation and some of them are 



4406 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

relatively straightforward. But this particular piece of 

legislation, I think the most substantive part relates to The 

Wildlife Act and hunting licences. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the bill here and see what 

happens. Now I think I’ll start out by saying that The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 that’s being 

amended is legislation that I introduced when I was minister of 

Justice in 1997. And it was built on much consultation and 

discussion across the province around the issue of unpaid 

maintenance orders. 

 

And I think probably every year since 1997 we’ve had some 

amendments to this legislation that provide further powers to 

the officials in the maintenance enforcement office to make sure 

that parents or spouses are paying the support that’s needed for 

the family members that require the support. And practically by 

the time these amendments show up in the legislature, they’ve 

had a fair bit of discussion in quite a number of places, and they 

usually are in a position where they make sense. And as this 

system has developed, kind of like knitting a sweater or 

something that’s got all the pieces pretty well covered, what 

happens though is that the director of maintenance enforcement 

and the various people involved in maintenance enforcement 

identify particular areas where maybe they need some 

assistance. 

 

And so what we have this year is information that’s brought 

forward around the fact that suspending the ability to purchase a 

hunting licence may be a way to have people pay maintenance 

that there’s no other way to get them to pay the maintenance. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have here in the legislation then 

particular clauses which give the ability to the director of the 

maintenance enforcement office the possibility of directing the 

minister responsible for The Wildlife Act to prohibit a person 

from applying for or obtaining a hunting licence in certain 

circumstances. 

 

So it’s a pretty interesting power because it effectively, what it 

does is, it gives the director of the maintenance order legislation 

the power to direct a minister to do something which is within 

their discretion in their particular area. So the practical aspect of 

this, I understand, would be that the director of the maintenance 

enforcement office, who is a member and part of the Ministry 

of Justice, would be able to tell the Minister of Environment 

that, don’t issue a hunting licence to that person until they’ve 

paid up the money owed for the care of their spouse or child. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting power, and it’s one that 

does give some extra impetus, if I can put it that way, to a 

person who’s delinquent in their payments to get them in order. 

So presumably, since most of the hunting takes place in the fall, 

that would be when a lot of these payments are made and 

everything is caught up. 

 

Now I think I should make it quite clear, this only applies if 

you’re hunting in the province of Saskatchewan. You can’t go 

to another place and direct that the person couldn’t hunt in some 

other jurisdiction. But given the fact that if people like to hunt 

— there are many opportunities in Saskatchewan — this is a 

fairly powerful tool that’s being given to the maintenance 

enforcement office. 

 

And so basically how it works, as far as I can see here, is that 

the director of maintenance enforcement would serve the person 

who hasn’t paid their maintenance with a written notice that 

they intend to get a prohibition from the Minister of 

Environment to make sure that that person can’t apply for or 

obtain a hunting licence. And they have to give them 30 days 

notice they’re going to do that. And the preferred response of 

the delinquent payer would be that they would immediately go 

the maintenance enforcement office and pay up, and then there 

wouldn’t be any necessity for the direction to the minister to go 

ahead. 

 

But if these payments aren’t made, then the whole process gets 

into place and the ability of that person to get a hunting licence 

is eliminated. And so to effect all of this, which is quite 

complicated when you have the orders going between different 

ministries, we have a whole number of changes, and maybe 

more changes and more sections than would seem like it on sort 

of a relatively simple situation. 

 

And so what also happens is that it can relate to a fishing 

licence, and so there are changes that have to be made that deal 

with that specific issue. It’s also bilingual legislation, and so we 

need to look at the legislation itself to make sure that it’s 

accomplishing the same thing in both of our official languages. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the process as set out in the legislation has 

the ultimate goal of getting the payments made for the benefit 

of the family members who require the support. And so I think 

practically we’re hopeful that this actually accomplishes the 

intent of what is the purpose of maintenance enforcement 

legislation, which is that families are properly provided for. 

 

[15:15] 

 

We’re a bit sad that it takes this much activity, this much work 

to actually get the process in place, but I think that, based on the 

request from the maintenance enforcement office, we accept 

that there are these extraordinary measures necessary in some 

very specific cases to enforce the maintenance orders. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the legislation itself has some other 

challenges that have arisen over the last few years, given that 

much of the work related to licensing in Saskatchewan has been 

moved out of province. And so I think the legislation is drafted 

in a way so it won’t cause any difficulties. But when people are 

buying and getting their licences through private contractors 

outside of the system, there may be some challenges in the 

legislation itself. And so I’m not sure how that will be dealt 

with exactly if there are jurisdictional questions. I think it’s 

something that we need to watch. If in fact all of the activity 

around preventing somebody to get a hunting licence or a 

fishing licence happens in a Tennessee call centre, not in the 

province of Saskatchewan, will there be issues around the 

enforcement of this legislation? I don’t know how that works. 

 

What we do know is that many small businesses in 

Saskatchewan, whether they’re local gas stations or co-ops or 

whatever, are having difficulty meshing with the new licensing 

systems that have been set up. And if this legislation causes 

further complications in that process, I think we would all need 

to pause a bit and make sure that the ultimate goal of providing 

financing for families doesn’t interfere or mess with a whole 

number of other things. 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4407 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of questions that we will be 

asking in committee, but I think they’re . . . Over the winter 

now, we will have a chance for people to provide us with 

further information as to the effect of this legislation. But at this 

point, I don’t have any further comments. I know some of my 

colleagues will want to talk about this legislation as well. And 

so at this point, I will move to adjourn the debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 104 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure again 

to rise to speak to The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

legislation only has one section, and it’s basically to deal with 

the issues under The Fisheries Act (Saskatchewan). And what it 

does is make sure that the minister responsible for the fisheries 

Act will also follow the direction from the maintenance 

enforcement office to enforce a maintenance order by refusing 

to issue a fishing licence. And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is 

only in English, not in English and French, so it requires a 

different piece of legislation than Bill 103. And so it’s for that 

reason that it’s quite a short piece of legislation. But all of the 

comments about Bill 103 relate to this particular bill as well. 

 

The issue is whether there are problems that will be created in 

the present regime for fishing licences which involve an 

out-of-province contractor doing much of the work, whether 

there will be any legal challenges to, any attempt to prevent the 

issuance of those licences as it relates to this legislation. I’m not 

sure if I can think of any circumstance where that would take 

place, but I think it’s an issue that needs to be addressed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the ultimate purpose of this legislation is the 

same as the previous legislation, which is to make sure money 

is available for families when they need it and to make sure that 

people who are responsible to make those payments for their 

families do make those payments. 

 

But I think practically the consultation and the questions around 

this legislation will happen at the same time as Bill 103, and we 

look forward to hearing any comments. And as we proceed in 

the process in our legislature, we’ll look forward to looking to 

ask questions in committee about the effect of this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s a couple of other of my 

colleagues that are interested in speaking to this particular piece 

of legislation in conjunction with Bill No. 103 and, as a result, I 

will adjourn debate on this bill as well. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 105 — The 

Informal Public Appeals Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca . . . for 

Cumberland, sorry. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Bill 105, the 

information public appeals Act, just want to talk a little bit 

about I guess fundraising in general. And you know, I want to 

compliment the different organizations, groups out there, 

individuals who sometime take it upon themself, whether it’s a 

family maybe loses their house in a fire, a flood. There’s 

different ways. They lose a loved one. And community will 

come together. And you know, our rural communities are great 

for that. Northern communities are great for that. But also our 

urban centres do that. There’s different ways. And some 

organizations, they’re bigger, they’re organized, whether it’s I 

guess the Elks clubs, Kinsmen. There’s different ones. There’s 

many of them. They do great work, and I commend all the clubs 

that do that. 

 

You could apply, and families . . . And there’s different ways to 

apply for the funds. They fundraise all year round, different 

activities. You know, I think of the La Ronge Elks, the lodge up 

there. It does a lot of fundraising, whether it’s at the fair. They 

have different functions that they operate within their hall, the 

building they own and operate. And they generate revenue, and 

they help out the community members. When people apply to 

them, they do that. 

 

So you know, I want to talk about the Elks, and there’s many of 

the lodges in the province that do that, Elks. But also groups 

who do a lot of great work fundraising. You know, and I think 

about even some of our seniors groups. They fundraise, have 

bake sales, bingos. I know I volunteer and have helped out with 

the seniors in La Ronge at the fair. They hold the bingos and 

that’s how they do fundraising. And they help out community 

members when things are happening. And they do some great 

work and I commend that. 

 

But we also have local groups, and they’re not clubs or 

organizations, but it’s individuals. And there might be an 

individual in a community that decides to say, you know, I’ve 

heard this happened. So they organize community members . . . 

a loss for someone who has a family needing help, a community 

member. In Saskatchewan we have a good track record of 

helping out. When times get tough for families, individuals, we 

come together and we help out. 



4408 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

And I think that has been shown in the records when you look 

at Saskatchewan. The volunteer time we put in fundraising, it’s 

amazing. Whether it’s Telemiracle, all the different 

organizations that are out there doing great things, we get 

behind. There’s so many of them, you know, to name. And I 

apologize. You know, I may not name all of them. But there’s 

so many great groups that work, work, work, work endless 

hours. They volunteer and they do great work for Saskatchewan 

residents. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it is amazing to see. 

And when we get the numbers and the support of the volunteer 

hours that are put in by Saskatchewan residents, families, 

individuals, you know, it’s amazing to see the work that goes 

into it. And there’s all kinds of them. 

 

But you know, it’s not just that type . . . It’s fundraising for 

sports, for young people. We have a lot of youth programs. And 

without the fundraising of those individuals, you would not, you 

would not be able to see some of the sporting activities go on, 

tournaments, different things that go on. And I know it’s 

important. They run programs, and you can do advertising in 

them, and it’s amazing. It helps out small towns when they’re 

trying to run their sports clubs and the hockey games and 

tournaments. And there’s ways you can advertise in it. You can 

do certain things. And they have people, but they do a lot of 

fundraising. 

 

And it is to take care of I guess the costs to . . . Some of the 

athletes cannot afford the registration, cannot afford all the 

equipment. Sometimes it’s costly, and some of the families, 

they just don’t have the resources. They’re working hard. Some 

of them are two family members are working hard, mom and 

dad, doing their part, and they still with the cost of . . . Every 

day today we see the cost for rents, utilities going up. It’s 

alarming for Saskatchewan people, residents. So they might not 

be able to provide the dollars that they would like for their kids 

for sports and activities that are going on in the community. 

 

So there’s ways that there’s fundraising. And some of those 

organizations have fundraising, and they sell tickets, bake sales. 

They do many different things to fundraise. And at the end of 

the day clearly it’s because of the cost that they can’t provide. 

They want their kids involved in some of the sports, some of the 

clubs, organizations that are going on, running activities in their 

communities. But when they can’t afford it, it’s unfortunate. So 

here’s an opportunity that groups, individuals can fundraise and 

do different type of activity to allow . . . Children are not turned 

away or turned around. 

 

So having said that, when it comes to fundraising, and I realize 

maybe there’s a reason why obviously the government’s 

looking at this, Bill 105. And I’m wondering who they 

consulted with. Who did they talk to? And who asked the 

minister and the government to bring this bill forward? That’s 

an interesting question that I have. We’re not sure who’s done 

that. 

 

Now having said that, was there individuals, organizations that 

have asked government to bring forward legislation? And it 

sounds like in the bill . . . And we’re going to have to go 

through this. And I know my colleagues will have lots in 

committee, will ask a lot of questions. And right now we’ll 

share some of our views and the good work that’s going on. But 

who’s asked for this legislation? Has it been organizations, 

individuals? And what is the reason of it? We want to know 

what the reason is. Why is government introducing this bill and 

legislation? 

 

It talks about they don’t want to create hurdles for individuals 

or organizations, from what I can understand. They don’t want 

to create hurdles. But I wonder then, what’s the purpose of it? 

Who requested this bill? Who asked for this information to 

come forward? And how will it impact service clubs, groups? 

How will it impact, legislation like this — and I’ve been 

thinking about this as I was talking — First Nations 

communities? Because I know they do a lot of fundraising. 

They do their bingos. They do . . . You name it. They do all 

kinds of tournaments, whether it’s hockey, football, volleyball. 

They do amazing fundraisers, constantly trying to help the 

youth, and they do a great job on it. 

 

So will this provision that’s going to be . . . And it might be 

online that they get access to the forms it talks about. Will they 

have access, and will this impact them in any way? And if it is 

going to impact them, has the government approached them 

saying, are you aware we’re introducing legislation that may 

impact First Nations on their communities, may impact 

Saskatchewan residents? We’re bringing that in. Now I’m not 

sure, and I know with, through committee we’ll have to ask 

that. But I’m going to be checking on it because I know there’s 

a lot of organizations . . . And you know, I have five First 

Nations that I represent in the Cumberland constituency. I want 

to make sure that this won’t impact them, and if it is, that 

they’re aware that there’s legislation coming in. 

 

So you know, hopefully they’re hearing this and they’ll get the 

message, the news, and hear about the government introducing 

this legislation. And if, you know . . . And I encourage the 

leadership and the community members, if they’re doing 

fundraising, if they have concerns, they should ask the 

government to clarify this. Why are you bringing this? Will it 

impact us? 

 

[15:30] 

 

Or you know, is it . . . And if it’s not going to impact them, then 

that’s great. They’ll continue to do what they’re doing. And I 

know out of this . . . It sounds like there are some individuals 

that’ll continue to do the fundraising the way the communities 

have done it. And government is saying it’s not creating any 

hurdles. So I wonder if you have 30 individuals in a community 

who do fundraising, if 10 of them use the process, the 

legislation . . . 

 

Now it talks about some of them won’t have as much protection 

if they don’t use the form. If they don’t comply with I guess the 

regulations or the legislation, they’re not going to have as much 

protection. That I think through committee we have to find out, 

what did the minister mean in his comments when he referred to 

this bill? What was he talking about? Some will have . . . And 

some of his comments, and you look at them and you wonder, 

okay, some will have I think better protection than others. The 

legislation will protect . . . It’s designed to I think protect all of 

them is what I got from it. But those that comply and I guess 

apply to a, I don’t know if it’s going to be a licensing, if there’s 

going to be regulations that will come out, or is this at the end 

of the day government going to be monitoring. And will 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4409 

government be monitoring every fundraising now? 

 

When we have a teacher who does fundraising in her classroom 

with students and stuff because they want to go on class trips, 

will they have to do some type of reporting? Filling out forms 

or reports to government saying, well here’s what we 

fundraised for the class trip. We collected, you know, $38.12, 

and they’ll have to report that to the government because the 

government wants to see how much money is being fundraised. 

And that’s very concerning to me because I know the good 

work . . . And I’ve talked about that. 

 

I just want to talk about the teachers for a minute, the good 

work they’re doing with students. They do a lot of fundraising 

and, you know, I say to them, thank you for all the great work 

they do with our students. And they do. They make sure our 

students get to the activities, get to go visit places when they do 

the class trips. Some of them come to the Legislative Building 

and some of that’s done by fundraising. And it’s small little 

pennies here and there, a dollar here and there. It’s amazing 

what they do. And you look at the good work that they’re doing 

to bring individuals and students to this Legislative Assembly 

for a tour. And they do the tour and the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] barracks, the Science Centre. It’s amazing. 

They do some good tours but they do a lot of fundraising. 

 

So I get a little worried when we see government wanting to 

monitor now. Government will say, well no, no, they’re going 

to have to report every penny. But I’m not sure. We need to find 

out exactly, you know, the details. We’ve got to look into the 

details and at the end of the day what comes with . . . 

Legislation is fine. You can have a discussion here, but I guess 

at the end of the day we’re going to see what comes out in the 

regulations, that the minister then has the power, and the 

ministry, to develop the regulations. 

 

Now are they consulting with the individuals I talked about 

today, you know, First Nations, municipalities? Are they talking 

with the mayors that know a lot of fundraising goes on with 

recreation in their communities, whether it’s bingos . . . Some 

of the smaller communities, they operate bingos. They do a lot 

of fundraising. It’s amazing. Like I said, a lot of good work 

because, you know, unfortunately there isn’t an endless pool of 

money and resources for some of the small communities. 

They’re isolated. So they do a great job of fundraising and 

doing all they can to clearly make sure that their students, their 

residents, and the children have access to programs. 

 

And that’s so important, Mr. Speaker, that we make sure kids 

can be involved and have a quality . . . whether it’s education, 

educating them with coming, like I said, to a tour, whether it’s 

taking part in sports, volleyball, basketball. There’s so much of 

it that they do from the schools and, you know, some of the 

schools just do amazing. Their recreation programs, after school 

programs, they run some amazing programs. 

 

Then we have organizations throughout the province do a lot of 

fundraising. I’m hoping that this doesn’t create hurdles for 

them. And after the fact, after this legislation comes into power 

and then we see the regulations and the so-called rules that 

individuals are told you can fundraise by, but you’re going to 

have to report this, this, this, we want to make sure that, you 

know, you do the due diligence. 

But government says that they’re protecting them. And I’m 

really concerned. Well did these individuals ask to be 

protected? Has there been some reason why? And I would like 

to know, and I think in committee those are some of the 

questions we’re going to ask. Is there correspondence that asked 

the minister and the ministry to come up with this legislation to 

protect people who are doing, like I said whether it’s, you 

know, someone’s lost their house in a flood, in a fire, if they 

lost a loved one? We want to know. At the end of the day, are 

those individuals the reason why they’re monitoring this? And 

that’s the concern I have, and we have to ask those tough 

questions to make sure that those individuals doing the 

fundraising for all the different programs that I’ve talked about 

and mentioned, and great programs, that it’s not going to create 

hurdles for them. And the minister’s comments says he doesn’t 

believe it will create hurdles and that’s not what the idea of this 

legislation is. 

 

So I wonder in the details, Mr. Speaker, then what will come 

out in regulations and everything else and who will they be 

talking with to find out what is best for individuals who do the 

fundraising? And there’s so many of them. Whether you have, 

you know, a pie-eating contest, you have . . . Our province is so 

great when we come up with ideas and fundraising. 

Communities have to do the fundraising, and they’re amazing. 

 

You have small communities. It’s amazing some of the amounts 

of fundraising. And you know, I think about . . . MBC 

[Missinipi Broadcasting Corporation] did the, you know, a 

fundraiser. They did the telethon for the children’s hospital. It’s 

amazing what they do. It just shows when you take the province 

and you take the North doing its part to support the children’s 

hospital in that way, I commend the leadership with MBC and 

all the other organizations that fundraise and do whatever they 

can to promote. So we see when you have corporations 

matching, it’s amazing how big the donations. But we’re talking 

about the little, you know, fundraisers that people do. It might 

be a little meal. It might be a turkey supper. It could be a 

fundraiser on hockey. There is so much goes on in this province 

that individuals do and the great work they do. 

 

So I’m a little worried at the end of the day and we’re going to 

have to get into details that this doesn’t create hardship for 

individuals who are just trying to fundraise to help out a family 

or help out an organization that needs it for some reason, 

whether it’s a school, after school program. So there’s lots of 

things, whether it’s the food bank. And you know, I think about 

the food banks and the great work they do. There’s a lot of 

fundraising, door knocking that’s done. They collect food. 

 

And you know, I realize that some of them are bigger chapters 

and you know, they have . . . You can make donations and you 

get a tax receipt, so that’s different. I think they have a way of 

reporting and they report on some of that stuff and that’s good 

because they have a board and they’re bigger organizations. But 

when you get down to just the small, you know, individuals and 

maybe a few family members, a few community members get 

together and they say, we want to do some fundraising. We 

have this idea. We heard about this family or this organization’s 

in trouble for whatever reason. They can’t operate, keep the 

lights on because of the cost of electricity and stuff in our 

province. We see the cost of electricity going up and, you 

know, that’s the government’s deciding to do that. We see what 



4410 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

the government’s doing. 

 

So when we see all these challenges facing our rural and, you 

know, urban, the North, all the groups that do a great job of 

fundraising and dealing with some of the challenges, you know, 

and families suffering and, you know, we want to make sure 

that the government consults with individuals that will be 

impacted by this legislation, individuals . . . And I think the 

government should go out and talk to students. I think they 

should talk to teachers. I think they should talk to 

municipalities, to municipalities that have radiothons for 

fundraising. 

 

And I know Pelican Narrows does a great job of that. They do a 

lot of fundraising for families and, you know, I’ve been there. 

You hear them on the local radio stations and they’re 

fundraising. And I mean many northern communities do that 

and I’ve watched the way they do that. It’s amazing how they 

come together. When their family members, their community 

members are struggling and having challenges, they come 

together. 

 

Now government wants a reporting of that, and I’m worried 

about that and that concerns me. Too much reporting. And it’s 

not, you know, government says, well we don’t want to create 

hurdles. I hope at the end of the day, all of a sudden we don’t 

look at some of this stuff and then say, well we’re going to take 

this a little further and these organizations, these individuals 

will have to go through a . . . 

 

It’s like the bingos. And I think about the bingos, you know. 

The bingos, people used to . . . Different groups belonged to 

bingos. They did a lot of fundraising. And it generated a lot of 

resources to help whether it’s volleyball, hockey. I don’t care 

what recreation activity was going on, they did it, whether it 

was canoe trips. You had to take part whether you were in 

minor hockey. You had to work bingos and you had to do your 

part as parents. You had to do your part and you would do the 

fundraising. 

 

But sometimes I think it got too complicated and of course with 

the government agencies and with the rules and regulations, 

they overdo it and they complicate it so bad that those 

volunteers don’t want to volunteer to do it anymore because the 

government makes it too hard and creates more hurdles than it’s 

worth. And that’s the challenge. When you’re creating these 

hurdles and you think, well you’re giving protection to 

individuals and groups, well I don’t think they see it that way 

sometimes, and they just see government interfering again in a 

good thing that individuals are doing. 

 

So if there’s a lot of complaints and if that’s why the 

government’s doing this, I wish the minister would say that and 

hopefully we can flesh that out in committee by questions 

asking, well did you get a lot of complaints? Who’s 

complained? Who’s requested it? You know, is it the courts are 

saying this? Is it individuals? Who’s asking you, you know, 

who’s asking for this type of legislation to make sure that the 

monitor . . . And I want to say this. Government says they’re 

not creating more hurdles and they don’t want to. That’s not the 

idea of the legislation. It’s to work with those and to give them 

protection. 

 

I sure hope at the end of the day, like I’ve said, this is very 

concerning because there’s so many . . . And I mean this is a big 

thing. We may think it’s not but there are so many groups and, 

you know, organizations, individuals that do so much 

fundraising, like I said about class trips. You name it. And 

we’re all probably, as members of this Legislative Assembly, 

have been involved in different groups and helping out 

fundraisers, whether it’s, you know, you’re donating out of your 

pocket to buy bakeries, they’re having bake sales, all the 

different things we either . . . or working or volunteering, 

whether it’s a pancake breakfast or, you know, there’s so many 

different activities that go on and we take part and try to assist 

when it’s a good cause. And you see it. And you hope at the end 

of the day you trust the individuals that they’re going to do the 

right thing with those resources and the money that they collect, 

they fundraise, that they’ll do the good thing and the right thing. 

Most I think people feel that way. 

 

But if the government’s saying that they’re having issues with 

that, then I hope we’ll flesh that out and find out what’s the 

reason why. Have there been complaints? Or is this really not to 

create hurdles but to give supports? 

 

So I know my colleagues have a lot of questions more, and I 

know in committee we will get a chance to ask more on this. So 

having said this at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared 

to adjourn debate on Bill 105. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105, The Informal Public 

Appeals Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 106 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 106 — The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I’m pleased to rise to join in on the debate on Bill No. 106, 

An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990. The minister 

gave some fairly thorough explanations of what’s being 

attempted here in this bill in his comments on November 18th, 

2013 when he gave the second reading speech from the 

government on this proposed bill. 

 

The bill attempts to make a number of changes to provisions in 

The Legal Profession Act. And as you will know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, The Legal Profession Act is the Act that governs the 

law profession here in Saskatchewan. I’m a member of that 

profession, and certainly this is something that is very important 

to the profession. And I think these changes that are being 

proposed add more to what the profession is desiring to do in 

terms of being accountable to the public. 

 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4411 

I think it’s fair to say that lawyers sometimes get a bad rap, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and are often the butt of a lot of criticism in 

the profession. But if you look back over the years and the 

history of this profession, it’s a very noble profession and one 

that takes its obligations very seriously. And lawyers are often 

brought in when things are at their very worst, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And that’s I think sometimes where some of the bad 

rap comes from, is that lawyers by their very skills sometimes 

charge fees to provide services to the public. And sometimes 

it’s seen as a bit difficult for members of the public to do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start out by just looking at some 

of the proposed changes. The minister indicated the first 

provision that’s being changed is one that’s clarifying that when 

regulating the profession, the public interest is paramount. I 

think this is really important, Mr. Speaker, and I think I want to 

read that whole clause for you because it’s something that I 

think is really important for the law profession. 

 

[15:45] 

 

I’m enjoying some of the comments from across the way, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and certainly I do enjoy speaking to the 

provisions of the bill so I’m going to keep trying to do that. 

 

The new clause that’s being inserted here in terms of protecting 

the public is clause 3.2, and I’m going to read that proposed 

clause. It says: 

 

In any exercise of the society’s powers or discharge of its 

responsibilities or in any proceeding pursuant to this Act, 

the protection of the public and ethical and competent 

practice take priority over the interests of the member. 

 

And I think it’s a very clear message from the Law Society and 

the lawyers in Saskatchewan that the protection of the public is 

paramount and that ethical and competent practice is the most 

important aspect of the legal practice. And it’s not the interests 

of the member. And I think too often a lot of people presume 

the opposite. But I think the attempt here by the Law Society is 

that indeed the protection of the public is the number one 

responsibility for any lawyer practising law in Saskatchewan, 

and this provides clarity to that. 

 

As the minister indicated, all of these requests come from the 

Law Society of Saskatchewan. This is not something that’s 

being imposed by the Law Society, but it is this professional 

association who wants these changes and wants them to be 

absolutely clear so that the public understands what the view of 

the Law Society is. 

 

And any member that does not take the protection of the public 

or the ethical and competent practice as a priority will be 

challenged and disciplined by the society. That’s the whole 

intent of this. 

 

The second change that the proposed amendments are making is 

in section 6(2), and in that one we see a change in the 

composition of benchers. And benchers are the people that are 

responsible for disciplinary action and admissions and all the 

administrative items that the Law Society deals with. So there’s 

a new change or a proposed change to who will be benchers. 

 

The thing that remains the same is that the dean of the College 

of Law will always be a bencher, and then there should be 17 

benchers elected. Now what’s being changed here is, rather than 

a very complex legislative formula that is proposed under the 

current Act under 6(2) — it’s quite a long formula that’s being 

imposed by legislation — that’s being wiped out. And now the 

benchers, there’s still 17, but they will be elected pursuant to 

the rules of the society. And I’ll get into some of the details of 

the powers to make rules here in a minute. 

 

So what we’re seeing is a removal of strict legislative formulas 

of 50 per cent and 40 per cent. It’s quite complicated. That’s 

being removed. And as the minister indicated, the society itself 

is being given more control over the number of elected 

members on its council to accommodate demographic changes 

and improve governance. So I think this is an improvement, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And another change that we see in the definitions is that the 

society is now given authority to regulate law firms as well as 

individual members. So that’s a change as well. We see a new 

definition of firms being introduced so that the society can 

discipline a law firm as well as an individual member. And 

again I think that’s a good change and I commend the Law 

Society for coming forward with that proposal. 

 

The next change that the minister speaks to is found in section 

10, and these are the rules that I just referred to. There’s a long 

list of rules that the benchers can make about governance of the 

society, establishing committees, the election of benchers, the 

powers of the benchers. And it’s a very long list that goes on for 

over two pages in the current legislation. 

 

So there’s sort of a clerical change being made at the beginning 

of the section, and all that we’re told there is that they’re 

incorporating the definition that’s used in BC [British 

Columbia] right now, so it adds some clarity about who the 

benchers are making rules for, and it includes firms. So again, 

it’s more clarity that the Law Society and the benchers have 

authority to make decisions relating to firms and not just 

individual lawyers. So they’ve adopted a new definition there. 

 

But the substantive change, there’s two here. One is in 10 

article . . . Sorry. Section 10(f.2) is a new provision. And this is 

that they can make rules respecting the establishment of an 

admissions panel. And there’s two important things about this. 

The admissions panel currently is the entire benchers, which as 

you know is made up of 18 members. I think the Law Society 

was finding that rather onerous, so they’re now suggesting we 

just have an admissions panel. So who can be admitted to the 

Law Society? There’s two groups of people. One is articling 

students, or students-at-law, as they’re referred to in the 

legislation. And the second piece is new members of the Law 

Society. 

 

And certainly I remember both of those instances very clearly 

in my law practice, Mr. Speaker. Back in 1994 when I finished 

my degree of law, I then applied to be admitted to the Law 

Society. It’s a really big deal. And so that’s under section 23 of 

the Act. And now instead of this being reviewed by the entire 

benchers, it would be reviewed by a smaller panel. They can 

make rules about who’s going to be on that panel, and that’s the 

change here. 



4412 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

And then the second big deal when you become an official 

lawyer is you actually get admitted to the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan by that . . . now it’ll be the special committee. 

And again that’s a very, very important day in any lawyer’s life, 

when you get to go down to Regina to the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan and you actually sign the rolls. And every lawyer 

who’s ever been admitted to practice in the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan is able to go to Regina, and you sign your name 

in the rolls. It’s much like as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] when we sign the official record-keeping book here 

in the Assembly — same idea. And it’s a very important time 

for a new lawyer, for sure. So that’s a change you see in the 

rules. 

 

And the other big change that’s being proposed is the new 

clause (n.1), and that reads as follows: “providing for the 

appointment and composition of panels to carry out the 

discipline provisions of this Act.” And the description that’s 

given in the Explanatory Notes for that clause tells us that this “ 

. . . gives the Law Society the power to make rules for 

appointment of members of the general public to discipline 

hearing panels.” The minister in his comments indicates that 

this is something the Law Society wants. They want members 

of the public to be able to be part of panels that are hearing 

disciplinary complaints against individual lawyers or firms. 

 

And I think this is again a good move on the part of the Law 

Society to ensure that the transparency and accountability of 

individual members is scrutinized not only by members of the 

Law Society but by members of the public. And we often fear 

that when people are being disciplined by their own colleagues 

that perhaps the tendency to be lenient perhaps, if I could 

suggest, is more of a temptation when you’re being disciplined 

by your colleagues. But what this does is it opens it up to the 

public. And I think the view then of the Law Society is that that 

fear or concern is dissipated because we no longer have just 

people and their friends judging each other, which could be 

appeared as being inappropriate. And I’m not suggesting it ever 

is, but it’s the appearance of that that’s concerning. 

 

So the Law Society is suggesting that also members of the 

public can now be involved in the disciplinary panels, and I 

think that’s a very important change, Mr. Speaker. What the 

minister said is that the changes are proposed to change the way 

appeals are conducted . . . Sorry. In terms of the disciplinary 

actions, will provide that members of the public can also be 

involved in those decisions. So that’s something that’s 

important. 

 

So yes. And when I mentioned earlier the change to the 

admissions panel, there’s another change that’s being suggested 

in section 23. This is when a Law Society, when a 

student-at-law applies to be admitted and they’re refused 

admission to the Law Society. This is where instead of having 

the entire bench review the refusal or the appeal of the refusal, 

it’s now going to be a smaller panel that’s established under the 

rules. And that applies for a student-at-law under section 23. So 

there’s some amendments relating to that. 

 

And it also applies for when a person applies to be a lawyer and 

is refused. And again, instead of asking the entire bench to 

review the appeal of that refusal, we’ll see an admissions panel. 

And that’s a couple of changes to section 24 that are being 

proposed. And again, I think they make eminent sense, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Section 35 is also being changed, and in this case . . . That’s 

what I referred to earlier, is the conduct investigation 

committee. Now that the rules allow it, this section 35 tells us 

how the conduct investigation committee is established. It’s no 

longer prescribed in the legislation, but it’s prescribed in 

accordance with the rules. Now we know that section (2) has 

been amended quite a bit, and it just reads, “The majority of 

members of the . . . committee must be benchers.” 

 

So the Law Society is insisting on a disciplinary action that no 

matter how many people are hearing it — and we know that 

members of the public will be part of that committee now — a 

majority of the members of the committee still must be 

benchers of the Law Society. So it’s not like they’re throwing it 

wide open to a bunch of members of the public doing the 

disciplinary hearing. There still has to be a majority of the 

members that are from the Law Society. 

 

So I think then we have a couple more changes that I want to 

mention. One is in section 53. It used to be that the hearing 

committee had to report back within 45 days. Now they’re 

proposing that it be heard as soon as possible. So I think that 

just is to provide some flexibility because in complex cases it’s 

been difficult to achieve that 45-day period. 

 

And in section 86 there’s some changes here. There’s a 

statutory exemption from liability for a number of people in that 

section already, and they’re just extending it to the Law 

Foundation or members of the Law Foundation, as long as those 

members are acting in good faith. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a number of these changes seem very 

appropriate. Again they were brought forward by the Law 

Society, and I think that they’re designed to promote 

accountability and including members of the public in some of 

the decision making that is made by the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan, which seems very appropriate. So at this point, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, I would like to move to adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 106, The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 113 — The Powers 

of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la 

Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4413 

Mr. Speaker. And I’m glad to note that my colleagues across 

the way are hanging on my every word and finding out what the 

true substance of these bills are. So I really appreciate the 

attention by members opposite as well as my colleagues. 

 

So I’m very pleased to be able to get up and speak today to Bill 

No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, 

one of the things that I want to start with is . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There seems to be quite a bit of noise 

in the Assembly. I’m having a great deal of difficulty hearing 

the member from Nutana. Those members that are in the back, 

if they would like to take their conversations outside, it would 

be much appreciated. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your attempts to 

obtain a quieter Chamber, but we’ll carry on. One of the first 

things I wanted to bring to the public’s attention when we’re 

debating this bill — because it’s a complicated area of law and 

it deals with powers of attorney, and there’s lots of words that 

get thrown in when you’re talking about powers of attorney — 

but I’d like to share with the people that are interested in this a 

small piece from the government’s web page, the Ministry of 

Justice web page, on the purpose of an attorney because I think 

this is an important point to embark on this discussion. And I’m 

going to quote what’s on the web page. It says: 

 

People who are growing older may be unable to look after 

their basic financial transactions. They may be unable to 

do their own banking, look after day-to-day bills, buy 

personal items, buy food, shelter and services, and collect 

payments to which they are entitled or deal with assets 

they own such as a house or investments. This makes them 

extremely vulnerable. It also affects other people such as 

dependants, service providers and those who own property 

together with the grantor. The role of an attorney is to step 

into the shoes of the grantor for the purpose of financial 

decisions and transactions on the person’s behalf. This 

serves to protect the welfare of the grantor. It also 

indirectly benefits others whose own financial interests are 

connected to those of the grantor. 

 

This obligation is a very serious one. Almost every aspect 

of the grantor’s life is affected — directly or indirectly — 

by the attorney’s actions. By performing the role diligently 

and sensitively, the attorney will give the grantor the most 

comfortable, enjoyable and safe life that the grantor can 

afford. On the other hand, extreme harm can result to the 

grantor and to others if the attorney does not act diligently 

and honestly. Therefore, the highest standards of honesty, 

integrity and trust are demanded from the attorney. 

 

Passing control of . . . [one’s] income and assets to an 

attorney does not mean that the attorney assumes 

ownership of the income and assets. Ownership remains in 

the name of the grantor. He or she is simply responsible 

for managing, in the best way possible, what the grantor 

has. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can see that in these circumstances the 

role of an attorney is incredibly important. And I know many of 

us have aging parents, or many of us are responsible for 

dependents who are often unable to exercise their own will in 

terms of property or personal issues. 

 

There’s two types of an attorney. There’s a personal attorney, 

and then there’s a property attorney. And those can be two 

different people, but either of them are given the power to act 

under what we call the power of attorney. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So this is a very important issue that many of us in the 

Assembly may be asked to do at some point in time, or certainly 

we know individuals who are asked to perform this role. And 

it’s certainly one I think that’s very delicate, very sensitive. It’s 

extremely . . . As the web page says, “. . . the highest standards 

of honesty, integrity and trust . . .” are invoked in these types of 

situations because of the vulnerability of the individuals. Most 

often these individuals are seniors, as we get older and aren’t as 

able to look after our own affairs. So you know, it’s something I 

think that the most vulnerable people are affected by. 

 

And we hear a lot about vulnerable seniors these days. I know 

on this side of the House we’ve been talking a lot about the 

vulnerability of seniors in long-term care homes and personal 

care homes, and it’s something I think that we have to 

continually be extremely vigilant about. 

 

So I think there’s a few changes that are being proposed at this 

point to The Powers of Attorney Act, and these changes reflect I 

think the extreme importance and the level of integrity and 

honesty that are required by the attorney, if it’s a personal 

attorney or a property attorney, in maintaining and protecting 

that individual because of the vulnerability of that individual. 

And you know, many of these individuals as they get older have 

significant assets, significant property assets, banking assets, or 

personal affairs that are very complex and involved. So I think 

this vigilance that’s imposed in these types of legislation can 

never be high enough. I think it’s something we need to 

continually strive to ensure that these attorneys are held to the 

highest standard and also helped to reach those standards. 

 

So I think some of these changes make a lot of sense and will 

make some clarity around issues where there was some 

confusion. And indeed the minister, when he rose to speak to 

this on November 18th, indicated that there’s some aspects of 

the law respecting powers of attorney that are unclear. 

 

I just want to point out that he said that there was consultation 

on this recently, but to me it’s unclear with whom he consulted 

with. So that’s one of the questions I think we’re going to want 

to find out once we have an opportunity to question the minister 

in the committee is, exactly who did he consult with? Because 

he said he consulted, but we don’t know with whom he 

consulted. So we’re hoping that folks like the Seniors 

Mechanism, who I understand are having their Christmas party 

today, but those are the types of folks who we’ll be . . . we 

assume and hope that the minister consulted with. But we will 

certainly need to find out when we have an opportunity to ask 

him that question. 

 

Anyways as he was indicating in his comments, there are some 

aspects of the law respecting powers of attorney that are 

unclear. So the first example he gives is that let’s say the 



4414 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

grantor, the person he’s acting for, he or she’s acting for, has a 

substantial estate and would normally have been making 

donations or gifts to various people as a matter of course. There 

was nothing in the law that said that the power of attorney could 

also make gifts on behalf of the grantor, and so there’s a 

number of changes that are being proposed here. And I’m just 

going to pull out the actual change that we find in the Act. 

 

This is a new section, and it’s going to be called section 16.1, 

and it’s called “Gifts.” That’s the marginal title of it. 

 

So what we see here is there’s three ways that a property 

attorney can make a gift out of the grantor’s estate, and there’s 

no other way to do it. This is limiting to these three conditions. 

So we’re saying: 

 

(2) Subject to the regulations and any limitations . . . in the 

enduring power of attorney that appoints the property 

attorney, a property attorney may make a gift out of the 

grantor’s estate if: 

 

(a) the portion of the estate that constitutes the gift is not 

required to meet . . . [their] needs . . . 

 

So if he’s going to give away more money than the grantor 

needs, it’s not allowed. 

 

Second thing, if the property attorney should have reasonable 

grounds to believe that, based on the grantor’s actions when 

they had capacity, that they would’ve made the gift. So the 

power of attorney can’t start giving money willy-nilly, even if 

the money’s there, if the grantor had never done that before they 

lost capacity to make decisions. So again I think that’s, that’s an 

important restriction on this. 

 

And then finally, “the value of the gift does not exceed the 

prescribed amount.” We see that under regulations there will be 

a prescribed amount that caps the amount of money that a 

property attorney can make. 

 

I guess another point here, Mr. Speaker, is I had to 

double-check what’s the difference between a power of attorney 

and an enduring power of attorney? And this section is for the 

enduring power of attorney. I could appoint you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as my power of attorney now, I still have capacity to 

make my decisions, but you would as well. But once I lose 

capacity to make decisions, then you would become the 

enduring power of attorney. So the enduring portion of the 

description here, it’s only enduring powers of attorney who can 

make gifts, and those are when I have lost or the individual 

grantor has lost their own capacity to make gifts. 

 

So you know, you can give power of attorney. Let’s say you’re 

going to go out of the country for six months or you have to, 

you know, undergo some medical treatment and you don’t want 

to run your own affairs. You can appoint a power of attorney 

for that, but it wouldn’t become an enduring power of attorney 

until you have lost capacity. 

 

And I’m just going to quote a little bit of this from the web page 

as well, just to make clear what an enduring power of attorney 

is, and it says, “An enduring power of attorney is a power of 

attorney that states that it is to continue in effect even if the 

grantor becomes incapacitated.” 

 

There’s two types of enduring power of attorney. One is the 

first type that takes effect immediately, and the second comes 

into effect on a specified future date or the occurrence of a 

specified event. And they have an example: so it was when the 

grantor becomes mentally incapable or when grantor leaves the 

country for an extended period. This is a contingent power of 

attorney. 

 

So I think many, many adults, as they get older and become 

senior and realize they’re not able to deal with their affairs as 

well as they would like to, will appoint a power of attorney. 

And they’ll continue to make their own decisions as long as 

they’re capable of doing so, but the power of attorney can make 

those decisions. Or once they lose capacity, then the enduring 

power of attorney would take over. 

 

So in terms of the gift portion of the changes to the Act, this 

only relates to enduring powers of attorney when the grantor 

can no longer make those decisions. And as I said, they can 

give gifts in the very specified provisions here in the new 

section 16.1. 

 

The next section that is being amended is in relation to fee 

schedules. And I know this is often a problem that I think we 

encountered in my . . . the father of my children when his father 

died. His father had provided for a trust company to look after 

his estate. And the fees they charged, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were 

absolutely massive; I was quite surprised at what they charged 

for my father-in-law’s estate. And I think it’s very important 

that individuals are protected and dependents and beneficiaries 

are protected against exorbitant fees. 

 

So the proposed changes here are I think in section 17 of the 

existing Act. And what’s being proposed here, they’ve actually 

basically replaced the existing clause. In the existing clause 

there was a provision that said that you can charge a fee that’s 

reasonable and that you have to provide an accounting for those 

fees. Now the new section reads: 

 

An attorney acting pursuant to an enduring power of 

attorney shall not charge a fee unless: 

 

[it’s] . . . set out in the enduring power of attorney. 

 

And again the power of attorney is the document that outlines 

the responsibilities of the attorney. So you can’t charge a fee 

unless it’s set out in the document that makes you the attorney 

or the court has made an order setting a fee for you. Or if it’s 

not set out in there but there’s a prescribed fee schedule in the 

Act, then it can’t be more than the prescribed fee schedule. 

 

So again I think it protects the vulnerability of the grantors in 

this case, that unless the grantor has said, here’s the fees you 

can charge, or if a court has said, these are reasonable fees you 

can charge, or if they’re not any higher than what’s in this 

schedule in the regulations, then you can’t do it. So that’s a very 

important protection for the vulnerable people that are the 

grantors in these circumstances. 

 

The other changes that we find in the Act . . . Let me find these 

again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In terms of accounting in section 18 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4415 

there’s a few changes that are being made, basically that there 

will be a prescribed form for accounting so that we know that 

proper forms are being used. 

 

There’s also a new subsection (4.1) that gives the government 

or the public guardian and trustee the power to carry out an 

investigation to ensure that the accounting is appropriate and 

mirrors the provision in The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Act. And we know now there’s going to be 

some regulations that will give the form for accounting. So 

there’s going to be a standard accounting process for any 

attorney who is collecting fees as a result of being appointed as 

an attorney. 

 

And the amendment to subsection (6) allows also an order to 

terminate the authority of an attorney who does not provide an 

accounting. So it gives some powers to the court and to protect 

the vulnerable people against unscrupulous attorneys who do 

not properly account for their fees and do not follow the rules, 

basically. So again it’s another protection for the vulnerable 

people that are placed in the position of having a power of 

attorney. 

 

Section 19 is also being amended somewhat. There’s just a few 

provisions being added here: what happens in the case of a 

missing person, and presumption of people who are presumed 

dead. They also, if they have a property guardian that’s 

appointed — because you can do that under The Missing 

Persons and Presumption of Death Act — the changes here 

now just reflect the ability to cross-reference that Act. Those are 

found in clause 19(1), and it’s just adding a couple of clauses 

here: subclause (g.2) and (g.3) for orders presuming death of 

the grantor, or orders appointing a property guardian for the 

estate of a missing person. A couple of small changes also in 

that clause in terms of the definition of spouse, which are just 

modernizing and reflecting the amended description of a 

spouse. 

 

And the final change that’s being proposed under the 

regulations is a few new ability clauses to make regulations. 

Clause (d.1) — and this all relates to the other changes I’ve 

talked about — so clause (d.1) of regulation powers says that 

they can prescribe the maximum value of a gift. So we can now 

do that. Under (d.2) we can prescribe a fee schedule for the 

attorney’s fees. And then finally under (d.3), we are going to 

have an ability of regulations prescribing the form of the 

accounting that takes place. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I think the vulnerability of the grantors 

is paramount in any of these provisions. And for those of us 

with aging parents who will need that kind of help, or maybe 

already we are dealing with those kinds of responsibilities for 

vulnerable seniors — and of course this doesn’t only relate to 

vulnerable seniors, but any dependant who has affairs that need 

to be looked after — then I think these kinds of changes are 

very important. And I think, as the minister said, the protection 

of vulnerable adults who have given a power of attorney is now 

enhanced with the proposed changes. 

 

So I’ve really appreciated the opportunity to speak to this bill. 

And I believe other of my colleagues want to speak to it, so at 

this point I would like to move that we adjourn the debate on 

Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 113, The Powers of 

Attorney Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 114 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation which we’re amending is an 

important part of the health care system in Saskatchewan. It 

looks at and sets up procedures whereby people can make 

decisions about their health care in a way that’s organized and 

reflects careful thought by an individual as to how they want to 

be treated in situations where right now they don’t anticipate 

that such legislation will be needed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of legislation that deals with 

tough decisions that are made by families or others so that the 

appropriate and the right decisions can be made. And as we 

know, as people age and as they get into situations where tough 

decisions are made based on medical advice and sometimes 

legal advice, the more accurate legislation that we have, the 

fewer problems that there will be later in interpreting them. 

 

So what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is legislation then that 

amends the directives, health care directives legislation or 

substitute health care decision makers Act. It appears that the 

rationale for this legislation is that there are and have been quite 

a number of situations where decisions around health care are 

difficult. And I think the most practical one was identified by 

the minister in his second reading speech, and that relates to 

day-to-day decisions made in a health care institution. 

 

So you have a spouse or a parent in a long-term care facility 

where there are decisions that need to be made on a day-to-day 

basis about particular treatments that are needed or particular 

activities, and when the person is not in a position to make 

those decisions themself, somebody else has to do that and 

make those decisions. And so what the legislation does is say 

that day-to-day treatments can be made in a fashion that is 

without complication, and it’s made by people who are in care. 

 

So basically what’s going to happen is that the power will be 

here in the legislation for regulations to be created to prescribe 

who will be the caregiver that makes these day-to-day 

decisions. So it could be, you know, something related to a 



4416 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

certain type of medication or it could be something related to 

dental treatment, eyeglasses, things like that, where a person 

can’t make the decisions. And so what they’re doing here is to 

set out a way whereby these treatments can be accomplished. 

 

I think the specific language in the legislation says: 

 

If a person requires a day-to-day treatment but lacks the 

capacity to make a health care decision with respect to the 

day-to-day treatment, and neither a proxy, nearest relative 

nor personal guardian is readily available, the person’s 

caregiver may make a health care decision for the person 

requiring the day-to-day treatment. 

 

So practically, that’s acknowledging the fact that caregivers do 

have relationships with patients and that they can in many cases 

make decisions in a relatively straightforward manner. And so 

the legislation will be amended to include that kind of an 

option. And, Mr. Speaker, that seems reasonable. I’m sure there 

will be situations where there may be some difficulties as a 

result of that, but I think practically that it’s a reasonable 

solution to what sometimes is a difficult situation. 

 

One of the factors for Saskatchewan is that we often have 

people who are aging here whose family is spread out across the 

world. And they’re available and will be diligent in coming 

back to visit senior family members, but they’re not there for 

some of these day-to-day decisions. So this is a method 

whereby some of those particular situations can be dealt with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that this is a relatively good solution 

for now. I also understand that there may be situations where 

this isn’t going to satisfy everybody involved. But we’ll have to 

see whether two years or three years or four years down the 

road there doesn’t need to be some amendments to define what 

day-to-day treatment is and what a caregiver is. But practically, 

this appears to be a reasonable solution. 

 

And so the way the legislation is set up is things like the term, 

day-to-day treatment, will be defined in the regulations. I think 

that much care will have to be taken in developing those 

regulations, and I would urge that there be much consultation 

around that because it’s on that practical side of this legislation 

where problems will arise. 

 

Now then the next section in the legislation, they’ve set out a 

priority order I guess if I can put it that way, for people who 

will make a decision for somebody who can’t make a decision 

around application to a long-term health care facility. And this 

is another place where there sometimes arise difficulties 

because you have different people who think they have 

authority, and they all have concern about the person who 

requires the care, but some may have more priority in the list 

than others. So what this legislation will do is to set out that 

priority. And I think if you look at the new section 18.1(2), and 

we can go through it and listen to what’s said here, we’ll see the 

priority that’s been set out. 

 

And so it says, “If a person requires long-term care but lacks the 

capacity to make a health care decision, the personal guardian 

. . .” is number one. If they can’t do it, the proxy is number two. 

If they can’t do it, the nearest relative is number three. And if 

that’s not the solution, then two treatment providers can make 

the decision. 

 

So effectively we have a four-tiered layer. The personal 

guardian, and the personal guardian would be somebody who 

has that status under the legislation or under some agreement. A 

proxy is somebody who’s been appointed a health care proxy. 

And then you go then to the nearest relative, and the legislation 

itself now does have a whole list of relatives in order as to who 

has the power. 

 

And just for review purposes, I’ll set that out so that people can 

understand. So basically if somebody has an issue around 

making decisions for health care, the order as set out in the Act 

is as follows: “the spouse or person with whom the person 

requiring treatment cohabits and has cohabited [in a spousal] 

. . . relationship of some permanence.” Now that gives a little 

flexibility, but effectively it’s the spouse or partner is the first 

person to make a decision. Then if they’re not there or not 

available, it’s the adult son or daughter of that person. If they’re 

not available and they have a parent or legal custodian, then 

they take the decision. If that person isn’t around, it goes then to 

an adult brother or sister of the patient. If they’re not around, 

then it goes to a grandparent, and then if the grandparent’s not 

around, it slips down to the adult grandchild, and then it goes to 

adult uncle or aunt or an adult nephew or niece. 

 

And I think that it’s interesting to see how that sort of hierarchy 

works, and it’s important to keep that in mind when some 

decisions are made. Now often in larger families there may be 

more than one person in each of these categories. So you’ll 

have some other issues around how to make the decision, but 

ultimately the goal is to have as much information and 

conversation, and that if there are disputes, then you will have 

some rules. 

 

And so what the legislation does here is say that if there is 

nobody in that nearest relative category, which is the third tier 

after the personal guardian and the proxy, you can still have the 

two treatment providers make the decision. And I think that’s 

kind of a fail-safe clause. I think it’s important. It adds some 

clarity to how these applications can be completed. It also 

makes it easier for the enrolment organizations, which we know 

are part of our regional health authorities, to be certain that they 

have the right people applying for long-term care in a long-term 

care facility. 

 

So it’s a broader structure, and part of what our job here in the 

legislature is is to try to make sure that there aren’t any gaps, 

that there aren’t any places where somebody will end up with a 

dispute over in the hallway around what kind of care a person 

should get. 

 

Now the next part of this legislation relates to identifying and 

making sure that it’s clear that an enduring power of attorney, 

which my colleague was just talking about under The Powers of 

Attorney Act amendments, but an enduring power of attorney 

does not have the effect of giving that attorney the power to 

make health care decisions. And this is a bit of an interesting 

issue, but it’s a further clarification of the differences around 

creating the personal guardians for somebody under a health 

care decision kind of agreement and somebody who has a 

power of attorney or enduring power of attorney to deal with a 

person’s assets. 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4417 

And there, I think, has been some sort of on-the-street 

perspective that, well, an enduring power of attorney does cover 

this whole array of health care decisions as well as financial 

decisions, and rather than leave that fuzziness in the legislation, 

what’s being brought forward here is to make it absolutely clear 

that the enduring power of attorney does not relate to health 

care decisions that are part of this particular legislation. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The net effect of that is that if a person enters into an enduring 

power of attorney, they do that because they have concerns that 

they may end up with some memory issues or 

Alzheimer-related types of dementia that is going to make it 

difficult for them to make decisions around their property and 

other areas. But they’ll have to be clearly advised that it is not 

an agreement or an arrangement that is transferring authority to 

deal with health care decisions. That those kinds of decisions 

are to be dealt with through health care directives and through 

the types of instruments that are mentioned in this legislation. 

 

And I know that this particular clause that’s been introduced in 

this legislation actually does, you know, would relate to those 

situations where people are convinced, as the person who holds 

an enduring power of attorney, that they have this right to make 

all of these decisions in the health care area. But they do not. 

And it’s setting out very clearly that the health care directives 

and the powers that are made under those documents will trump 

anything that’s in a power of attorney or in an enduring power 

of attorney. 

 

So it’s a whole interesting area and it’s important to see how 

it’s developed over the years. I mean clearly, as issues arise, 

new words are added to both the health care directives and the 

enduring powers of attorney to reflect what happens here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the other thing that I would point out is that each province, 

and most likely each of the states in the United States, have 

their own legislation as it relates to similar activities. So in 

Alberta, the rules may be slightly different. In Manitoba, a little 

bit different here and there. I know there’s an attempt to try to 

have them as similar as possible, but they aren’t exactly the 

same. And that does, you know, raise the question sometimes 

that an understanding of a particular document or a particular 

directive in Saskatchewan may be different than what the 

person in British Columbia or Ontario is thinking based on what 

they know about their British Columbia or Ontario legislation. 

And so it is part of the whole concern around getting as much 

clarity in our legislation as possible, but also getting the clarity 

around the words that are used across jurisdictions, at least in 

Canada. But given the fact that many of our citizens spend a lot 

of time in the States or other parts of the world, to make sure 

they’re clearly interpreted in those places as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the last section in the legislation relates to 

some of I think the regulations that can be created. And 

effectively what it does is put into effect where and how the 

decisions are made as it relates to the changes that are there in 

section 18.1 around who can make a decision about entry into 

long-term care and also who can make the day-to-day decisions 

about treatments and types of treatments. And so what we see in 

the regulatory power clauses is that the minister, through 

regulation, will be able to designate all of those positions that 

are caregiver positions, and those are the people then that have 

the ability to make the day-to-day treatment decisions. 

 

Then also in the same regulatory phrase that’s used in this 

legislation, it will prescribe and list out all the types of 

treatments that are to be subject to the day-to-day decisions. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this is going to be an interesting task to 

see. I encourage the minister to put out draft regulations as 

quickly as possible so that people can discuss whether their 

decisions are too wide for day-to-day type decisions or whether 

they’re too narrow. Because practically the heart of the changes 

that are here will be in those particular regulations and so, Mr. 

Speaker, you end up with concepts that are in the legislation 

and then these definitions that will be in the regulations 

themselves. 

 

Another regulatory power that will be given to the minister will 

be the power of designating facilities as long-term care facilities 

pursuant or for the purposes of section 18.1, and that effectively 

may be that a long-term care facility, as we understand it under 

other legislation of the province in the Health ministry, might 

be slightly different than the long-term care definition that’s 

going to be under this particular legislation. So that will be 

another area where we’ll want to watch and see how the 

legislation is implemented. And once again in that area I think it 

would be wise to send out draft regulations many months ahead 

of them going into effect to make sure that we don’t end up 

with some strange anomalies between one place that is called a 

long-term care facility and another which is exactly the same 

but doesn’t have that designation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on this type of legislation, it’s usually brought 

forward by the minister to deal with specific issues that have 

arisen. I know that you often can’t talk about exactly the 

situation that’s arisen, but I think that we’ll all be looking to the 

minister to provide us with the context where some of the 

problems have arisen so that we can assess whether this actually 

will solve the problem that has been identified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that some of my colleagues will also want 

to speak to this legislation, probably from an angle of some of 

their own personal experiences in dealing with this because I 

think it’s important to also put that on the record as showing the 

importance and the urgency of these types of changes. 

 

It may also be that as we look at the legislation over the coming 

winter that there are other changes that should have been made 

in this area which are not included in this legislation. And if 

they’re practical and reasonable, I’m sure we will bring them 

forward or it may be that the minister would bring them forward 

because they’re so practical and reasonable. So we would see 

about that. 

 

But I want to give other of my colleagues opportunity to speak 

to this legislation, and so I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, I 

will adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



4418 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 115 — The Public 

Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to 

be recognized in the Assembly and, as ever, nice to get the 

thumping support from the member from Regina South. The 

guy’s got a gift for thumping that desk, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

always nice to hear him putting that gift to use. 

 

Bill No. 115, An Act to amend The Public Guardian and 

Trustee Act, to repeal The Mentally Disordered Persons Act 

and to make a related amendment to another Act, Bill No. 115, 

is a pretty interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. It comes 

forward as part of a suite of legislative amendments tabled this 

fall session by the government to provide better legal responses 

under the existing legislation for dealing with individuals that 

for different reasons, either through the health care system or 

through the legal system . . . But again we’ve dealt with the 

matters under the health care directives Act, under The Powers 

of Attorney Act, and again we’re here today with Bill No. 115 

dealing with measures under The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Act. 

 

I’ve had recent experience, Mr. Speaker, as I know you have 

yourself, as I know other members in this Assembly have, to 

pay a bit closer attention to the work of the Public Guardian, 

Mr. Speaker. And again in the person of Ron Kruzeniski, 

you’ve got a long-standing public servant, a real trailblazer in a 

lot of respects, someone who has done a fine job on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan in many, many different capacities 

over the years, Mr. Speaker, but of late in the Office of the 

Public Guardian and Trustee. 

 

And I know that looking at the legislation, it would seem to 

bear certain of the grace notes evident in the work of that 

individual. And certainly making sure that the Act is keeping up 

with the best in modern practice, the best in interjurisdictional 

best practices is very important. And again we’re glad to see the 

refinements brought forward in these various pieces of 

legislation here today. 

 

As regards the Act itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of what 

I’d like to discuss here today, what I’d like to do first is 

consider the minister’s second reading speech and then work 

through the legislation itself and then maybe situate that in the 

context of the current work being undertaken by the Public 

Guardian and Trustee. 

 

But when the minister brought the legislation forward in the 

second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, November 8th, 2013, the 

Minister of Justice stated that: 

 

The main portion of this bill moves the provisions 

respecting certificates of incapacity from The Mentally 

Disordered Persons Act allowing that legislation to be 

repealed. 

 

Carrying on with the quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Some changes from the provisions found in the former Act 

include: a change in terminology from incompetence, 

which some of the respondents from consultations found 

objectionable, to a concept of capacity or incapacity; a 

new ability for physicians to examine a person for capacity 

without a request from a chief psychiatrist; and a reduction 

in the time period that can be imposed between 

re-examinations for capacity from one year to six months. 

 

So there, Mr. Speaker, you find some valuable concepts being 

deployed in this legislation. Moving from the terminology that 

denotes incompetence to one of competence or capacity, 

obviously a more positive definition of the situation for people. 

And again these are folks who are often quite vulnerable, Mr. 

Speaker, and they have some pretty wrenching situations that 

have led them to trusteeship. And stating their situation more 

positively, making a more accurate assessment of the skills and 

the competencies and the capacity that they bring, Mr. Speaker, 

is a good way to go. 

 

[16:45] 

 

In terms of the ability for physicians to examine a person for 

capacity without a request from a chief psychiatrist, in this, Mr. 

Speaker, we see again I think an adaptation of the system to 

make the system more responsive, to provide for more timely 

assessments as regards capacity or competency. And again the 

balance that need be struck there, Mr. Speaker, is in terms of the 

previous bar being one, with involving the chief psychiatrist, 

ensured that the gravity of what is entailed in a decision or a 

designation of competence is a very serious one, Mr. Speaker, 

and entails some pretty significant changes in the ability of a 

person to govern their own affairs so that the bar should be set 

high with the chief psychiatrist. 

 

And that that is now being changed to provide for different 

physicians to be able to make the assessment of competence 

without application first to the chief psychiatrist. Again we’ll be 

looking to see how that works. We’ll be looking to make sure 

that there aren’t abuses that accrue to that. 

 

Again in terms of the different regulations that oversee 

physicians and the different individuals empowered by this 

legislation, there are safeguards in place. And we’ll see if this 

does indeed meet that balance of both responsive and timely 

assessments being made as regards competence but at the same 

time the assurance of making sure that this is undertaken in the 

absolute spirit of solemnity and gravity that it need be 

undertaken in. 

 

And then the reduction in the time period that can be imposed 

between re-examinations for capacity from one year to six 

months, again, Mr. Speaker, this should make for a more timely 

regime, a more responsive regime as regards these very critical 

assessments and the fairly significant restrictions and 

curtailment of individual liberties that it involves. But we’ll be 

looking to see how that is utilized and how that works its way 



December 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4419 

through the system. But again, given the sort of time periods 

involved, this is something that should become evident over the 

immediate and medium term of this legislation upon being 

enacted. 

 

Again returning to the second reading speech, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Other amendments update the powers of the Public 

Guardian and Trustee by adding the power to revoke an 

acknowledgement to act that was signed in error, and 

adding the power to administer the estate of a deceased 

dependent adult client of the public trustee and guardian 

pending administration by someone who is not a 

court-ordered personal representative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is again clarifying what are fairly significant 

powers under the Act and fairly significant powers that are 

exercised on the behalf of individuals under the office of the 

guardian and trustee that we’re able to revoke, that they’ll be 

adding the power to revoke “ . . . an acknowledgement to act 

that was signed in error . . .” Again that would seem to be a 

fairly straightforward proposition, but we’ll have questions I 

think, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the previous approach that 

needed to be followed and what sort of anticipation there is 

around using that provision. 

 

“. . . adding the power to administer the estate of a deceased 

dependent adult client of the public trustee and guardian 

pending administration by someone who is not a court-ordered 

personal representative.” Again, Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

significant power that is vested in this office and that we’ve 

seen in other jurisdictions go significantly wrong on behalf of 

people abusing that authority, people abusing that trust. And 

again, so the laws rest upon human shoulders, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, we’ve been blessed with a Public Guardian and Trustee 

who takes that job very seriously, but the legislation and the 

conduct under that legislation is of course critical. And that 

there can be a refinement made is referenced there by the 

minister in his second reading speech. Again this is a good 

thing, but we’ve always got to be vigilant in ensuring that this is 

the best possible legislation and that the legislation itself is 

being conducted and applied in a way that is worthy of that 

tremendous trust and authority that’s been vested in the Office 

of the Public Guardian and Trustee. 

 

And again, not so much in Saskatchewan of late, Mr. Speaker, 

but we’ve seen examples in other jurisdictions where that trust 

is abused and that trust is not carried in a way that is consistent 

with the tremendous authority that is invested in this legislation. 

And when that happens, Mr. Speaker, people get hurt. People’s 

lives are made for the worse, and damage to property and to 

livelihood can accrue. And it’s not unlike, you know, if you’ve 

got people behaving poorly in any sort of circumstance, where 

they’re not living up to the authority entrusted to them, then 

people can go wanting in terms of situations of fraud or the 

abuse of seniors. 

 

And I note for the record, Mr. Speaker, different sort of 

examples coming out of British Columbia, where there’s an 

entire organization, Seniors at Risk, that has sprung up in 

response to different circumstances that have come around 

questions concerning the conduct of the Public Guardian and 

Trustee in that province and questions of abuse of authority and 

fraud in managing the estates of seniors placed under their 

control. I’m citing from Seniors at Risk, May 14th, 2012. They 

reference: 

 

1. A Public Guardian and Trustee staff member who was 

convicted of embezzling millions of dollars of real estate 

and other assets from seniors for whom the PGT was 

appointed guardian, 

 

2. The Public Guardian & Trustee seized the joint bank 

accounts of an elderly couple after the husband 

complained about mistreatment and neglect of his wife by 

care facility staff, and forced his wife to remain in an 

institution rather than be cared for at home, with home 

care, and 

 

3. [An allegation around] Public Guardian and Trustee 

staff . . . [ransacking] the home of an elderly woman who 

was under the PGT’s legal care, made the last months of 

her life “miserable.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, these are circumstances where if you don’t 

get that balance right between the legislation and the legislative 

framework and oversight and execution of the legislation, then 

things have an opportunity to go very badly wrong. And in the 

situations that I’m listing here, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what 

has happened there, and how unfortunate. 

 

So again in terms of making that balance between the very 

vulnerable situation that individuals are under when they come 

to orders being placed under the purview of the Public Guardian 

and Trustee and that keen balance that must be struck in terms 

of making sure that we’ve got the best practices, making sure 

that we’ve got the best possible legislation, and making sure 

that we’ve got good people to carry these very critical duties 

out, Mr. Speaker. And you know, at the same time, with great 

power comes great responsibility and the responsibility under 

this legislation to make sure that all of that trust vested in this 

office and represented here today by the legislation is not just 

warranted but is well carried through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that we in the opposition benches have a 

number of questions that we’d like to ask about the legislation. 

We’ll be looking to see, now that we’ve got a better idea of 

what’s in the Assembly before us in terms of the legislative 

agenda of this government, to see how these different pieces fit 

together and whether or not they do truly provide for a better 

protective regime for vulnerable adults and those placed under 

trusteeship under the Public Guardian and Trustee office or as 

regards to the different measures brought forward under powers 

of attorney or the different sort of circumstances envisioned 

under the health care directives legislation previously under 

discussion by my colleague from Lakeview here just this 

afternoon. 

 

So we’ll be looking to see how those fit together. We’ll be 

consulting certainly with seniors but those who are experts in 

the fields who are out there practising and interacting with this 

legislation on a day-to-day basis and hopefully with individuals 

that are subject to the provisions of these Acts themselves, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



4420 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2013 

So those are some of the things that we’ll be looking to 

undertake in the days and weeks and months ahead as we 

consider the different pieces of legislation, but in particular Bill 

No. 115, An Act to amend the Public Guardian and Trustee Act, 

to repeal The Mentally Disordered Persons Act and to make a 

related amendment to another Act. And with that, Mr. Speaker, 

I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 

a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4391 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4391 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4391 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4391 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4391 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4391 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4391 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4392 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4392 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4392 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4392 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Collaborative Emergency Care Model a Success  

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4392 

 Remembering Catherine Charles 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4393 

 Record Harvest in Saskatchewan 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4393 

 Professor Wins Community Service Award 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4393 

 Honouring Whitewood Volunteer Firefighter 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4394 

 2014 Saskatchewan Winter Games 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4394 

 Festival of Trees in Estevan 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4394 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Emergency Room Wait Times 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4394 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4395 

 Seniors’ and Long-Term Care 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4396 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4396 

 Landfill Management 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4397 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4397 

 Financial Reporting 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4397 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4398 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 128 — The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2013 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4399 

 Bill No. 129 — The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4399 

 Bill No. 130 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4399 

MOTIONS 

 Ombudsman for Saskatchewan 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4400 

 Committee Membership 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4400 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4400 

 



 

 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4403 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4404 

 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 

 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4407 

 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4407 

 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4410 

 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4412 

 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4415 

 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4418 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


