




















































Hansard: November 18, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 14B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2013, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4043 

 November 18, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, second reading 

debates will resume. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Powers of Attorney Amendment 

Act, 2013. Mr. Speaker, as mentioned in the Speech from the 

Throne, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 is being 

introduced as one of the bills that responds to a recent 

consultation respecting vulnerable adults. 

 

As a result of these consultations, it was determined there were 

some aspects of the law respecting powers of attorney that are 

unclear. For example, the law was not clear about an enduring 

power of attorney’s authority to make gifts from an adult’s 

property. That has been clarified in this bill. The attorney can 

make gifts in the following circumstances. First, if the 

document creating the power of attorney specifically authorizes 

the making of gifts. Secondly, if an amount not to exceed the 

value prescribed in the regulations, and if there are sufficient 

funds to make the gift, and there are reasonable grounds to 

believe that the adult would have made the gift if she or he had 

capacity. And finally, if the court authorizes the gift. 

 

The bill will also allow regulations to set a fee schedule for 

someone acting under a power of attorney. The fee schedule 

will come into effect if the document creating the power of 

attorney does not specify the fees to be received and if there is 

no court order establishing the fee to which the attorney is 

entitled. There are several amendments dealing with the 

requirement for an attorney to account for his or her handling of 

the property of the donor. They are divided between 

accountings that occur during the exercise of the power of 

attorney and accountings that occur after the power ends. 

 

The Public Guardian and Trustee is given new powers to carry 

out an investigation to ensure the accuracy of an accounting. 

Also regulations will prescribe the form of an accounting. For 

mid-term accounting, the court is given the power to remove an 

attorney if the accounting is not satisfactory. A final accounting 

occurs at the conclusion of the attorney’s power such as when 

the donor dies, a property guardian is appointed, or the court 

removes that attorney. The final accounting must be provided 

within six months. The bill directs to whom the accounting is 

provided and gives the court the power to order an accounting if 

it is not voluntarily provided. With these improvements, Mr. 

Speaker, the protection of vulnerable adults who have given a 

power of attorney is enhanced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Powers of 

Attorney Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased once again to rise in my place to offer our initial 

comments on the second reading of Bill 113, The Powers of 

Attorney Amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, what’s again the 

point that we would make is that this particular fall sitting is all 

about introducing the bills and introducing the effort behind the 

bills as to what the government hopes to accomplish. 

 

And as I mentioned to many folks that do indeed watch the 

channel, I know a lot of people from my constituency pay 

attention to this particular channel, and what it’s all about is 

having the government introduce their bills, the intent of the 

bills, and to inform the public of the bills. And then after a 

period of three or four months we come back in the spring 

sitting, and this is where we begin to debate the bills. And so 

the time between the fall sitting and the spring sitting really 

allows us to research some of these bills. 

 

And what Bill 113 is all about, The Powers of Attorney 

Amendment Act, is basically that people that are given authority 

through The Powers of Attorney Act, the public trustee or 

guardians are given more powers without having to appear 

before a judge. That’s basically some of the information that we 

have derived from the bill so far. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, there’s a bit more information: that it 

also allows the trustees or the guardians of some of the 

vulnerable adults that we are dealing with here with this bill, it 

also allows them to continue to make gifts on that person’s 

behalf if they’ve known to do some of the gift-giving during 

their time that they were able to look after their own affairs. 

 

So I think one of the points, Mr. Speaker, it’s all about helping 

seniors. And one of the things that we want to raise in the 

Assembly all the time is to make sure that, as you age, that 

Saskatchewan pioneers that have built this province over the 

many, many, many years — and we all have our stories of the 

many, many seniors that live in our constituencies or have had a 

positive effect or impact on your life — as they begin to age it’s 

important that we provide as much support as possible to them. 

 

And what Bill 113 does, it allows them that if they become 

incapacitated in some way, such as they become too ill or they 

perhaps . . . before they suffer any mental health issues that 

many of them do, things like Alzheimer’s and so on and so 

forth, that these vulnerable adults can actually assign someone 

to look after their affairs once they become to a point where 

they’re unable to do so on their own for a variety of potential 

reasons that affects their mental state or their overall 

well-being. 

 

So what they do is they often appoint a trustee or public 

guardian or somebody that has the power of attorney over their 

affairs. And so this is another mechanism I think that many 



4044 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

senior citizens often participate in and take advantage of. And 

what this particular bill does of course it raises the information 

as to what the bill’s intent is all about. And certainly it also 

talks about a number of changes, such as being able to continue 

making gifts on an annual basis to certain, I guess, charities that 

this individual has done over the past number of years, and has 

been consistently giving contributions to a certain charity, if 

you will, that that public trustee or the person that is appointed 

guardian of this estate is able to do so. 

 

So the biggest thing that we would want to support obviously is 

the support for the seniors. We think that if we allow the seniors 

the dignity and the time to make up their business and make up 

their plans in the event that they do get sick, that somebody that 

they trust, somebody that they have confidence in is able to do 

all this work beforehand and make sure that their issues and 

their affairs are taken care of once they get to a point where 

they’re unable to look after these matters on their own. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think again the seniors, being able to 

position them well is something that we in the Assembly, and 

certainly the opposition benches, want to see happen on a 

continual basis. There’s no question that we would be 

consulting seniors because we think that while this may be 

something that is of value, we want to make absolutely certain. 

We want to be clear, and we want to be informed by the seniors 

groups themselves that are out there that this is indeed . . . Bill 

113, that the government says is intending to help them with 

some of the extra powers and privileges that trustees and 

guardians might have as a result of this Act, that it’s not 

misplaced. And that’s one of the reasons why we need to 

consult with them and again take the two or three months that 

we need to look at this bill and involve various groups. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that from our perspective as 

an opposition we have looked at some of the problems that this 

government has had with senior care. And certainly, you know, 

we’ve heard the stories from some of the private health care or 

the private care facilities that have our seniors housed in some 

of these places. We’ve heard the horror stories of how some of 

our seniors are treated. And we continually bring home the 

message that they have to this Assembly, that we have to treat 

the elders with a lot of dignity and compassion and care. 

 

And basically from our perspective we looked at some of the 

challenges that many of our seniors have in some of these 

homes that they are currently being housed in, that we need to 

be vigilant. We need to be diligent in the sense of making sure 

that we’re not becoming complacent or thinking that 

everything’s rosy in a sense of caring for some of the seniors in 

our province. We have to make sure that this is the case. 

 

And basically from some of the information that we’ve 

certainly been exposing the government on, we’re finding more 

and more evidence that many of these care homes are not 

providing the care to our seniors. And that’s a crying shame. It 

is a crying shame, and some of the direct reasons why they are 

not getting the care they ought to deserve is primarily because 

of the staffing shortages. There’s just not enough staff looking 

after the seniors. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the biggest thing that 

we’re trying to challenge the government on, and we’re getting 

less and less of a response. And we’re getting more and more 

complaints from the people about that particular activity. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the bill again, 113, The Powers of Attorney 

Amendment Act is primarily intended to deal with a trustee or a 

guardian. So one of the things that we want to bring up is that 

you must be consistent in any action that you take as a 

government when it comes to ensuring the dignities afforded to 

the senior citizens of our province. 

 

You cannot on one hand have care, these private care homes 

being compromised to a point where it’s being brought up in 

the Assembly on a continual basis, the same time do a measure 

of this sort because people kind of get confused as to what the 

intent of the Sask Party government is. It gets, the message gets 

conflicting. Why would you want to confer extra powers on 

your public trustee or guardian through a bill of this sort to help 

to position you to make sure that your wishes are kept through 

even after you come to a point where you’re unable to take care 

of these matters on your own? Then you turn around and you 

get housed in a private care home that doesn’t show you any 

attention, that is so short-staffed that the quality of care is 

severely compromised. 

 

So that’s the point that I want to make as the official 

opposition: on our first blush at this particular bill and some of 

these second readings is that you’ve got to be consistent. 

You’ve got to be caring, and certainly you’ve got to be 

compassionate when you start talking about senior care in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So as I looked at this Act, Bill 113, there’s a lot of questions 

again we want to ask. And we want to talk to which senior 

groups that have been consulted. Have any of the care homes 

been consulted? Have any of the law firms that could be 

involved, have they been consulted? These are some of the 

things that are really, really important. 

 

And again, as I pointed out from our perspective, our leader has 

been very clear to us as critics and MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] as well, that if the government is doing 

something properly, then we would support them on that front. 

If they’re doing something not properly advised and something 

that they want to push down people’s throats — because many 

times they’re dismissive, they’re secretive in many occasions, 

that they simply don’t listen to people — and this is where we 

need to make sure we hold them to account and continue to 

challenge them on a daily basis. These are the directions we got 

from our current leader. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s Bill 113 talking about The 

Powers of Attorney Act or the home care challenges we have in 

this province, this opposition will continue driving home that 

message to people, is that you do have the opportunity to 

impact bills that are coming forward in this Assembly. And all 

they have to simply do is contact us, or look to the Internet, 

look at the bill in specific, talk to your groups, get involved. 

 

I would encourage the seniors to get active and to get highly 

organized. Because they can’t simply sit by and hope that this 

government, who has a very poor record when it comes to 

senior care, we can’t simply afford to let this government give 

it a clear sailing to impose some of the Acts that they want to 

impose simply because we haven’t been vigilant or fighting 

back enough or organized enough to fight back. We have to do 

that work. That’s the thing what I think is a very, very clear 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4045 

message. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this bill. We’ll 

take our time, as I mentioned at the outset. We will take the 

several months that is allowed to talk to our own contacts, to 

talk to our seniors’ groups and to tell them, is this what is 

needed and is something that you can support? And what are 

your worries about this bill? That’s the intent of this opposition, 

and we’ll continue doing that until the bill is actually 

proclaimed, Mr. Speaker. And again the opportunity’s there for 

people to participate. 

 

So on that note I would encourage all folks to pay attention to 

this bill. And I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 113. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise again today to move second reading of The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act is being introduced as one of the three 

bills resulting from a thorough review of legislation affecting 

vulnerable adults. More than 100 groups and individuals were 

consulted, including people in the area of health and mental 

health, advocacy groups for persons with disabilities, seniors 

groups, and many more. Consultation responses identified gaps 

in legislation or opportunities for improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 

Care Decision Makers Act allows individuals to give advanced 

health care directives or to choose a person known as a proxy to 

make health care decisions for them in the event of their 

incapacity. The Act also directs that the nearest relative can 

make health care decisions for an incapable person if there is no 

health care directive or proxy. If there is no nearest relative, two 

health care providers can make health care decisions. The 

amendments I am proposing today, Mr. Speaker, will fill three 

identified gaps in The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act. 

 

[19:15] 

 

The first gap that was identified by the health care sector 

involves decision making for day-to-day decisions respecting 

adults who are not capable of consenting to health care. These 

are relatively minor decisions such as the decision to consent to 

dental work, for example. What constitutes a day-to-day 

decision will be listed in regulations after full consultation. The 

decision maker will be the caregiver if there is no readily 

available proxy or nearest relative. Mr. Speaker, again the 

regulations will prescribe who will be considered a caregiver. 

 

The second issue concerns the ability to apply to admit a person 

to long-term care or accept placement of the person in 

long-term care. Until now there was no clear legislation as to 

who would have the authority in this situation. Mr. Speaker, the 

proposal is that the following persons could make the decision, 

in this order: personal guardian, proxy, nearest relative, or two 

treatment providers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final amendment is to clarify that an enduring 

power of attorney who has been appointed in accordance with 

The Powers of Attorneys Act, 2002 does not have the authority 

to make health care decisions pursuant to the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved Bill 114, 

The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care 

Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to stand this evening to give our initial 

discussion and comments on the particular bill that’s being 

presented here, Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act. 

 

As the minister mentioned, it’s really talking about which 

process would be followed to give consent for day-to-day 

treatments when there’s no personal guardian or a relative that’s 

readily available, and if there’s no proxy, Mr. Speaker. And 

again I go back to the earlier point that when you have 

somebody that’s incapacitated in a long-term care home it is 

very, it’s a very tragic circumstance when you know what is 

necessary to help that senior. And you know, many times I 

would assume that a great amount of time on a daily basis and 

evening basis is being spent by professional staff that are there 

every day and that are working with the families and of course 

are paying a lot of attention to that particular patient. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, care for seniors is one of the most important 

things that a government does. And obviously there is some 

confusion as to how we and who would be authorized to 

administer medicine or medical care of that sort. I imagine the 

medicine would be something that’s probably . . . somebody 

that’s certified, a nurse or a doctor. But nonetheless that if there 

is some health care that is required for some of these seniors 

that aren’t able to make their own decision — and as was 

mentioned, the whole notion of dental work as a good example 

— that they would have a process in place. And the process of 

course would be that there would be a personal guardian, then a 

proxy, and a nearest relative, and of course the final option, 

having two health care staff available to make the decisions on 

that patient, of course, being in that order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that we hope we never see that 

a senior that doesn’t have that option, that doesn’t have the 



4046 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

option that we’re identifying in terms of having a personal 

guardian in place because that may occur in this day and age 

where you don’t have a personal guardian, you don’t have 

somebody that has proxy, and the nearest relative may be many, 

many, many miles away. And then it comes down to the two 

staff, Mr. Speaker. So hopefully you look at those four options 

in terms of being able to make a decision on long-term care 

placement. 

 

These are really trying times for many of those seniors. And I 

can tell you that, you know, if ever we were able to be lucky to 

be able to survive till we’re older, and then all of a sudden 

we’re in a situation where we can’t care for ourselves and we 

can’t make decisions on our care on a consistent, logical basis, 

that we have to look to others for help, Mr. Speaker. We hope 

that many seniors are able to take care of that problem long 

before it becomes a major problem for them to make these 

choices. 

 

And certainly I would encourage elders, a lot of elders and 

some of their families in many of the communities that we work 

with, to make sure that you make arrangements for your loved 

ones as they age, to make sure that they do have a proper 

system in place. The proper system of course being that if you 

get ill, who makes decisions on your care? Who makes 

decisions on your basic medical care? That was identified in 

this bill. And clearly what the bill is saying today is that, in 

terms of being placed in a long-term care home, the options are 

that if you haven’t appointed a personal guardian then there’s 

the proxy. And if the proxy’s not available, then you have the 

nearest relative; it could be any close family member. And if 

that’s not the case, then of course the two staff members are the 

last fail-stop measure to make some of these choices. 

 

And these are fairly traumatic choices, Mr. Speaker. This is not 

a choice where you’re talking about what type of breakfast to 

have. This is being placed in a long-term care on a permanent 

basis. And that’s why it’s really important we tell people out 

there in Saskatchewan that you have to take the time to 

understand what options are there for ensuring that the seniors 

in your life is properly cared for. There’s a number of things 

that you have to look at. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that some of the things that I 

really, really wouldn’t mind to have expressed to the seniors 

that are living out there. Certainly, you know, in many of our 

constituencies, mine included, there are many seniors that 

struggle. They struggle every month to make ends meet, and 

now they find out that they’re getting sicker. And as they’re 

getting sicker, they’re having more challenges financially. This 

just doesn’t seem to be enough help out there. 

 

And I know of one particular senior that I’ve been trying to get 

his will straightened out. He’s got no help whatsoever, Mr. 

Speaker. And then all of a sudden he tries to get some advice, 

and you know — without mentioning this individual’s name — 

he’s got to pay thousands of dollars in legal fees. And he can’t 

afford that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these are some of the things that we find with our seniors in 

northern Saskatchewan. And I’m sure these are the problems 

with seniors right throughout the province, is affordability of 

basic things are very, very challenging for them — basic things 

like rent, like medicine, like food, and so on and so forth. Now 

they’ve got to do other things. Some of them help raise 

grandkids. Some of them have got to travel out for medical 

trips. And now some them have to do extra work and pay extra 

bills for some of the people that they’re trying to help. And then 

now they have to figure out the power of attorney. Now they’ve 

got to make sure that they do get to a point where they’re 

unable to look after themselves or they can’t make decisions 

about their health care, they have to trust others. 

 

So you can see this gets worse and worse and worse for some of 

our seniors. And that’s exactly my point: as a province we have 

to figure out how we can put together a comprehensive seniors’ 

care package that not only recognizes the fact that they might 

have these problems, but to ensure that these problems, if they 

do exist, that we have an answer for them on every front. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it gets very, very basic from my perspective, is 

that you’ve got to have the complete package. 

 

And I often tell folks, the younger people, as I mentioned a 

couple of times here, that when you’re working look after ways 

and means that you can create your own pension. You know, 

because I see a lot of seniors in my area, and I imagine they’re 

all over the province, that they never had the opportunity to 

develop their own pension plans. So many of them are living on 

1,100 or $1,200 a month. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a lot of money when you’re living 

in any province or any town, but it’s particularly challenging in 

the North because you’ve got a lot of costs for heat, and of 

course the food costs are quite high in northern Saskatchewan. 

So the seniors have that particular challenge from the North. 

Accessibility to health care. There’s many times they’re 

travelling. The extra costs for food. The extra costs for heating. 

The extra costs for medicine. Like, you just name the cost, it’s 

always a bit more as you get further and further from our urban 

centres. 

 

So a lot of the senior citizens throughout our province, they 

understand sacrifice. And I tell young people they are fairly 

tough when you look at some of the decisions they make and 

some of the basic choices that they make when it comes to 

managing their house or their home or their life. And many 

times you see the commercials and the commercials are true 

where some families, and in the case of the seniors, they have 

to make a decision between their medicines or their rent. And 

that’s very unfortunate in this day and age, given the fact that 

the government has a lot of money. 

 

So you look at that particular point, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 

to Bill 114, We are failing on many fronts to make sure that 

there is proper support for those seniors, those seniors that live 

on fixed incomes and do not have the necessary dollars to plan 

and prepare for the day when they become incapacitated, in the 

sense that they can’t look after their own affairs. And here we 

have a bill that talks about that. And I can tell people that a lot 

of seniors do not know what options they face. They don’t have 

any of the legal means to position themselves well. 

 

So somewhere along the line you’ve got to get pretty serious 

about how we present the complete package for our seniors in 

terms of helping them set themselves up for their later years in 

life, to make sure that at least they know the decisions they 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4047 

make now when they’re fully functional will be respected and 

will certainly be applied and followed when they get to a point 

where they’re no longer able to make these decisions on their 

own. It’s so very important, so very basic. 

 

So I would encourage the government to put the sum of some 

of these bills, some of these bills — 114 and all the other bills 

that we’ve been advocating for and all the other supports that 

we’ve been pushing for as an opposition party — to put them 

together in a complete package. And what would that cost the 

government to make sure that our seniors were properly cared 

for, Mr. Speaker? It would not cost a whole heck of a lot of 

money? And this is exactly my point. Some seniors are 

fortunate enough to have families that are able to provide them 

that direction and advice, but there are many, many, many 

seniors that do not have those options and that certainly do not 

have that support system in place. 

 

So I would say again, there are many elders, many elders in our 

province that are suffering in silence. I know that, Mr. Speaker. 

Some of us are very fortunate in the sense that we hear a few of 

the stories, but that’s just the tip of the iceberg. We know that 

there are many, many people that are forced to do more work. 

There are many people that are forced to make critical choices 

that they don’t want to make. It’s either, like I said before, it’s 

either your medicines or your rent. We have many, many 

people that are looking after their grandkids, which add an extra 

burden onto them. 

 

And I’ll tell you today, I’ll tell you today that there are some 

places, there are some places in the country, and I believe it’s 

the Northwest Territories, where the government of the 

Northwest Territories have said to their senior citizens, we 

recognize the cost of living, of living in the territories. It’s a lot 

of extra burden on families. So one of the programs they have 

in the territories talks about free glasses and free dentures once 

every two years I think, where the province will provide, or the 

territory in this case would provide the free glasses and the free 

dentures and a few other things, I think a hearing aid. These 

kinds of things that would give them, every two years, would 

give them this free service. And I think, Mr. Speaker, we ought 

to learn from that. Because what is wrong with that? What is 

wrong with that support? 

 

So today I think when we sit down with the opposition is 

exactly what we talk about when we talk about seniors’ care, 

that what we see from the Sask Party is seniors soiling 

themselves, seniors waiting hours on end for any kind of 

service from staff that are being, that are short-staffed and 

certainly under a lot of pressure. We’re seeing that they’re not 

open and accountable and transparent when it comes to their 

commitment towards senior care. 

 

And you have all these other ideas, all these other ideas on how 

to improve service to seniors. And let me say it again loud and 

clear: there are many senior citizens in our province that are 

struggling. They are struggling every day. And thank goodness 

they were born in an era where they learned to struggle because 

they are used to struggling. And many times the younger 

generation, including myself, we’ve never learned to struggle 

that much. 

 

And I see a lot of seniors throughout our province, and I have a 

lot of admiration for them because I can tell you with some of 

the sacrifices that they made, and some of the struggles that 

they went through, some of the hard times that they went 

through, you know, we wouldn’t be able to handle some of 

those hard times in this day and age. Because the seniors at the 

time made those tough choices and they went through the hard 

times, and today they’re still going through hard times. And the 

reason they’re able to survive those hard times is because they 

struggled with hard times many times before. And that’s what 

makes them extra tough and what makes them extra resilient. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And that’s why we should do something different. We should 

do something unique. We should do something that’s important 

to them. We should start taking better care of them. It’s very, 

very simple, Mr. Speaker. And they’re not asking for handouts. 

They’re not asking for a handout. They’re not asking for pity. 

They’re not asking for anything else except compassion and 

understanding of the circumstances that they’re going through. 

And what better way to show that compassion and that concern 

than by making sure that, as you age, you’re afforded the proper 

place to live with the proper supports and that you’re able to 

rest in general comfort? Not expensive comfort. That’s not 

what they’re asking for, but in general comfort and certainly 

with a sense of peace and dignity, Mr. Speaker. That’s all they 

ask. 

 

So today I see some of the challenges that the seniors have and 

how Bill 114 might be able to help them. And this is where we 

need to ask more questions. Does it fill a huge gap from the 

seniors’ perspective? Not from the government’s perspective 

because every time we hear from this government, they’re 

taking care of their own. We need to shift the focus to the 

seniors and to actually see what services, what benefits, and 

what are we doing to benefit them. What are we doing as MLAs 

to help out seniors in our community? That should be the focus, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we see the government doing one bill here, another 

bill there, it’s disjointed. And we hear all the horror stories in 

between. And we know that there are affordability issues out 

there and we are not recognizing those affordability issues. I 

could go on here all night how we’re ignoring and not 

respecting our seniors and not affording them with the proper 

care and the mechanisms of care on many fronts, including 

legal supports and including to make sure that they’re able to 

make decisions when they become too ill to do this on their 

own, to make sure they have good care as they age in some of 

these private homes, and to make sure that health care is there 

for them, and maybe once in a while throw them a bit of 

support, like I mentioned in the territorial government where 

they were able to give them free dentures and a hearing aid and 

free glasses once every couple of years. I don’t have all those 

details, but I hear a lot of those good stories. 

 

And certainly from my perspective, we need to figure out how 

we can do a better job, a better job of supporting our seniors 

than doing some of the haphazard things that we’re doing in the 

Assembly, especially when it comes to seniors’ care in these 

private care homes where they have the overworked staff, the 

very few staff trying to take care of the many seniors that are in 

there now. And that, Mr. Speaker, is certainly a recipe for poor 



4048 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

service to the seniors. And we’ve put that right at the footsteps 

of the Saskatchewan Party government because they know it’s 

happening and they’re not doing a darn thing to address it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there’s a lot of things we want to talk about on this particular 

bill. We want to talk about a wide variety of issues on seniors’ 

care. And I’m really glad that our leader in our opposition is 

fighting back for seniors, because every day he gets up in the 

Assembly and he brings in another story of how senior care is 

being compromised. 

 

Now one of these days, Mr. Speaker . . . There’s two things that 

I would tell people when you talk about seniors’ care is that if 

we’re lucky enough to live that long, we’re going to need that 

kind of help when we get old. And that’s one of the messages I 

think a lot of seniors would tell some of the younger people in 

this Assembly is that sooner or later, if you’re lucky, you’re 

going to be as old as us. 

 

And they don’t tell us it’s lucky getting that old, because as you 

get older, things get tougher. So you’ve got to be tough to be an 

elder in this province and you’ve got to be really tough to make 

it to the age where you’re 75, 80, 85 years old. You’ve got to be 

really tough. And not that it gets easier. Because everybody 

thinks as you age, things get easier. No, it gets absolutely 

harder. And that’s why I tell folks out there, when you see a 

senior, understand that they’re struggling a lot of times, that 

they, you know, they’ve survived a lot of crises on their own, 

and for them to age to that age they had to fight their way and 

they’re still fighting. 

 

So imagine fighting every single day to enjoy one thing — 

quality of life. That’s all they want as they get older. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we have been failing them on many occasions. And 

today is one example of how one small step in a series of steps 

that’s required, it’s simply not going to be sufficient enough to 

impress the elders and the pioneers of our province. 

 

So I say again when you look at the consultation process, you 

know, this is why it’s so important to talk about consultation. 

Did they actually deal with seniors’ groups that are being 

impacted by this? Who did the government talk to? We don’t 

know that. We don’t know which group has come along and 

said, we like these ideas or we’re opposing these ideas through, 

you know, through the government. We haven’t heard those 

consultation processes. And I go back to the earlier position I 

took, is that it is one thing to consult but it’s another to get 

agreement from. So we’ve got to stop playing the game of 

consultation and start getting hard core agreement from seniors’ 

groups that we’re trying to support and benefit. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you see seniors’ groups come into this 

Assembly and start ratifying and endorsing some of the deals 

that this government makes, that’s when we know we have their 

agreement. And so far, Mr. Speaker, the balconies in this 

Assembly have been empty because there has been no 

consultation this government has taken where they are able to 

hammer out an agreement with the seniors that they supposedly 

are trying to help with this particular Act. So we have a lot of 

work to do. We have a lot of work to do. And one little Act on 

one little bill ain’t good enough. That’s the bottom line that I 

have for this particular government. It ain’t good enough, 

primarily because we’re failing on so many other fronts. 

 

And I can tell you a number of stories from my own 

constituencies of how older people have to get their own wood, 

how older people have to sometimes even go hunt on their own, 

how older people have to borrow at high interest rates so they 

are able to use some of their money to buy their pills, of how 

older people are caring for the seniors, and nobody recognizes 

that. Nobody understands that. Everybody just ignores it. And 

this is the problem we have, Mr. Speaker, in this day and age is 

that bills that are intended to help the seniors, like Bill 114, fall 

far short of the effort required to build a good province for our 

seniors. 

 

And I like that line and often use that line in this Assembly 

because I heard it being mentioned once, so I’m plagiarizing a 

bit here, Mr. Speaker, but I always maintain that this province 

is not a good province for any one of us unless it’s a good 

province for all of us. And the seniors are the ones that are 

saying that loud and clear, that this province isn’t a good 

province unless it’s a good province for seniors too. They 

count. They vote. They want to see a different way of dealing 

with their issues. And, Mr. Speaker, so far this government has 

failed them miserably. 

 

So on that note, we have a lot more we want to comment about 

when it comes to health care and senior care in particular. 

We’re going to bring those issues forward. We’ll continue 

bringing them up, and the fight has just begun. The fight has 

just begun because we’re going to fight back with them and, 

Mr. Speaker, we would invite them to join us to fight this bill if 

it’s not going to be appropriate or fight this bill if it doesn’t go 

far enough, and begin teaching this government how to govern 

properly for senior citizens throughout this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 114. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Public Guardian and 

Trustee Amendment Act, 2013. Mr. Speaker, this Act is being 

introduced as part of a package of bills designed to improve 

protection for adults who rely on others to make decisions on 

their behalf, as was mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The main portion of this bill moves the provisions respecting 

certificates of incapacity from The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act, allowing that legislation to be repealed. Some 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4049 

changes from the provisions found in the former Act include: a 

change in terminology from incompetence, which some of the 

respondents from consultations found objectionable, to a 

concept of capacity or incapacity; a new ability for physicians 

to examine a person for capacity without a request from a chief 

psychiatrist; and a reduction in the time period that can be 

imposed between re-examinations for capacity from one year to 

six months. 

 

Other amendments update the powers of the Public Guardian 

and Trustee by adding the power to revoke an 

acknowledgement to act that was signed in error, and adding 

the power to administer the estate of a deceased dependent 

adult client of the public trustee and guardian pending 

administration by someone who is not a court-ordered personal 

representative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill also updates references to legislation in a 

number of places that adopt the word incapacity and other 

legislation that references the Act. These amendments will help 

persons who are using the legislation in assisting vulnerable 

adults. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Public 

Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 115, The Public 

Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to rise again this evening to talk a bit more 

about the senior care issues that the province of Saskatchewan 

certainly suffers from. And I use the word suffer because there 

is a lot of suffering out there when it comes to care for our 

senior citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand from the notes, basically there was 

the definition and a word change between competence, and of 

course, capacity. And that’s one of the things that’s really 

important in this day and age is look at some of the Act, that 

some of the better language, you know, the more appropriate 

language be used in some of these bills. And certainly from our 

perspective that makes a bit of sense. It provides a better 

perspective on what the Act is intended to do when you start 

talking about dealing with senior citizens and some of the 

challenges that I alluded to earlier, how the senior citizens are 

able to be served better. I think proper wording and certainly 

proper language, it would certainly help, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

no question that some of the wording of some the previous bills 

and bills from many, many years ago, they weren’t sensitive to 

some of the proper terminology to use when you’re talking 

about seniors’ care. 

 

I know one particular example. I don’t want to speak about that 

example, but there’s a lot better language in some of the bills 

that we’re dealing with in this day and age than was used 40, 50 

years ago, Mr. Speaker. But again I go back to the whole issue 

of competence and I think with Bill 115, again we go back to 

seniors and accountability. You know, it’s a great issue because 

seniors are getting a bit of attention. They’re certainly getting 

recognition of some of their challenges. 

And I will say, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the seniors, we 

have to, as I mentioned, ensure that we have a matrix of 

support. It’s not just one little step. It’s not just modernizing 

language. It’s not just improving the guardianship, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s about positioning them well before the time comes where 

they’re unable to make their own decisions. How much effort is 

required to be able to do that? It’s a matter of breaking down 

the challenge bit by bit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s what I’ll point out in this Bill 115, that if we’re 

talking about consulting seniors to see how we can be more 

effective and supportive towards them, then we need to break 

down the problem. There are some seniors out there that would 

like to see a modernization of a system of support to them. We 

know some seniors can afford legal fees, so they position 

themselves well when it comes to guardianship. We know some 

seniors are able to position themselves well to take advantage 

of their early years of employment through a pension plan, 

when many others don’t have that option. And there’s a myriad 

of challenges that each different group of seniors face. Some 

seniors in southwestern Saskatchewan would have a remarkably 

different set of needs from those from northeastern part of the 

province. So it’s just a varying degree of seniors out there with 

different needs and different challenges. 

 

And we need to start taking a looking at our seniors’ groups 

themselves, and looking at their makeup, their numbers, their 

income, their challenges and begin to, you know, begin to 

analyze what exactly their issues are. Then we need to start 

consulting with them as to what they would consider being 

priority because some places, legal support would be a priority. 

Other places is to make sure that we have seniors’ care for 

them. Other places will make sure that we have good health 

care to them. Other places might be affordability of, you know, 

of a home. There’s all kinds of needs out there for our senior 

citizens. 

 

And yet we’re not having any kind of action by this government 

except on Bill 115 where they’re simply clarifying, in my 

opinion, clarifying and modernizing language about seniors and 

about accountability. So fine. We can modernize the language. 

I’m not saying that it’s a bad thing to do. I’m just saying that if 

we’re going to modernize language, maybe it’s time we 

modernize our service to the seniors as well. That’s an 

important point that I’d like to mention, that we ought to 

modernize our approach to what the seniors need in this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, if all we’re modernizing is the 

language and not modernizing service and recognizing their 

unique challenges from each of their areas and their 

backgrounds and their varying degrees of difficulty, then 

obviously as a government we’re failing them. And I point out 

again, we’re failing them miserably. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So I think we need to get serious about this particular process. 

This Bill is one of three or four bills that does a little bit of 

tinkering here and there. All these bills are all about tinkering 

here and there, not addressing the main issue, and that’s what 

upsets us so deeply on the NDP [New Democratic Party] side, 

the opposition side, is that you’re taking seniors for granted. 

You’re not recognizing their need. You’re not addressing their 

challenges. You’re simply tinkering with some of the 



4050 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

legislation to make it appear you’re doing something when the 

net effect of all your efforts is a big fat zero. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they have a long ways to go, the Sask Party 

does, to be able to ensure that seniors are properly cared for. 

We have the stories here. We have the ideas on this side, how 

we can do it, serve the seniors a lot better. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re asking the groups to get involved with some of these 

bills, get organized, and give us advice on how best to provide 

the advice and direction that the Sask Party so desperately 

needs to recognize what the seniors of this province want from 

this government and expect from this government and, from our 

perspective, deserve from this government. 

 

They deserve some of these supports, Mr. Speaker, because 

they have done so much for our province. And yet they 

continue to suffer in silence. And I say that should not be the 

case in the year 2013. There should be better respect and 

admiration for what they’ve done, better respect and 

recognition for what they’re going through today. And that’s a 

message I don’t think the Sask Party has gotten in the seven 

years that they’re in power, and I doubt very much, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’ll get that message here unless we all 

collectively send them a message and oust that government and 

finally start serving seniors like they should be served. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Adjourned debates. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 112 — The 

Accounting Profession Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

my honour to be able to rise tonight and speak to second 

reading on The Accounting Profession Act, Bill No. 112. It was 

introduced here in the House on November 12th, so a week or 

so ago. And it’s obviously something that’s been in the works 

for quite some time now and something that the Minister of 

Finance is really taking direction from the accounting 

profession here in Saskatchewan but also across Canada. So 

this bill is part of a much larger initiative that has been under 

way for a number of years now, Mr. Speaker, coming from the 

national body of the Canadian accountants or the different types 

of accountants that have been created over the years. 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, there’s three general kinds of 

accounting designations that are currently in Saskatchewan by 

law, and that would be chartered accountants, management 

accountants, and then general accountants. 

 

So I have to confess this is not an area where I spend a lot of 

time. I was going to look up some good accountant jokes for the 

Assembly but I didn’t think that would be appropriate so I’m 

afraid I’m just going to have to keep my content fairly dry. But 

certainly we see that this type of initiative is one that this 

government reflects the responsiveness of the government of 

the needs of the professional organizations. It’s not a huge 

earthmover in any sense for the people of Saskatchewan, but it 

certainly is something that’s incredibly important to the people 

practising accounting here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So as the minister noted in his introductory comments, there 

will be a new body that’s an amalgam of the three main bodies 

that exist today. And he tells us there’s about 4,400 members 

right now in the collective body of the three types of 

designations, and so this will be a merger by those three groups. 

He indicated there’s different types of benefits for the merger. I 

know that in the materials I read online from the national 

organization, part of the push to unify these groups and merge 

is to have a better reflection on the international global scale, 

that there’s a demand for the CPA designation — the chartered 

professional accountant — which would more closely match 

what’s happening in other countries and therefore the work 

that’s being done by these accountants would be more 

transferable on a global scale. And that’s something that will 

certainly benefit the individual members here in Saskatchewan. 

 

They’re saying that the regulatory regime will be streamlined 

and modernized. There’s material or clauses in the new bill that 

will reflect best practices for organizations that exist already, 

including things like codes of professional conduct. When I go 

through the bill I’ll highlight some of the types of clauses that 

are attempting to accomplish that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things he indicated in his comments is that this 

streamlined regulatory regime would give the public some 

assurance as well that the public . . . And I don’t know if you’ve 

ever gone through this conversation before, but whenever 

you’re talking about accountants, people say, is it a CGA 

[certified general accountant] or a CMA [certified management 

accountant] or is it a CA [chartered accountant]? And there is 

definitely, I know, in the people that I talk to, a lot of confusion 

about those designations and people aren’t quite sure which one 

is which. So this will certainly relieve some of that confusion in 

the general public. And also I think once they have the one 

designation, then the public will have a better understanding of 

exactly what it is CPAs do. 

 

The minister, when he introduced the bill, the Deputy Premier 

also indicated that in his view the bill would provide protection 

to consumers so that they can feel assured that accountants are 

qualified to provide a service in their designated specialty. I 

don’t know if I would feel absolutely assured. Any time I think 

the best method for being assured whether your accountant is 

good or not is to actually do a reference check. That’s one way 

I would think consumers want to make sure they’re getting 

proper services for the work that they are looking for, and that’s 

in any profession I think, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to make 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4051 

sure that you find the accountant that suits your needs and it 

would help to go through reference checks for those kinds of 

things. But certainly having a regulatory regime that establishes 

the baseline for the requirements for getting certified is 

something that the public needs and wants to be able to rely on. 

 

There’s more in the minister’s comments about being able to 

register both a member and a firm, and I think that must be 

something that the individual groups of accountants have asked 

for. And the other thing is that one of the provisions in the Act 

is to reserve the practice of professional accounting to licensed 

CPAs. And I don’t think that’s a whole lot different than what it 

is now where we have licensed CAs or CGAs or CMAs. 

There’s also provisions in the bill . . . He goes on and describes 

some of the provisions and the transitional requirements under 

the bill as well. So that was basically the extent of the Deputy 

Premier’s comments when he introduced the bill. They weren’t 

extensive and he didn’t go into a lot of detail on the content of 

the Bill itself. 

 

We’re aware that the accountants of Saskatchewan have met 

with government and certainly have encouraged this bill. 

Across Canada right now there’s varying stages of progress on 

the unification of the accountants as a profession. And really 

only one province so far has actually introduced legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s Quebec which passed their bill in May of 

2012. So Quebec was first on the list to actually do the enabling 

legislation and it appears that Saskatchewan is the second. So 

we’re actually ahead of the curve a little bit on this one and the 

bill was introduced, as we know, a few days ago here in the 

legislature. 

 

So Saskatchewan has introduced the legislation. In other 

provinces it isn’t going quite as smoothly and certainly I think 

each provincial association has its own concerns about the 

merger. One of the things that has been recommended by the 

federal organization and has been adopted I think here in 

Saskatchewan is the notion that you would still, even though 

you became a CPA when the new bill is introduced, for 10 

years there is a requirement that the individual accountant 

would also include their previous designation as part of their 

letterhead or when they sign off on things. So it would be a 

CPA/CGA or CPA/CA and this is the transitional, what I think 

the organizations feel is the need for transitional continuity and 

provide for awareness in the public of what’s going on. So after 

10 years they would drop that designation and by that time all 

the new trainees that are learning how to be an accountant 

would be all certified under the new designation of CPA. So 

people coming in new would have the new designation but 

those who are of a different designation when the bill comes in 

will have to put both down. 

 

There is a number of things that the federal agency is looking 

for. In terms of unification, there’s a number of guiding 

principles: the single designation, over a 10-year period 

continued use of existing designations which I just referred to, 

retention but no expansion of rights so there’s no additional 

rights for people that have certification now, a uniform 

certification process for new members. And I think that’s where 

the real transition will occur, Mr. Speaker, is once the new 

trainees come through as CPAs, then there will be the new 

trend that people will start recognizing. And there’s a few other 

things that the national organization is looking for. 

I think one of the reasons that’s really motivating this, one of 

the notes I found in an article on Wikipedia called “Chartered 

Professional Accountant” indicates that other professional 

accounting bodies around the world are currently extending 

their reach through various globalization activities, and the 

Canadian accounting profession appears to be relatively 

fractured in comparison. So there was an initiative undertaken 

in 2011 to work towards a merger that would see this new 

Canadian organization which would have 125,000 members 

and would be one of the largest accounting bodies in the world, 

according to the information on Wikipedia. 

 

So we see Quebec has done, has already passed their 

legislation. It’s not quite so harmonious in Ontario. They’re 

entering into a number of discussions but I think the CMA 

walked away from the discussions, the CMAs. And then the 

CGAs were saying they would integrate but only under the 

right circumstances. But finally it looks like all the members are 

back at the table and as late as October 24th, CGA Ontario 

returned to the table to talk. I think in BC [British Columbia], 

the merger agreement was announced and they’re just waiting 

for the legislation. And there’s some other information 

available on the other, on the other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think, based on the discussions we’ve had to date with the 

accounting bodies in Saskatchewan, we feel that there is 

definite support for this type of legislation. We’re certainly 

looking to them to provide comment now on the detail of the 

bill and, as my colleague from Athabasca indicates, this is the 

time where we’re looking to the people and the public to do that 

scrutiny, to indicate where there’s concerns, and to make sure 

that this particular version of the legislation, this draft, is one 

that’s actually going to meet the needs of the accountants in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So we’ll continue over the winter months to talk to people, find 

out what the feeling is out there. I know that on November 7th, 

what in Saskatchewan they call the CPA Saskatchewan Joint 

Venture, they released a press release indicating that they’re 

pleased that the legislation was introduced and they’re 

indicating some of the benefits of the new legislation. And 

particularly we have Keri Ziegler who is the CEO of the CPA 

Saskatchewan Joint Venture, and she noted that the new unified 

body will, and I’m quoting here, noted that “The new unified 

body will benefit the public by eliminating confusion over the 

qualifications of the different designations [for accountants] and 

by improving the standards of the profession.” So that’s 

certainly something, I think, as we’ve indicated in the past, 

when it makes sense, we’re going to support it. And this 

appears to be a piece of legislation that generally seems to make 

sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The bill itself is broken down into what you would see in any 

type of I think legislation that establishes a profession. We see 

there’s, off the hop there’s an institute established and the name 

of the new institute is the Institute of Chartered Professional 

Accountants of Saskatchewan. That’s the first part of the bill. 

 

[20:00] 

 

The second part of the bill is who is on the board. And we see 

here that almost all the board members are elected by their own 

profession, but there are two members that are appointed by the 



4052 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

government. So that’s something that we’ll be watching for and 

certainly, as always, we will be looking for appropriate gender 

representation on this board. And I think any kind of equity 

group would look for appropriate representation on these public 

appointments. So that’s the second part of the bill. 

 

The third part just sets out the bylaws procedures. There’s two 

types of bylaws that the organization can pass. And one is what 

is referred to as administrative bylaws, and then there’s also a 

set of regulatory bylaws. Now the regulatory bylaws have a 

catch because those are the ones that do have to be approved by 

this legislature. And under section 14 of the Act, it tells us . . . I 

just want to find that section. This is section 14(4): 

 

No regulatory bylaw made by the board comes into force 

until it is: 

 

(a) approved by the minister pursuant to section 16; and 

 

(b) published in the Gazette. 

 

Oh yes, and that’s one interesting thing I found in the 

definitions, Mr. Speaker, that I haven’t seen before, the way the 

minister is defined: “. . . the member of the Executive Council 

to whom for the time being the administration of this Act is 

assigned.” That seems to be kind of circular because they are 

the minister. So I’m not sure why that wording is there, but 

maybe it’s some popular phraseology that is being used by 

other drafters. But I found that a rather curious way to describe 

the minister in this particular bill. 

 

At any rate the regulatory bylaws are needed. They do need 

approval by the minister. And they also need to be published in 

the Gazette. And that’s something, Mr. Speaker, that I think 

I’ve talked before about modernizing procedures here in this 

legislature, and I sometimes wonder if the Gazette is effective 

in reaching as many people as it should. And that might be 

something that the . . . Mr. Speaker and his staff would look at, 

in terms of what other organizations are doing in relation to 

gazetting. Because I know there aren’t a lot of people rushing 

out to read the Gazette, but I know it’s also hard . . . I’m sorry 

to bring the bad news to you, Mr. Speaker, but maybe this is a 

perennial problem that, that it’s really difficult to get people’s 

attention at the best of times. So I don’t know if we need a 

Krazy Kiley’s ad or something like that to let people know that 

there’s changes to the accounting profession’s bylaws. But 

certainly gazetting is the way that’s been around for many, 

many centuries, and that’s the way that’s being provided for in 

this particular Act. 

 

The next section that we go into, so there is a long, long, long, 

long list of the types of things that this . . . the bylaws can be 

made for. And that’s really the meat and potatoes of this 

legislation, is the description of the types of bylaws that this 

board can make and how the qualifications and standards and 

tests of competency for accountants in Saskatchewan will be 

subject to and how the training will be defined — a long, long 

list of the types of things that the bylaws will cover. 

 

Then we get into the membership, and this is where they talk 

about you can be a member, an individual member, but firms 

can also be members. And there is different rules for 

registration, there is also a long section following that on 

disciplinary action, which is really appropriate for an agency of 

this type and a board of this type because, again, it’s a matter of 

public trust. We want to know that when we hire this 

accountant that they have a professional body that is 

scrutinizing and that there is ways to deal with individual 

accountants who are not up to snuff and who are not acting in a 

competent manner. 

 

So that’s the membership and discipline sections of the Act. 

Following that, there is the general sections that are sort of meat 

and potatoes or boilerplate type of clauses you would find in 

any kind of Act where it establishes a professional agency. 

 

And finally of course the last section is the repealed transitional 

and consequential amendments. So this is where the big change 

actually happens because this is where the previous bills are 

going to . . . or Acts are going to be repealed. So we will see the 

repeal of The Certified General Accountants Act, a repeal of 

The Certified Management Accountants Act, a repeal of The 

Chartered Accountants Act, 1986, and a repeal of The 

Management Accountants Act. 

 

And that reminds me, one of the comments the Deputy Premier 

indicated when he introduced the bill was that one of these bills 

has never actually been declared. And to me, there is a story 

there. And we haven’t had time yet to really look into that 

closely, but it’s The Certified Management Accountants Act, 

Bill 27 of the year 1999-2000 that was not yet proclaimed. So I 

may need to check in with my colleagues to find out what 

exactly happened there and why that wasn’t proclaimed. But at 

any rate, it’s going to be repealed, so that’s the end of the story 

for that bill. And it never did see the light of day for some 

reason, so I found that rather interesting. 

 

I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m at the end of my 

comments on this bill. We’ll look to the accounting profession 

to have a good scrutiny of the actual details of the bill, to ensure 

that everything is in order and proper. Again I’m curious about 

the definition of minister in this particular bill and may want to 

do a little more looking, look into that a little bit closer. But for 

the time being, I know my other colleagues are going to want to 

comment on this bill as well, so I would like to adjourn the 

debate on Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 99 — The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4053 

tonight to wade into the discussion about Bill No. 99, The 

Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

I’d like to start by talking a little bit about what the minister 

said in his comments. I know the member from Athabasca, 

being the first to respond to second reading speeches, has made 

it very clear this is the time where government introduces bills 

in the fall. And it’s a shorter session and between the fall and 

the spring, we in the opposition and the general public have an 

opportunity to take a little bit closer look at bills that are before 

us. And it’s our opportunity as the opposition to consult with 

the public, consult with people who are impacted by bills, and 

get a little bit better sense if there are any challenges from 

stakeholders’ perspectives around the bill. 

 

But what does Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, do, Mr. Speaker? In the minister’s own words, 

this particular Act will amend The Public Employees Pension 

Plan Act. And what the minister has said it will do, it will: 

 

. . . clarify that a simple majority of board members is 

required for all decisions made by the board; allow the 

board to undertake short-term borrowing for the purposes 

of the administration of The Public Employees Pension 

Plan Act; allow the Lieutenant Governor, by order in 

council, to designate the default fund into which all 

member contributions shall be deposited unless otherwise 

directed by the member; provide that the Lieutenant 

Governor may order that members who have never chosen 

a fund for their PEPP funds be moved into the default 

fund; and authorize the Lieutenant Governor by regulation 

to permit the plan to receive members and funds from a 

registered pension plan wanting to become part of the 

PEPP and to state which specialty fund members 

transferring into PEPP are eligible for. 

 

I think it’s important to talk a little bit about what the public 

employees pension plan is, and it is a defined contribution 

pension plan administered by the Public Employees Pension 

Board. As with all pensions, it provides a means of savings for 

retirement to its membership. And its membership may include 

the employees of executive government, members of the 

Legislative Assembly, Crown corporations, as well as a variety 

of government agencies. 

 

The minister in his second reading comment pointed out there 

are in Saskatchewan 53,000 plan holders of the PEPP [public 

employees pension plan] and it has $5.6 billion in plan assets. 

It’s important to note that there are 53,000 people in 

Saskatchewan who are plan holders of this particular plan. It’s 

important to note though there are many people in 

Saskatchewan and across the country actually who do not have 

employee-employer pension plans, Mr. Speaker, which is a 

huge problem. 

 

Today over 11 million Canadians are without a workplace 

pension plan. And I know some people use that to say, well 

why should one sector have a workplace pension plan when 

another doesn’t? But I think it’s important to recognize that this 

should be about raising the bar for those who don’t have it and 

not about lowering the bar. Pension plans are a very good way 

to ensure that people are not living their golden years in abject 

poverty, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s good to see you in the chair. 

You’re the one who I usually I call on or speak to actually; 

force of habit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It’s important. There are so many people . . . I know we can go 

to many, many places here in Saskatchewan today, many 

workplaces, and see seniors who are employed. And I would 

argue that many of them aren’t there by choice, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, people in their 60s and 70s. And no doubt that there 

are people who are employed in their later years who want to be 

there, but there are many people — and I’ve met them on the 

doorstep in Saskatoon Riversdale — people who are in their 

70s, early 70s, who need to work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

they didn’t have a workplace pension plan and CPP [Canada 

Pension Plan] hasn’t been enough for them. 

 

Just going back to Bill 99 — I’d like to talk a little bit about 

CPP in a moment — but just going back to Bill 99. One of the 

jobs of the opposition is to ask questions of the government and 

how bills have come to end up in this House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So one of the things that we always, a standard 

question that you always need to ask is, why is this bill before 

us? Who asked for it? Who has been consulted? And in the 

minister’s own comments he actually didn’t outline that often, 

often when there’s been consultation, ministers will outline in 

their remarks with whom they’ve spoken or with whom the 

legislation has been drafted in partnership with. 

 

But in these particular remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

minister simply states that “. . . the world is always changing. 

Therefore investment options are also always changing. It is 

desirable, Mr. Speaker, to amend The Public Employees 

Pension Plan Act to do the following.” And then he lists the 

things that will be done. 

 

So I think it’s important for us in opposition again to ask, why 

has this bill come before us? What exactly does it do? The 

remarks on the surface are sometimes what they seem to be, but 

they aren’t always. So we will spend the next few months 

clarifying whether or not there are any concerns with the bill. 

 

But I think it’s important to talk, when we’re talking about 

employer pension plans, it’s important to talk a little bit about 

the Canada Pension Plan. It’s a big issue right now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and there’s been leadership across Canada actually 

from provinces calling on the strengthening of our Canada 

Pension Plan, recognizing that many people, as I had stated 

earlier, over 11 million Canadians are without a workplace 

pension plan. So they are very reliant on CPP. And CPP just 

doesn’t cut it for so many people and will not, going into the 

future as costs continue to rise. 

 

Some of the advantages with having a strong CPP is that it is in 

fact indexed, secure, and portable across jobs. I know, well it’s 

a pan-Canadian solution for a pan-Canadian problem where 

people don’t have workplace pensions. And I know there are 

some provinces that have put in place, tried to respond to the 

lack of . . . the difficulty that people have when they don’t have 

a workplace pension. 

 

In Saskatchewan here in the spring, I believe it was in the 

spring, we passed a piece of legislation on pooled retirement 

savings plans, which the opposition supported, but we also 

recognize that that isn’t enough. There’s so many people who 



4054 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

can’t afford or don’t put money into pooled retirement savings. 

So the opposition has called on our government here in 

Saskatchewan to, at the federal-provincial-territorial level, be a 

part of leading that discussion, that we do need some serious 

changes with CPP in terms of enhancing it. 

 

And here in Saskatchewan, one of the problems where you have 

a one-off or different provinces trying to address a 

pan-Canadian problem is that we have worker mobility issues, 

and with changes to employment insurance in the last year or 

two, we see that even more of a challenge. You’ve got people 

coming from more depressed areas of the country, whether it be 

Ontario or the Maritimes, coming to Saskatchewan to work. So 

it’s great that you might as a province fill some of the gaps, but 

it is not addressing the pan-Canadian problem that CPP needs 

to better support people in their retirement. And there is a way 

to do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So I think it is incumbent upon our government to join in with 

the other provinces. Prince Edward Island, Ontario have called 

very loudly for CPP to be strengthened and enhanced. And our 

government . . . Well there was a federal-provincial-territorial 

meeting just a few weeks ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where our 

Finance minister was, and for all intents and purposes 

Saskatchewan was silent and sat on the benches with regard to 

CPP improvements. And so we’ve got Ontario calling for 

changes. We’ve got Prince Edward Island, a little province, that 

has taken leadership on this issue and, I might add — 

something that’s near and dear to my heart — on child care 

actually. A little, tiny province who’s taken some really bold 

steps around child care. 

 

So Saskatchewan talks about, our Premier and our government 

talk about being leaders in the country, and we are in so many 

ways. But when it comes to ensuring that all Canadians have an 

opportunity to retire with dignity and not living in abject 

poverty, it is incumbent upon our government to no longer be 

silent. 

 

In the spring during question period, in a set of questions, the 

Finance minister was asked about where this government stands 

on this particular issue. And the Finance minister went on to 

say that they will, when it comes to the expansion of CPP, they 

will, at the appropriate time, will make that decision around 

advocating for modest increases. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the opposition we would argue 

that right now is the time to be arguing for that. You’ve got 

other provinces who have stepped up to the plate and are 

working, calling on the federal government to make some 

changes. And the stronger voices, the more voices calling on 

that, the more pressure to bear on our federal government, 

which would be a much better thing. 

 

We have issues where people who don’t have workplace 

pensions or who in fact are relying on RRSPs [registered 

retirement savings plan] for their savings, I think the one good 

point I think that the Canadian Labour Congress makes is that 

workers who know that CPP will be there wouldn’t fear losing 

their pensions given the misdeeds of both Bay Street and Wall 

Street. And so we do need to do something, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, on ensuring that all Canadians and all Saskatchewan 

residents have the opportunity to have a retirement with dignity. 

 

And with respect to Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension 

Plan Amendment Act, it’s great that 53,000 Saskatchewan 

residents have this, have a pension plan, a workplace pension 

plan, as do other Saskatchewan residents. But there are many 

people who do not. And this shouldn’t be about lowering the 

bar and saying, well why do these folks have a worker . . . or an 

employee . . . a workplace pension plan, and these ones don’t, 

and if they have it, they shouldn’t. And this should be about 

raising the bar for everybody, ensuring that again that we all 

have the opportunity to work hard during our working life and 

retire with dignity. 

 

But as the months go on, as we head into the spring session in a 

few months from now and even over the course of the next few 

weeks as we continue with debate, the opposition will talk to 

appropriate stakeholders, and I know the public will weigh in, 

and we will continue on this debate. I know that I have 

colleagues would like to weigh into the discussion on Bill No. 

99, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013, 

but for now I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The Child 

Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this evening to talk about child care legislation. I think we 

all know in our province we need many more child care spaces, 

both in the cities, in the smaller communities, and in rural areas 

across the province. And we have a whole number of 

challenges related to provision of child care.  

 

My understanding of this legislation is that it’s bilingual 

legislation and that basically it’s main thrust is to make sure 

that the legislation is in both English and French. And I think 

we all know in this Legislative Assembly that the effort and the 

time and the money we spend to provide legislation in both 

English and French is important and it’s money well spent. And 

it’s also in response to decisions made by the courts saying that 

there’s an obligation to make sure that our legislation is 

available in both official languages of Canada. So that 

particular aspect of this legislation I think is a positive one. This 

will provide for the legislation around child care. 

 

Now what we have in the legislation itself is pretty well a 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4055 

reiteration of what has been there for quite a number of years. 

There are some changes that I’ve identified when I’ve looked at 

the legislation and compared it with the previous legislation, 

and it seems to be in this whole area of investigations and 

inspections. And under the old legislation, there was a provision 

for inspecting child care places and, if there were problems, 

doing investigations. And what appears to have happened in 

this legislation is that they’ve tried to split those things apart 

and look at the investigations in a way separately from ordinary 

or regular inspections of private or public child care. 

 

Now I think that’s a positive thing, that we would take these 

steps to improve what’s there. I think it’s quite interesting that 

they’ve added in a clause which allows for investigations and/or 

inspections to take place in vehicles, of cars, vehicles where 

children are being transported. So I assume there must have 

been some problem at some point in this legislation where they 

needed to get some powers to allow for that type of ability, 

which is to apprehend or pick up children that were in a care 

situation. 

 

So those are the kinds of things that are in this particular 

legislation. But I think the bigger issue is, what’s the role and 

importance of a child care program within the economy of 

Saskatchewan? Why does enhanced child care mean smart 

growth for the province? Well what we know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that when we make appropriate community-wide 

provision of child care available, we provide support to children 

and young families and give them an opportunity to participate 

in broader activities of the community, including having both 

father and mother work and contribute through employment or 

through other activities within the community. We also have a 

situation where, where there’s good child care and there 

happens to be a single parent, that ends up providing support to 

that parent in raising a child or children. And unfortunately in 

Saskatchewan we have not placed as much of an emphasis on 

this broader public support of child care that we could. And I 

think we’re missing something here. 

 

A few years ago, I guess it’s probably 10, 15 years ago, in the 

province of Quebec, they ended up coming forward with, at that 

time I think was, a $5 a day child care program. It ended up, I 

think now it costs $7 a day. And it was a bit of a surprise to 

governments right across the country and perhaps even to the 

federal government that they would come forward with 

something that effectively was saying, we as the province, we 

as the whole community will pay the majority of the costs of 

child care. 

 

And it strikes me that we haven’t asked that question as directly 

as we should have in Saskatchewan because we know that there 

are many children in the province whose parents are struggling 

with the costs of raising them. And if we could have a program 

of broad support for child care, you can end up having a much 

more level playing field for all of the young people of the 

province to get the support that they need to make sure that they 

can participate in the community in the long term. We know 

from the studies in Quebec that they are seeing that kind of 

result of their universal child care program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation today regulates child care. It 

talks about how you would make sure that children are 

protected in different things. But it doesn’t have that visionary 

perspective about how using child care as a social policy would 

be a benefit to our economy. 

 

Another aspect of child care, which is true in other places, in 

other jurisdictions, is that a piece of legislation like this would 

talk about what kind of professional training child care workers 

need and then basically explain how to provide that training for 

them so that our children, who are our greatest asset, I would 

say, in this province . . . No matter what we say about all the 

mineral resources and natural resources, we always affirm that 

it’s the people and the children that are the greatest asset we 

have in this province. So this legislation doesn’t talk about how 

we can make sure that we have the most optimum care for the 

young children, and it doesn’t go to or it isn’t supported by the 

budgets that we need to actually provide the best child care we 

can in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that when you talk to individuals, 

there’s always agreement that it’s important to have support for 

child care in our society but, for whatever reason, when it gets 

into the budgetary process, it seems to get pushed off to the side 

and doesn’t get the full support that it needs. 

 

Now I had the opportunity to go to university in Norway, and a 

number of my friends who were . . . that I got to know over the 

years in Norway were professional child care workers. And 

some of them worked with the children from basically one or 

two months old to age three, and others worked with the ones 

from age three to when school started, and then others did some 

of the after school work. But virtually all of those people who 

worked in that system were professionals with full training 

through what they call the Spedbarn Academy, which was the 

academy for training of people to take care of infants and 

children. 

 

I raise this because we have not been as diligent as a society to 

recognize the importance of complementing parental care and 

raising of children with professional care. We’ve done it for our 

school children and then we’ve added kindergarten and we’ve 

added some of the pre-kindergarten work, but we haven’t 

looked at this in a way that gives us a comprehensive base. 

Now we have prominent Canadians like Dr. Fraser Mustard, 

who is now deceased, but people like Dr. Fraser Mustard who 

say — who have said over the years, and many others have said 

the same thing — that money invested in young children ends 

up benefiting the whole of the community in the long term. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So when we have legislation like the child care legislation, it 

has a great name, but I think the budgetary supports for this 

kind of work and just our overall attitude about how to support 

child care misses some of the points as it relates to provision of 

care for children. I think that if we had a society that was smart 

about growing the total economy, we would have a big piece of 

that as support for women and men, but I think in many ways 

primarily women who want to combine the use of their good 

skills in a profession or in a training that they have along with 

raising of children. And I’ve had many people contact me or 

contact my office about how to get appropriate child care that 

they can trust in the city of Regina or in other communities. So 

we, I know that we have much more to do in this particular 

area. 



4056 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

Now it may be that this bill and this bilingual bill is a signal 

from the Minister of Education — because we note that it was 

brought forward by the Minister of Education — that there will 

be some further funding or further support for the expansion of 

child care. We know that some of the best child care facilities 

are the ones that are related to the elementary schools and allow 

for a single place for children’s care. Perhaps this is a signal 

that we’re going to see some more of that or something like that 

coming from the government, but I think based on the record 

that we’ve seen over the last few years that’s not what we’re 

going to be getting at all. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is an important area. This bill is very 

important, but what’s most important is that there’s a 

willingness on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan for the 

government to make major advances in their budgeting process 

and in the training education process to make sure that we have 

the best child care that we can have for Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that would be a smart thing to do both for children 

and families, but also for the economic life of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will adjourn the debate on this 

particular bill at this time and I’m looking forward to comments 

from some of my colleagues about this child care issue as well. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98, The Child Care 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 100 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise and speak to Bill No. 100, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act. This bill relates to the 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, or SAMA in 

common parlance, in Saskatchewan. And it relates to a number 

of decisions that this government has made over the last few 

years and it deals with some particular challenges that have 

been created by the government which we’re seeing play out in 

quite a number of ways and quite a number of places in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation identifies the problem that’s now 

arisen when the government has taken over the whole area of 

raising revenue for schools on taxation of property. And 

effectively what the legislation does is remove any references to 

school divisions around the whole assessment issue and then 

attempts to clean up the language and deal with some of the 

issues. Now what I think I want to emphasize here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that people in Saskatchewan have been doing their 

part to work hard and build the economy. Many young families 

have made choices to save up money and buy their first home, 

and they then are into this process of having their home 

assessed for property taxes. The valuation is needed for the 

property tax. 

 

And what we see is that we have people who plan their budgets, 

working together with their bankers or their mortgage brokers, 

who are now facing big property tax hikes because the 

assessments are proceeding along. And what we have now is a 

system of about a four-year rollover, and so because of the 

increase in the values of some of the properties in some of our 

communities, they are facing very, very hefty tax hikes based 

on the assessment from the SAMA, or the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency. 

 

So this is the Act that deals with that ability to do the 

assessments. Now practically, this assessment should be done 

as concurrently to the increases in values as possible. We see 

systems in other provinces where that happens on a regular 

basis, sometimes like almost every year. And it may be that 

that’s where we’re going with this kind of legislation, but 

unfortunately when I looked at this legislation I see some other 

things happening that cause me to raise some concerns. 

 

And I think I’ll start with some of the points that are raised by 

the Minister of Government Relations who has the job of 

dealing with the municipal taxation issues. And he’s, you know, 

quite straightforward to say that this system raises over one and 

a half billion dollars for funding of municipalities and for 

schools. And so what we know is that that ability of schools to 

set their taxation has been moved away from the school boards 

to the provincial government. And so effectively what we have 

is an assessment of one and a half billion dollars in taxes that’s 

divided between the province as the assessor and the 

municipalities of the province, whether they’re urban or rural 

municipalities. 

 

And what we then see is that the costs of this agency had 

traditionally been divided up between the school boards and the 

municipalities. I think the provisions in the old legislation said 

it was a 65/35 split. Now effectively what this did was made 

sure that the Assessment Management Agency had enough 

money to do its job. 

 

Now when the province took over the assessment or the 

collection of the revenues for school boards, it ended up 

causing quite a number of problems which we see now when 

we hear every day about school boards trying to make plans in 

their regions without really having any capital plan from this 

provincial government and without really having any sense of 

participation in some of the building of the new schools, 

whether it’s the new schools announced that are forced to be a 

public-private P3 [public-private partnership] kind of operation 

or whether it’s the portables that were ordered by the provincial 

government last year and still are causing quite a number of 

difficulties because of the way that that was done. Effectively, 

school boards no longer have any leverage or any ability to 

raise their own money through this SAMA, the assessment that 

we’re talking about here, and so they’re kind of left on the side. 

 

So what the legislation is doing here is it’s saying, okay, the 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4057 

school boards don’t have any ability to deal with the taxation 

for education anymore. They’re referred to in the legislation. 

Let’s move them right out of there. Well that would be fine if 

there was a stepping up of the ability of the province to actually 

participate in the Assessment Management Agency, but I 

thought it was curious that the minister seems to indicate that 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] are 

— that’s the urban municipalities and the rural municipalities 

— are in support of this when he says quite clearly in his 

remarks that they’ve wanted to eliminate the 65/35 per cent 

split sharing for the costs of the assessment of SAMA so that 

the agency, which is SAMA, can seek greater funding from the 

municipal sector. 

 

Now I’m not sure if all of the directors of SUMA and SARM 

have seen this particular statement made by the minister, but 

effectively what he’s saying here is he wants to push more of 

these costs onto the municipality. Now that’s interesting that he 

would do that and he continues to talk about how SUMA and 

SARM are really excited about this legislation. 

 

Now there’s also a . . . They want to make it easier for SAMA 

to add further increases around municipal requisitions and 

providing timelines that are reasonable and make sure it’s a 

properly funded agency. Now I’m not sure from the wording 

that we get here if it’s totally understood that the government is 

pushing more of these costs on the municipality. There’s also a 

reference here to make it more administratively efficient for the 

government to make its financial payment to SAMA earlier. 

Now that may be a good thing in that it will get the assessments 

done a little bit more quickly. But I’m still not totally certain 

that we understand what it is that the government is doing here 

in this particular legislation. 

 

The traditional split has been I think 65 per cent cost to the 

municipalities and 35 per cent to the school boards. Right in the 

minister’s speech he says that in the last year that we have the 

full records of the property tax revenues, which is 2012, 61 per 

cent of the money went to the municipalities and 39 per cent to 

education. And so it already seems that there’s something 

askew here as it relates to the sharing of the costs. And what we 

also know is that there are other activities that relate to the costs 

of SAMA, where the government is holding the line on the 

amount of money that they have to actually do their job. And 

the net effect of that is to not increase the number or the 

frequency of the assessments. 

 

What we know over the valuations of homes over the last five 

years in Saskatchewan is that there’s been dramatic increases in 

the prices of homes, and so the effect of not doing more timely 

assessments will be more and more people with very large 

increases in taxation. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Now one of the issues that actually then comes up is, well what 

have various of the organizations involved with the Assessment 

Management Agency said about the provisions that are here? 

We don’t really know from the information that we have so far 

how, you know, what kinds of suggestions were made by the 

municipalities. We do know that the school boards are feeling 

totally left out of this process, and they are identifying a whole 

number of areas where they no longer have any control over the 

flow of money and therefore very little control over their capital 

building plans or negotiations that are involved. 

 

We know that the vote most recently around the teachers’ 

contract is basically a direct teacher-government negotiation, 

not the school board-teacher-government negotiation that’s 

been there for many years. So we have legislation that’s coming 

forward to make changes that are putting, looks like, more 

expense down to municipalities, and we will be asking quite a 

number of questions around how that works. 

 

Now another aspect of the legislation, which it seems to purport 

that this is going to increase the frequency and lessen the time 

between assessments that are made of property . . . We know 

that that takes more money, and once again we’ll be looking at 

this bill in light of whatever the budget is in the spring to see 

whether the budget actually follows the kinds of changes that 

are made here. If the change is to say, well provincial 

government’s holding the line on the amount of funding but we 

want you to speed up the whole process and spend more 

money, we know that effectively that’s just pushing costs to the 

municipalities and we’ll all pay as taxpayers, but only we’ll pay 

it out of a different spot. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that that’s a plan that often is there, 

to push some of these costs into some other places so it looks as 

if the provincial budget is maybe a little smaller. But I think 

that that’s not going to work in this area. And we’ll be watching 

to see how, how they do that. 

 

Now there are a whole number of other changes that are part of 

eliminating any reference to the school boards in the legislation. 

I think that, you know, that this is, this is the track that the 

government has taken. If in fact they start recognizing that they 

need more local involvement in the school funding and in 

dealing with some of the capital needs in local communities, by 

changing this legislation the way they are doing here, they are 

eliminating the ability to maybe correct some of the mistakes 

around how they are raising funds for education. 

 

So practically it’s legislation that takes us down this step of 

having basically the province and the municipalities fund 

assessment for property taxes. We know it facilitates collection 

— this last year of over a billion and a half dollars — so 

therefore it’s obviously very important to taxpayers right across 

the province. We’ll continue to look very carefully at what 

they’re doing, and we look forward to hearing from different 

groups who are affected by the legislation, as it moves forward, 

to make sure that there aren’t other mistakes made by this 

government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to hearing some of my other 

colleagues comment on this. We also look forward to hearing 

from people across the province who are concerned about how 

taxation of real property in the province is done. And with that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I conclude my remarks. Thank you. And I 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 



4058 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 101 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter the discussion about Bill 101, The University 

of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013. I’d like to start by 

outlining some of the minister’s remarks in terms of what he 

has said this bill is going to do and which also reflects the 

explanatory notes that we get. 

 

But just stepping back here, one of the things I know the 

member from Athabasca had said earlier in the debate on this 

bill, we receive the bills or the bills are introduced in the fall 

session and it’s usually an opportunity between the fall and the 

spring to reach out to stakeholders and find out if the 

government has done their consultation, if everything in the bill 

is good or what are the challenges with a bill, again who has 

been consulted. But that will be the work going forward over 

the next three weeks as we continue to sit, and then between the 

fall and spring session. 

 

But some of the things from the minister’s own remarks that he 

has stated that the goal of Bill 101, first of all it’ll help clarify 

the awarding of diplomas in the list of powers of convocation, 

and that falls under section 11. Also this bill will help ensure 

that individuals elected to represent the senate, specifically and 

especially outside of student members of the senate, they will 

work to ensure that they represent the senate and they’ll be 

graduates of the university. And that’s section 24. 

 

Thirdly the amendments will clarify the process by which 

student members of the senate are elected, and this is in 

sections 29 and 32. As well the amendments do amend the term 

of office for the senate’s nominees to the board to allow them to 

serve a three-year, third three-year term, and that’s section 45. 

And what that section 45 actually, what this does is it 

authorizes the two members elected by the senate to serve on 

the board for a third three-year term, as I mentioned, which 

provides parity with terms of office for the five members of the 

board that are appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. As per the University of Saskatchewan board of 

governors bylaws, these are members on the board that are 

eligible to be nominated for Chair or Vice-Chair. 

 

As well this bill will amend the powers of the council to 

facilitate the appointment of student members on hearing 

boards, and they will address the requirements of the corporate 

seal. And as well I had mentioned the parity between the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, the board appointments made 

essentially by cabinet, and those elected by the senate. 

 

And finally there are remaining housekeeping amendments 

which often come before us, bills that haven’t been amended 

for a very long time. And one of the things that I’ve . . . So 

those are some of the goals of this bill. And one of the things 

I’ve mentioned earlier is, as opposition one of the things we 

always want to know is who brought the bill forward or who 

brought the possible changes forward. Who was consulted? 

Who wasn’t consulted? 

 

I know the minister has made clear in his remarks. He said that 

the University of Saskatchewan in fact submitted a letter earlier 

this year to the Ministry of Advanced Education requesting 

these amendments. And the minister goes on to say that his 

ministry has consulted with the U of S, the University of 

Saskatchewan, and the University of Regina on the proposed 

amendments, and both institutions have provided letters of 

support for these amendments. So it would be good to see those 

letters of support, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He goes on to say that 

the University of Saskatchewan consulted with the University 

of Saskatchewan Students’ Union as well as the graduate 

students’ association, and they both provided letters of support 

for those proposed amendments. So it would be great actually, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for us to be able to see those letters of 

support. 

 

Again one of the key pieces, key things we look to as the 

opposition is who has asked for changes, why they’ve asked for 

changes. Have all the people necessary who are impacted by 

bills been consulted? So those are all things that we look to, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and will be looking into over the next several 

months. 

 

I know the minister in his remarks talks about the support this 

government has had for our universities, but I think it’s 

important to acknowledge that universities here in 

Saskatchewan have had some serious challenges in recent 

years, some of them brought on by funding issues. We can look 

to a year or so ago, or in the past year, some debt was foisted 

upon the University of Saskatchewan — 100 million, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — that had been committed to being taken care 

of in the last election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We look at rising tuition. Just this fall we heard that tuition at 

the U of S is up 4.7 per cent. It was the highest increase, 4.7 per 

cent for undergrads, which was the highest increase of all the 

provinces, highest percentage increase of all the provinces. So 

it’s interesting. You look at tuition here at the University of 

Saskatchewan is on average $6,394 a year for an undergraduate. 

And that’s the second highest undergrad tuition in Canada. As a 

parent who has a child two years away or three years away 

from university, that has me somewhat concerned, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. My daughter’s dad and I have been saving for her 

education since her birth, but thinking of . . . at right now that’s 

more than $25,000 in tuition. That’s if my daughter went to the 

U of S and did a four-year degree which she would be paying. 

 

And we’ve done okay saving, but that has some concern for me. 

And I know that has some concern for many families across the 

province. Having the second highest undergrad tuition in 

Canada is . . . or of all the provinces, is definitely problematic. 

 

I know the university, because of some of the financial crunch, 

the 100 million that they’ve had to take on in debt, and because 

of the financial crunch, there’s been layoffs at the University of 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4059 

Saskatchewan, many layoffs as a matter of fact just in recent 

months. I know I’ve got friends who teach at the U of S, and 

they speak of the low morale on campus or particularly around 

some of the staff. So this government talks a good talk about 

supporting our universities, but the reality is there are some 

serious challenges that our universities are facing, in large 

measure from funding issues. 

 

We have got the University of Saskatchewan medical school on 

probation, which this government said would never happen 

under its watch. And I know the Saskatoon Health Region and 

other health regions are concerned about that. I know students 

are concerned about it. There are many people who have huge 

concerns about our medical school being on probation. So 

despite the talk of supporting our universities, I think there are 

some real problems, and the talk doesn’t always match the 

action, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But going forward as we continue to debate this legislation and 

other legislation, we will spend some time talking to the 

stakeholders. We’re glad to hear that it does look like in fact the 

government on these particular changes has consulted with 

important stakeholders, but and as I said, it would be great to 

see some of those letters of support. And we will be looking to 

clarify some of that over the coming months, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But with that I do know I have colleagues who will be weighing 

in on this discussion. And with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Riversdale has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 101, The University of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 107 — The 

Wildfire Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 107, An Act respecting the 

Prevention, Management, Control, and Extinguishing of Fires. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that this legislation is another 

attempt at bringing The Wildfire Act forward. We had 

legislation last spring that caused quite a bit of fuss across the 

northern or the north . . . or the central part of Saskatchewan 

when the legislation came forward. And as a result, the 

government has taken it back or dropped that version of the 

legislation and brought forward this version of the legislation. 

 

Effectively this legislation relates to wildfires. And there are 

quite a number of definitions in the Act which are obviously 

important in interpreting the Act, and I think ultimately it’s 

interesting I think to maybe put on the record what this Act is 

about. So there is a definition of wildfire, and wildfire is a 

single word. And what it says under section 2: 

 

(dd) “wildfire” means an unplanned fire that burns 

organic soil, grasses, forbes, shrubs, trees and associated 

vegetative fuels in their natural or modified state, and does 

not include structural, vehicle or landfill fires. 

 

That’s the end of the definition. And I think the important part 

of this definition is that wildfire basically relates to a fire that’s 

in the brush or in the trees, in the grass, in other places, but it 

doesn’t include a fire that would be in a barn or in a car. Or if 

you have a garbage dump and there’s a fire in the garbage 

dump, it doesn’t include that type of a fire. 

 

And why the importance of the word wildfire? Well effectively 

what this legislation is all about is trying to delineate the 

responsibility for fighting fires between the provincial 

government — in other words, Saskatchewan Environment — 

and the rural municipalities or smaller urban municipalities 

when a fire takes place which may be both a wildfire and a 

structural fire together. And so what this bill is attempting to do 

is deal with a number of problems that arose over the last 

number of years around the provincial government billing rural 

municipalities for the cost of fighting fires in brush or other 

places or trees or grass that’s in the rural municipality. And as 

we know, there are many acres or hectares of provincial land 

that are right across our province, and especially in that forest 

fringe area where many of these fires take place. 

 

And what we know is that a few years ago some of the bills that 

were sent from the firefighting portion of Sask Environment to 

rural municipalities were so large that it was almost impossible 

for the residents of a rural municipality to pay those bills. And 

it became difficult also to decide exactly who should pay them, 

based on where the fire might have started or where it actually 

went. And I read this definition of wildfire because you end up 

then going into a definition of what a wildfire management area 

means. And these are, you know, fairly complicated ways of 

doing this, but anyway, under Section 2(gg), as opposed to (dd), 

we have a definition of wildfire management area. And this 

means: 

 

(i) a provincial forest, including a provincial forest within 

the boundaries of a rural municipality or the Northern 

Saskatchewan Administration District; 

 

(ii) park land; [and then you have to . . . Park land is 

defined in The Parks Act, so you have to go and look at 

The Parks Act to see what that means.]; 

 

(iii) vacant Crown land; and 

 

(iv) every quarter section of land lying wholly or partly 

within 4.5 kilometres of the boundaries of a provincial 

forest. 

 

So what we have is provincial forest, and then 4.5 kilometres 

around that provincial forest, even though it may be part of a 



4060 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

rural municipality, will be included in the wildfire management 

area. Now the wildfire management area is the area where the 

provincial government does have some responsibility or does 

take some responsibility. And it’s actually this buffer area that 

brought upon all of the consternation of RMs [rural 

municipality] last spring which forced the government to come 

back with a new bill that’s been rewritten. 

 

Now there’s also a definition under section 2(ff) of wildfire 

management. And that means “wildfire prevention, detection, 

control, preparedness, suppression, investigation, research, 

training, education or reclamation and includes any activities 

related to the foregoing.” 

 

Now I think that detailed definition of wildfire management is 

there because every one of those things costs some money, and 

they want to be able to include it in a bill that they might give to 

a person or an insurance company or a rural municipality who 

might have some responsibility for fighting a wildfire in one of 

these places. 

 

Now we know that in that 4.5 kilometre buffer zone — and it’s 

basically 3 miles, so three sections around the edge of 

provincial forest — they still have this dispute possibility going 

on. And this in a lot of ways relates to some of those costs. 

What we then have is something where you have to read very 

carefully through the legislation to figure out what might 

happen. Now why is that important? Well there’s a few 

different places where you need to know what the status of your 

land is and how it affects whether it’s included in any of these 

wildfire management areas or not. 

 

The first one is if you’re an RM. If you’re an RM and you take 

some action to control or extinguish a fire within a wildfire 

management area, the municipality, the RM shall immediately 

notify a ministry official and shall obtain approval from the 

ministry officer to continue those actions. 

 

Well there’s a wildfire. You’re out there doing your best to try 

to deal with the fire, but you’ve got to be careful you don’t fight 

it too hard and spend too much money unless you make sure a 

ministry officer knows. Now hopefully all this land out there 

will be marked, so you’ll know exactly who is subject to which 

costs and what’s going to happen. 

 

Section 4 of that . . . [inaudible] . . . 12 right after this other one 

about giving notification to the ministry reads like this:  

 

The minister is not required to reimburse the municipality 

for costs or expenses of controlling . . . [or] extinguishing 

a wildfire if the municipality has failed to provide the 

notice required in subsection (3). 

 

I mean, basically this is an issue of dealing with a wildfire that 

may actually be causing some damage within that community. 

And we get this kind of a clause which says, well unless you 

give us that notice and the ministry official says it’s okay for 

you to fight the fire, the minister is not going to pay the RM for 

the cost of that fire. 

 

Now I don’t think there are RMs out there with fire equipment 

and all that that are just going out fighting fires just so that they 

can bill the provincial government. But this legislation, the way 

it’s written seems to be trying to prevent RMs that are out 

cruising around looking for fires from doing extra billing of the 

province. So I don’t totally understand what the intent of this is, 

other than to try to put some provincial control on the amount 

that they’re going to contribute when there’s fires to be fought 

in an area. 

 

Now there’s also a whole section in this legislation that goes 

back to the definition of wildfire and definition of wildfire 

maintenance areas that relates to what they call a burn 

notification number. And a burn notification number is 

presumably something like an old fire permit used to be, that at 

least let people know you were going to set a fire in an area 

which was covered by the whole burn notification process. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there’s some very technical things in this 

legislation that require one to go back and forth and try to sort 

out exactly how the Act is an . . . [inaudible] . . . And it’s 

especially, I think, related to the provincial government trying 

to shirk responsibility for paying for some fires where they 

have a role in making sure that especially rural municipalities 

are compensated for some of these costs. 

 

So I think especially members on the government side should 

be looking at this legislation very carefully and going back and 

talking with their rural municipalities around what the effect of 

this is going to be on local taxation in RMs. 

 

Now another piece of this legislation which is a change is once 

again a way to move costs from the provincial government 

somewhere else. And what I’m talking about here is they have 

defined some of the . . . another area where costs can be moved 

over to another party. And that’s in definition under section 2(l) 

of industrial or commercial operation. And it says: 

 

“industrial or commercial operation” means: 

 

(i) an activity carried on in connection with forestry 

operations, mining, oil and gas operations, mineral 

exploration, road construction and maintenance, the 

operation of public utilities, outfitting, peatmoss 

operations, the operation of institutional camps and 

railway operations; and 

 

(ii) any activity or development, other than one 

mentioned in subclause (i), that is prescribed in the 

regulations or the code. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we have is here is an expansion to put 

responsibility on railways. Now practically this would have to 

be provincially regulated railway operations. It’s expansion to 

put the costs on public utilities. Well our main public utilities in 

Saskatchewan are SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, but we 

also have many forestry operations, mining, oil and gas 

operations, mineral exploration. And effectively what the 

legislation is trying to do is to shift some of those costs. 

 

Now traditionally we’ve had an ability, if a mining operation or 

forestry operation starts a fire that then causes some damage, 

there’s ability to transfer some of that cost there. But I think 

where the expansion takes place in this legislation is that it 

moves some of these costs onto Crown corporations and, like I 

said, SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, where before they were 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4061 

not included. 

 

Now I think the rationale was that they’re both operations 

within government, and that there is a place for Sask 

Environment, and the costs that they’re spending in fire fighting 

wildfires is basically you either pay it through the General 

Revenue Fund, by paying Sask Environment, or you pay it 

through your power bill. What this is doing is shifting any costs 

that might come out of firefighting that relates to those utilities 

over to the utilities so that well the power bills might go up or 

the SaskEnergy bills may go up or SaskTel bills might go up, 

but it’s not going to affect the amounts in Sask Environment. 

 

[21:15] 

 

I’m not sure if that is totally recognized by the people in the 

Ministry of Crown Investments or in the various Crown 

corporations that this is a shift. We haven’t seen or heard 

anything about that in the information that was provided by the 

minister, and that’s not surprising given that it’s the Minister of 

Environment. And his officials are working hard to figure out, 

how do we contain our costs within our budget? And what they 

do is then shift them off to other places. 

 

I mean it’s clear that the best and most efficient way to fight 

fires is to do it in one place and have the responsibility for 

doing that in one place. This seems to start shifting some of 

those responsibilities to another place so that the costs of 

fighting fires can maybe be controlled in some artificial way 

even though maybe that’s not the best way to do it. 

 

So what’s happening with this legislation? I think that there’s 

been some fairly careful crafting of the legislation and crafting 

of the words to hide how some of these costs are being 

transferred onto our rural municipalities or even some of the 

urban municipalities. I think it’s not very clear and it’s not 

being very transparent about how they’re trying to shift costs 

over onto some of our Crown utilities, and I think that that type 

of activity needs to have much more public discussion, and we 

need to have much more information from the minister as this 

whole thing moves forward. 

 

Now we know that a year ago when some of the more direct 

costs were pushed onto the RMs, they pushed back. I think it 

was, you know, the RM of Buckland up by Prince Albert 

pushed pretty hard because of some of the fires that they’ve had 

in their neighbourhood, and we also know that there are other 

of the RMs that have really struggled with the bills that Sask 

Environment has sent to them.  

 

And I think that we all deserve much more information about 

how this legislation is intended to operate. And I think in fact 

the legislation may need to be redrafted or drafted in a much 

clearer way so that it’s quite obvious what the government is 

doing with this legislation because otherwise I think there could 

be some nasty surprises, especially for rural municipalities, 

maybe for our Crown utilities, and I think that we need to be 

wary when some of these things are done. 

 

Also included in here, as I said earlier, are the railways, and that 

means the railways that are within the province. And I think we 

need to have some of our shortline railways that are operating 

understand what kind of a change this means for them. We also 

maybe need to understand what the relationship between this 

legislation and the federally regulated railways are so that we 

can deal with that as well. 

 

So I think there are a whole number of questions about this 

legislation. There are some areas where there’s some fairly 

tricky wording as far as the definitions go and the terms that are 

used. And I think that we all should be quite careful as this 

legislation moves forward to make sure that we’re not doing 

something here which is just going to cause a great deal of 

difficulty, especially in some of the rural municipalities along 

the forest fringe area of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that some of my colleagues 

will have concerns about this. I look forward to comments from 

some of the Crown corporations and from some of the rural 

municipalities and shortline railways and maybe even some of 

our mining operations. All of these organizations are very 

strong and important parts of our economy, and if we’re adding 

in complicated costs or complicated bills that are going to 

discourage them from their economic activity, we at least need 

to have something that’s clearer than this to do that. 

 

So with those comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to 

adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 111 — The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy to 

rise here this evening to address Bill 111, The Personal Care 

Homes Amendment Act, 2013, a fairly straightforward 

amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What we’re seeing here is 

section 19 of the existing personal care homes Act is being 

amended to add some new clauses regarding reporting and 

authorizing publication of those reports. So apparently this is 

something, according to the minister in his comments, this is 

something the ministry has decided to do in order to meet some 

of the comments coming from the auditor’s office. 

 

And the recommendations from the Provincial Auditor and the 

Provincial Ombudsman said that there should be more 

information about personal care homes available to the public. 

Now it’s not exactly clear to us why this needed to be done 

through legislation, although I know that in that section of the 

Act there’s quite a long list of the types of regulations that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council can make in relation to 

personal care homes. And I guess this would make it a 



4062 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2013 

legislative requirement, once the regulations are passed, for 

these personal care homes to actually do this reporting. 

 

So the clauses that are being added in section 19, which is the, 

you know, the long list of the things that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council can make regulations for, they’re adding 

three new things. And the first one is the proposed clause 

19(a.1) which would authorize: 

 

. . . the publication of, or the provision of public access to, 

information respecting inspections of personal care homes, 

including the contents of an inspection report and 

information respecting a licensee’s compliance or 

non-compliance with any Act or regulation. 

 

And the second clause, (a.2), says they can make regulations to 

describe the period within which the information can be 

published. And the third clause, (a.3), is proposing to govern 

the manner of publication or provision of public access to the 

information. 

 

So the types of information that we’re seeing being now 

imposed upon these personal care homes is inspection reports. 

And what the minister had to say in his comments was first of 

all he indicated that it’s a response to recommendations from 

the Provincial Auditor and the Provincial Ombudsman that 

there should be more information about personal care homes 

available to the public. And so it’s good to see the government 

responding to recommendations from the auditor and the 

Ombudsman because we know that those two independent 

officers’ jobs are to comment and review and ensure that the 

government’s actions are appropriate and that the appropriate 

reporting-type things, like in this case, are being done. What 

these inspection reports are supposed to do is indicate where 

homes need to make improvements to meet required standards 

and then thereby allowing people to make informed decisions 

when it comes to placing their loved ones in a care home. 

 

I guess this sort of begs the question though, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, about the sufficiency of spaces within care homes, not 

just the personal care homes but of course the long-term care 

homes and other facilities that are managed by the health 

regions. And I think you would be aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that something that has come to our attention in the opposition 

on an increasing frequency, sad to say, that there are a number 

of concerns being brought forward to our attention regarding 

for example the staffing levels in care homes, in the long-term 

care homes that the government’s responsible for. And certainly 

we know there are petitions, and the Provincial Auditor in some 

of those petitions are indicating that many seniors’ care 

facilities do not have high enough standards of care. 

 

So it’s not just the reporting that is important. And this 

legislation only deals with reporting, but it’s more than 

reporting when we know that there’s other serious, serious 

issues that we’ve brought to the attention of the Assembly in 

terms of residents being left alone to soil themselves — there’s 

no staff people available to help them get to the toilet — 

requiring seniors to go to bed at 5:30 in the evening because 

there’s no one there to look after them if they’re outside of their 

rooms. There’s all kinds of things that we’ve been hearing from 

seniors in that there’s chronically low staffing levels in our 

health care system. 

So while on one side it’s important that these inspection reports 

be made available — and we are certainly pleased to see the 

government bring forward this type of legislation to ensure that 

the public has the information they need to make the decisions 

when it comes to putting people in care — I’ve had a number of 

people in my constituency office that are very frustrated with 

the lack of availability of spaces, period. So even if these 

inspection reports are available, it doesn’t mean that there’s 

enough opportunity for people to make informed choices. There 

simply aren’t enough spaces for people to use that information 

and make it worthwhile.  

 

You know, the information will be there, but I’ve had many 

people say they’re not pleased with the care their loved ones are 

getting but they have no choice. There’s nowhere else to move 

them. So it’s one thing to report and say that things aren’t all 

great in that personal care home, but if that’s the only care 

home that’s in town for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then 

there isn’t a lot of option for people or they have to move their 

loved ones to further away locations. And we know how 

disruptive and difficult that would be. 

 

So I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, this is a pretty 

straightforward amendment to an Act in response to a 

recommendation from the auditor and the Ombudsman. It will 

provide a tool to families when they are wanting to know more 

about a personal care home, and those inspection reports should 

be made available. So it’s something that I agree makes a lot of 

sense. But in my view, Mr. Speaker, this is only a very small, 

small item that’s being dealt with here, and there’s much more 

grave and serious items in the realm of seniors’ care that aren’t 

being addressed. And the chronically low staffing levels is not 

going to get better until we see some commitment from the 

government to assist the health regions to ensure that this 

chronic low staffing issue is dealt with appropriately. 

 

So by and large, Mr. Speaker, the amendment seems innocuous 

enough on its own. Of course other of my colleagues are going 

to want to have an opportunity to comment on this, and we 

certainly will be looking for commentary from members of the 

public and people that deal with personal care homes to see if 

this is an appropriate amendment to this section of the Act. On 

that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am going to move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4063 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:29.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4043 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4043 

 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4045 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4045 

 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4048 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4049 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4050 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4052 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4054 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4056 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4058 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4059 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4061 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


