




















































Hansard: December 05, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 25A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2013, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4421 

 December 5, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave for an 

extended introduction this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to hon. 

members for the leave. It’s a bittersweet introduction I have, 

Mr. Speaker, for members of the House today. Seated in your 

gallery is a very special woman, a special person, Mr. Speaker, 

in the city and in the province of Saskatchewan. She is joined 

by her family members. Her name is Bonnie Donison — maybe 

Bonnie will give us a wave — and with her are her son Lance 

Donison, his wife, Renae, and Bonnie’s grandson Jett. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bittersweet day because after many, 

many, many, many years of wonderful public service, Bonnie 

has confirmed that she’s going to be retiring from her work in 

executive government. Mr. Speaker, she is currently in the 

office of the Minister of Government Relations as a ministerial 

assistant working very, very hard and effectively on the onerous 

PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] file, helping 

people across the province with their claims among other 

things. And, Mr. Speaker, just having to work with the Minister 

of Government Relations would be enough that we should 

celebrate her today, but her service to our province goes beyond 

that, Mr. Speaker. In fact she has served under four premiers in 

various roles in different parts of government. 

 

She first started working with Premier Thatcher, a year before I 

was born, Mr. Speaker. It’s hard when we see her today, it’s 

hard to figure out that math unless there’s a DeLorean involved 

and some sort of time travel, but it’s true, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I was able to work very directly with Bonnie as leader of 

the opposition, when she came in to help me in the earliest days 

in the office. And what an amazing historical perspective she 

could offer. She was just very, very supportive and efficient and 

professional in the administrative duties that she had. But more 

importantly, she had some very good advice and very good 

counsel for me personally that I benefited from that she was 

willing to dispense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And she also could offer the lessons of history. She told 

amazing stories, frankly, about how Premier Thatcher operated, 

for example. Some of it’s been accounted in Eisler’s book, if 

people have read that. It’s a good one. But stories like he would 

basically have the budget of the province before him most days 

in a giant ledger and be very much hands-on as both premier 

and treasurer. 

 

And more than the historical context though, Bonnie has a 

unique ability to make sure that those to whom she might be 

offering advice or support keep their perspective and keep their 

context and remember why we’re here in the first place, which 

is to serve the province of Saskatchewan. Hers is a reputation 

for professionalism and sensitivity. She always has a smile to 

offer and a good and kind encouraging word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And were all of those years of service in government not 

enough, she also spent 17 years at CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] in radio and television. I think she was there when 

CBC hired a new young anchorman in Costa Maragos. I’m sure 

Costa would never have thought that Bonnie would be in the 

workforce after Costa had retired, but here we are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so we wanted to introduce Bonnie today, together with 

those that she loves dearly. We love her and we’re going to 

miss her, although hopefully she’s available. I think she has 

even offered if we need some help in PDAP to come back and 

do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Martin Luther King Jr. has a famous quote that’s I 

think fitting for today when he said: 

 

Everybody can be great because anybody can serve. You 

don’t need a college degree to serve. You don’t have to 

make your subject and your verb agree to serve. You only 

need a heart full of grace and a soul full of love, 

committed to love. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is Bonnie Donison, and I just wanted to 

introduce her more formally today to you and through you to all 

members and ask them to help me welcome her to her 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the Premier 

on behalf of the official opposition in welcoming Bonnie to the 

Chamber today, in a building that she is very, very familiar with 

for the many years of service as articulated by the Premier. And 

on behalf of the official opposition we want to add our words of 

thanks, recognizing the different administrations that you’ve 

served in and in more recent years the important work that 

you’ve been doing as well. 

 

I know in speaking with the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, 

he mentioned his appreciation for the help with a number of 

PDAP issues and your role in that. So I want to say to you and 

to your family members, welcome. Thank you for your 

commitment to this province. Thank you for the work that you 

have done, and we wish you all the best in whatever is next for 

you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to join with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 



4422 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

acknowledging Bonnie Donison. Mr. Speaker, I’ve known 

Bonnie for about 15 years now, but especially in the last year 

and a half I’ve had the privilege of being her co-worker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she is patient, as the Premier attested to. She is 

compassionate, and I’ve had many compliments from members 

on both sides of the House about the good work she’s done on 

the PDAP file. Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly going to miss her 

when she retires next month and I just . . . I know all our office 

staff are going to as well and, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 

members of the Assembly to both welcome her to the Assembly 

but to wish her many happy, healthy years in retirement. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with my colleagues 

here in the legislature to offer congratulations to Bonnie 

Donison. And I was trying to calculate the number of years that 

I’ve known Bonnie, but it’s not quite as old as the Premier is, 

but almost. And so I would say between three and four decades 

I’ve known Bonnie. 

 

And all through those years and all the different things that 

she’s done, the one thing that you provide, and I know you’re 

going to do this for the rest of your life, is a big smile, a big 

greeting, and the willingness to ask, well how are you and 

how’s your family. And I know that that characteristic is what 

served you so well as a member of the civil service in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well would 

like to introduce Bonnie Donison and recognize her family, 

Lance, Renae, and Jett. I first met Bonnie Donison many, many 

years ago when she was a reporter with the CBC, and that’s a 

story that we’re not going to tell here today. 

 

And then I got to know her much better after I became elected. 

Bonnie worked for a period of time as a constituency assistant 

in my constituency office in Moose Jaw, near the end of our 

term in opposition, where she was a relentless voice for the 

concerns of the people of Thunder Creek. And after we became 

government in 2007, Bonnie was asked, and appropriately so, to 

come to work for the new government in Regina. I was blessed 

to have Bonnie serve in my office, Enterprise Saskatchewan 

office, as ministerial assistant where she continued to set an 

example as to the way that the public should be treated by 

government. 

 

I’m going to out Bonnie now as a bit of a political partisan too. 

And Bonnie helped greatly in Thunder Creek in election 

campaigns, even managing one. Bonnie has knocked on a lot of 

doors, and she’s very much appreciated by the people of 

Thunder Creek as well as she is by the people around the 

province. Bonnie should give lessons in the proper way for 

government to treat the public. She always treats them with the 

greatest of respect and does everything possible to solve any 

issues that they may have. 

 

Truly a gentle soul, Bonnie has become a great friend to me and 

my wife, Linda, as well as many others in Thunder Creek 

constituency and hundreds of people that she has come in 

contact through her career — probably thousands — around the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

On behalf of the constituency of Thunder Creek and of course 

myself and my wife, Linda, I thank Bonnie for a lifetime of 

service to the province and wish her well in retirement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

my colleagues in paying tribute to Bonnie Donison. And it’s 

nice to see the family here today with Bonnie. I’ve known 

Bonnie for many years, but we did have the opportunity to work 

together in CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing] for 

three years. During that time, Mr. Speaker, we would have the 

odd brainstorming session in my office, which we often called 

policy sessions, and I received an awful lot of sage political 

advice from Bonnie. It was quite often I would hear such words 

as, Mr. Thatcher used to do it this way. And other times, well I 

remember Mr. Thatcher had said this. And so I really took those 

words to heart and I really appreciated it. 

 

On the PDAP file, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about 

that because we know of the catastrophic floods we had in 2010 

and 2011 and more in ’12. We totally revamped the PDAP file 

from end to the other, and a lot of that was in part to Bonnie. As 

you know, Bonnie’s a bit of a softie, and so when somebody 

would have a real issue with PDAP, again in our policy sessions 

Bonnie would say, is there nothing we can do to help these 

people? And that precipitated some of the changes that came 

about in PDAP. So for that I would really, really like to thank 

Bonnie. 

 

I’d like to also just thank her personally for her commitment, 

her support, her dedication to the province of Saskatchewan. 

But most of all I’d really like to thank her for her friendship. 

And I would ask all members to join me in wishing her well in 

her retirement when it does come. So thank you, Bonnie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, we have a school group in 

the west gallery from Collège Mathieu in Gravelbourg. There’s 

seven grade 10 students, social studies political 

decision-making class. And they’re brought here by their 

teacher, Raymond Michaud. And Raymond brings a class to the 

legislature, I believe, every year. So it’s very nice to see the 

group from Gravelbourg here again today. And I’m going to be 

meeting with them right after question period, and so I’ll have a 

chance to meet all of the students personally and answer some 

questions. So I’d ask all members to please welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I have 

the honour of introducing a couple of groups here today that 

have joined us in their legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is the annual National Day of 

Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. The 

day commemorates the 1989 murders of 14 female engineering 

students at École Polytechnique in Montreal. It was a senseless 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4423 

act of gender-based violence that still shocks us 24 years later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those young women were targeted and attacked 

primarily because they were women studying in a 

male-dominated industry, and that’s why I’m so delighted today 

to welcome our guests in the gallery. They are all either 

working in the field of engineering or studying to become 

engineers in our province. They demonstrate our commitment 

as a society to overcome the events of December the 9th, 1989, 

and to recognize the rights of anyone, including women and 

children, to pursue any career that they choose in the country. 

 

Joining us in the gallery today — and I ask them to give us a 

wave — is a professor of engineering from the U of R 

[University of Regina], Dena McMartin. We have U of R 

engineering students, Tracey Ozipko, Demi Wiens, Iyonia 

Rabayaa, Sarah Ali, Rabiya Adulkadir. And working in 

Saskatchewan we have Enisa Zanacic, Jasmine Wang, Margaret 

Hodges, Ian Sloman, and Bob McDonald. And with them is Pat 

Faulconbridge from the Status of Women. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

really would ask everyone to help me and welcome these 

outstanding citizens to our Assembly today. 

 

I also have another group of people that are very important to 

all of us in the province. We have groups from the Salvation 

Army. I know that we all walked in to the sound of music 

today, and I think the members should know that the band’s 

name — and I love the name — is actually Bandits. So with 

them today is Major Mike Hoeft who is the area commander 

from Prairie West. And I met Mike when we were walking a 

mile in red shoes in Melfort this summer. We also have Major 

Doug and Joanne Binner, corps officers from the Haven of 

Hope Ministries in downtown Regina. 

 

The Salvation Army responds to the needs of the people of 

Saskatchewan in the form of shelter for homeless men, 

cold-weather shelters, battered women’s homes, feeding groups, 

and the list goes on. But right now on our minds at this time of 

the year is Christmas. Last year at Christmas of 2012, there was 

9,073 adults and more than 15,500 children and teens were 

helped by the Salvation Army’s different programs such as food 

hampers and toys for children, equalling $339,823. And this 

year we anticipate the need is going to be great as well. So in 

the spirit of Christmas, I urge everyone to donate. So I’d like to 

welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

And last but not least, I want to introduce Brenda Szala, Allison 

Szeles, and Ivana Vuckovic from the Ministry of Social 

Services who are also with us today. And while I’m on my feet, 

thank you, Bonnie, for everything you’ve done for us. You’re a 

good friend. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased on 

behalf of the official opposition to welcome the delegation here 

for the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 

Against Women — Professor Dena McMartin, of course Pat 

Faulconbridge from the Status of Women office, and all of the 

fine engineering students and engineers who are doing their part 

to fight against all forms of violence against women by living 

your lives and pursuing careers that you should be able to 

pursue. 

 

So we appreciate all that you do to ensure that gender-based 

violence will someday be a thing of the past. So thank you and 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly. And to the engineering 

students, best of luck, best wishes for your career going 

forward. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, although he’s 

been recognized, I would like to just introduce and welcome 

Bob McDonald. He’s a dear friend. 

 

As many will know here, he works with APEGS [Association 

of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan]. 

He’s an engineer, a lawyer. He’s a historian. But he has worked 

tirelessly to make sure that Saskatchewan communities are 

increasingly inclusive. And with that same spirit, he’s worked 

tirelessly with engineers and geoscientists across Saskatchewan 

to ensure that that profession is increasingly inclusive. And so 

Bob’s presence here today doesn’t surprise us, but it just 

reminds us of the importance of his work. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d ask all members to help welcome Bob to his Assembly. 

 

And we just want to as well offer to Bonnie our sincere thanks 

for your wonderful service and friendship. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to join in in 

welcoming Mr. Bob McDonald and Margaret Hodges and the 

whole team and Dena McMartin from the engineering. But 

especially Bob McDonald because he is that special person 

that’s both an engineer and a lawyer, and he uses those skills to 

deal with many, many issues. And Bob, we thank you very 

much for all of the work that you do for the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I also want to 

introduce Mr. Grant Schmidt who is sitting behind us here on 

the floor. Mr. Grant Schmidt is the former member from 

Melville, former minister in the Grant Devine government, and 

we welcome him here today to be part of the proceedings. He 

did many interesting things over the years in his roles as a 

minister, and he also is a lawyer who I’ve dealt with on many 

files over many years as a lawyer. But welcome to the 

Assembly, Grant. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the minister in her earlier welcome to the officers from the 

Salvation Army and thank them for the music that was played 

before the sitting this morning, but more importantly to thank 

them for the important work that they do throughout the year in 

communities throughout the province. And as we are in the 

kettle campaign now, when we go to malls and shopping 

centres, I encourage all people in the province to give 

generously at this time of year. 

 



4424 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

And I also, Mr. Speaker, would like to say a couple of words. 

Throughout the sitting we have many guests that come to the 

Assembly. Some come once and some come more often. And 

one group that comes all the time, Mr. Speaker, are the 

representatives from the House of Prayer. And they never want 

recognition or to be identified perhaps, but on behalf of the 

official opposition, we do thank them for their presence here in 

the Assembly, their faithful presence, and their prayers for all of 

us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member from Regina Lakeview in welcoming Grant 

Schmidt to the Chamber today. I first met Mr. Schmidt during 

the 1980s, and he was my boss when he served as minister of 

Social Services and I was working at Legal Aid. Mr. Schmidt 

made a strong contribution to the province during that period of 

time, and I would like to welcome him to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join in with the Minister of Social Services and the Leader of 

the Opposition in welcoming the folks from the Salvation Army 

and also the folks from Social Services and the good work they 

do. 

 

But I do want to pay special attention to a couple of friends 

from the Salvation Army, Major Doug Binner and his wife, 

Joanne. I have to tell you, Doug and I went to school together, 

and actually he grew up in Parkbeg. Of course we’ve been 

talking a lot about Parkbeg and Gainer the Gopher, but Doug 

would know Gainer personally. But Doug and I went to school 

in Mortlach, Saskatchewan. So welcome, Doug, and I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them to our school . . . or our 

Chamber. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

welcome to you and through you and introduce to you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly, a group seated in 

the east gallery. I’m speaking of the group of English as 

additional language students with the Regina Open Door 

Society that are here today with their teacher, Deana Pageot, an 

old colleague of the member from Regina Douglas Park once 

upon a time, I understand, and mother of an old friend of mine. 

And so it’s good to see Deana Pageot here in her legislature. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, these 14 students come to us from 

Bangladesh, Pakistan, India, and Vietnam. And we had a 

chance to visit and had a chance to reflect on the fact that the 

slogan of Saskatchewan is Multis e gentibus vires, “from many 

peoples, strength.” And certainly these individuals here at their 

Legislative Assembly are that strength that is the promise of our 

motto. So it’s really good to see them here today. Welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to join with the member opposite in welcoming the Regina 

Open Door Society. The open door societies across 

Saskatchewan are usually the first point of contact for people 

coming from around the world to call Saskatchewan home. 

We’re very proud of our connection with the Open Door 

Society and our ongoing projects with them. The Open Door 

Society is an absolute fabulous organization that just welcomes 

anybody, no judgment, just be able to bring them into 

Saskatchewan and call Saskatchewan home. 

 

So thank you very much. I can’t see you up there, but thank you 

very much for what you’re doing on behalf of all the new 

people calling Saskatchewan home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

present a petition in support of anti-bullying initiatives. And we 

know that bullying causes serious harm and that consequences 

of bullying are devastating, including depression, self-harm, 

and addictions and suicide. And other provinces have brought 

forward legislation and various tools and programs to show 

swift and effective government action. And we know it’s a 

human rights issue, one of safety and inclusion. I’d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives 

of young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the risky, costly P3 [public–private 

partnership] scheme of this government. They reference a lack 

of accountability and transparency to this scheme, the fact that 

this government has been unwilling to expose any daylight to 

the plan or provide the answers and facts that people deserve. 

And certainly they’re concerned by the added cost, the 

forfeiture of control, and the needless delay. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to use the traditional build model rather than a P3 

privatization model to build new schools for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents in 

Regina. I so submit. 

 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4425 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

because the leaders and residents of northern Saskatchewan are 

concerned about the seniors’ care in the North. The Croft report 

of 2009 showed a serious shortage of long-term care beds for 

seniors, and the problem has only gotten worse. Seniors have 

done their part for this province and it’s time for the 

government to do their part. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to treat northern Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens with respect and dignity and immediately invest in 

a long-term care facility in the La Ronge area. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. The petitioners draw attention to the 

fact that the gym at Sacred Heart Community School in north 

central Regina is now quite literally falling apart, has been 

closed indefinitely, and is no longer safe for students or staff. 

 

They point out that the school and the community have raised 

the issue with the Sask Party provincial government since 2007 

without resolution. There is a temporary solution in place, Mr. 

Speaker, with the refurbishment of the old sanctuary at the old 

Sacred Heart community church, but certainly the students and 

staff and community are calling for a permanent solution. 

 

They point out as well that the Sacred Heart Community School 

is the largest school in north central Regina with 450-plus 

students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. They 

point out that enrolment has increased by 100 students over the 

past four years and that attendance and learning outcomes are 

steadily improving, and they point out that as a matter of basic 

fairness and common sense, Sacred Heart Community School 

needs a gym. In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to 

immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 

at Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 

Against Women 

 

Mr. McCall: — Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, Nathalie 

Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, Maud 

Haviernick, Maryse Laganière, Maryse Leclair, Anne-Marie 

Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie St-Arneault, 

Annie Turcotte, and Barbara Klucznik-Widajewicz. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the names of the 14 women that were 

murdered on December 6th, 1989 at École Polytechnique in 

Montreal. Tomorrow is the National Day of Remembrance and 

Action on Violence Against Women. It provides an opportunity 

to remember these women as well as many others who have 

been violated, hurt, or murdered because of their gender, 

because they were women. 

 

Even though it has been 24 years since this tragic demonstration 

of misogyny, Canada is still not a safe place for all women, and 

almost half of Canadian women will face gender-based violence 

in their lives. And we are also aware, Mr. Speaker, much of this 

is rooted in a deep-seated pattern of racist violence. The count 

of missing and murdered Aboriginal women in our country is 

staggering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe it to those 14 women to use this day to 

reflect on today’s realities, to do our part to end violence 

against women that still occurs. It is important to not only 

mourn and reflect, but to use these important days as a call to 

action. Initiatives like the white ribbon campaign aim to curb 

the patterns of violence that impact so many women, and 

recognize the role that men must play to end violence against 

women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to recognize 

those women we have lost and to remember the lessons that we 

must learn if we are to move forward. We must show that we do 

not tolerate violence of women and will stand up to make it a 

thing of the past. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to remind 

all members that tomorrow is the International Day of 

Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. Each 

year on December 6th, Canadians mark the anniversary of the 

murders of 14 female engineering students at l’École 

Polytechnique in Montreal in 1989. It was and still is an act of 

gender-based violence that shocked the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that violence against women and girls 

continues to happen in every region, every country, every 

culture. Saskatchewan women and girls have the right to live in 

safety. That’s why our government supports many programs 

and services delivered by community-based organizations that 

help people experiencing interpersonal violence. In this fiscal 

year we are investing $28 million in 81 agencies supporting 

women at risk of violence, and another $11.8 million in sexual 

assault programs and services. 

 

Today my colleagues and I are wearing white ribbons as a 

symbol of our pledge to work towards a future without violence 

against women and girls. I ask that we also take some time 

today to remember the women who live daily with the threat of 

violence, and commit ourselves to helping them whenever we 

can. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



4426 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Christmas Greetings 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, these days it’s easy to get caught 

up in the hustle and bustle of the Christmas season. For some, I 

know the holidays can be a busy and stressful time, but I hope 

everyone in Saskatchewan can take some time to focus on what 

matters the most and to enjoy the true meaning of this holiday 

season and the values that Saskatchewan people are known for: 

generosity, kindness, and selflessness. 

 

Saskatchewan has a rich and diverse heritage where we all 

celebrate the holidays in different ways. For many of us, this is 

a time to celebrate the birth of Christ and his incredible message 

of peace, love, and redemption. My family and I will be 

celebrating Christmas in the same way our parents and 

grandparents did in our Norwegian tradition. I know the same is 

true for the Leader of the Opposition and his family. And I 

know many others will also be embracing their heritage during 

the holiday season. 

 

However they celebrate the season, I hope it’s a good one for all 

Saskatchewan families, and on behalf of the official opposition 

I wish them a very Merry Christmas. May it be a time of 

thankful reflection on the past year and hopeful expectation for 

a positive, prosperous, and peaceful new year. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

International Volunteer Day 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, December 

the 5th, is International Volunteer Day in Canada and around 

the world. Recognized by the United Nations since 1985, this 

day was declared to thank all volunteers for their efforts and to 

increase the public’s awareness on volunteers’ contributions to 

society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government values the commitment of the 

many volunteers of our own province, along with the millions 

who generously give their time worldwide. Every day across 

this great province, we see volunteers donating their valuable 

time at schools, in their communities, and to organizations such 

as Big Brothers, Big Sisters, and Habitat for Humanity. Mr. 

Speaker, their tireless work and priceless contributions, in 

collaboration with not-for-profit organizations, support the 

well-being of individuals, families, and communities and help 

create a stronger Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing volunteers in this province, but also across the 

country and around the world, who devote their talents, skills, 

and resources to helping others in communities across the 

globe. Those who choose to volunteer make a valuable 

contribution to society and help their communities and this 

province to continue to move forward. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

Christmas Greetings 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, signs of 

the Christmas season are all around us. We admire the brightly 

lit up homes dotting our provincial landscape. We observe 

consumers crowding the malls looking for those special gifts. 

Christmas music is heard throughout the malls, including our 

legislative rotunda, and community carol festivals are being 

performed across our province. 

 

The message of the angel 2,000 years ago to the shepherds on 

the Judean hillside was: “Don’t be afraid. I bring you good 

news of great joy that will be for all people. Today in the town 

of David a Saviour has been born to you. He is Christ the 

Lord.” Mr. Speaker, this message has reverberated throughout 

the ages. 

 

This is truly a joyful time of the year. We all look forward to 

the gathering of family and friends and the opening of gifts. We 

enjoy the aroma coming out of the kitchen as we look forward 

to savouring the Christmas meal. The beauty of the Christmas 

season can remind us all of the beauty in the life that we often 

take for granted — our family, our friends, and our faith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan Party caucus extends our best 

wishes for this Christmas season. Please drive carefully as you 

travel during the holidays. Merry Christmas and have a blessed 

New Year. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Rhodes Scholar from Indian Head 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Rhodes Scholarship is the oldest and perhaps the 

most prestigious international graduate scholarship in the world. 

Each year 83 students from all over the world are selected to 

receive this honour. Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to share with 

the Assembly today that one of the 11 outstanding Canadians to 

earn this honour this year is a former constituent of mine, 

Jonathan Pedde. 

 

Jonathan lived on a farm east of Indian Head before attending 

high school at Luther College here in Regina. Before he left to 

study economics, math, and engineering at Dartmouth College 

in New Hampshire, Jonathan was already a licensed pilot for 

the Royal Canadian Air Cadets in Squadron 691, Hawk 

Squadron. But it was volunteer work in Africa and India 

through The Sharing Way, a relief development organization, 

that shaped his worldwide view. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once at Oxford, Jonathan plans on pursuing his 

master’s in economics. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join 

me in congratulating Mr. Jonathan Pedde on receiving this 

prestigious Rhodes Scholarship. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4427 

Government Response to Layoffs 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The layoffs of potash 

workers announced this week, Mr. Speaker, were devastating. 

The Premier said on Tuesday: “We will be immediately 

dispatching our rapid response teams to provide support and 

explore other opportunities in other sectors.” Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve learned from potash workers that most of them haven’t 

heard a thing about these rapid response teams. And the Premier 

told the media yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that he thinks the rapid 

response teams have simply called the management of 

PotashCorp. 

 

To the Premier: what did he mean when he said he was 

immediately dispatching rapid response teams? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the rapid response team 

within the Ministry of the Economy are teams this government 

has developed to respond to those occasions where there are 

layoffs. And we’ve seen them in the past, Mr. Speaker, be it 

with respect to the Sears announcement or the plant in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

What happens, Mr. Speaker, is ministry officials contact first 

the company to make arrangements that are coordinated with 

the company because obviously the companies themselves are 

dealing with severance and trying to, we would expect, assist 

employees. Mr. Speaker, then what happens is — and as the 

Minister of the Economy has pointed out, we don’t know the 

individual employees affected, frankly, by the layoffs — so that 

initial contact is made and then, where necessary and where 

requested, meetings are established and set up with the 

employees. 

 

This process does not happen overnight, but the teams 

themselves are dispatched. The action is caused immediately 

and the meetings with employees for assistance happens 

subsequently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can also tell you that with respect to this 

question, we’ve also been coordinating with employers like the 

city of Regina who’ve indicated a demand for those who have 

the same sorts of skills of those who have been laid off as a 

result of the potash announcement. The same is true as well for 

SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. Saskjobs.ca, the website was 

immediately tagged so that the folks who are accessing it in the 

wake of the announcement can be better served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what I meant when I indicated that these 

teams would be dispatched, the process would be initiated. And 

that is exactly what has happened. And what’s going to 

continue to happen, Mr. Speaker, beyond just working with the 

employees in terms of the rapid response team, we’re actually 

identifying other employers across the country who are saying 

we’ve got a job for these folks. And we’ll make sure they have 

that information. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, immediately dispatching rapid 

response teams suggests something more than simply placing a 

phone call to the management of PotashCorp. Immediately 

dispatching, Mr. Speaker, were the Premier’s words. 

 

My question to the Premier: of the 440 laid-off workers, how 

many have been contacted and how many have been offered 

assistance by the rapid response teams? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 

There are a number of locations where there will be dislocated, 

laid-off employees as a result of this announcement by the 

Potash Corporation, and so that’s why the calls are made, to the 

member who asked the question. We need to determine the 

location. We need to determine who has been affected, and then 

we move to meetings. And meetings will be established and 

assistance will be provided. 

 

So I’m not sure about the line of questioning. I think it’s fair to 

say that we want to ensure that we are as responsive as we 

possibly can be. But in order to do that, we need to know which 

employees at what locations are affected and who they are. And 

then when we know that, meetings can be arranged. And my 

understanding from the Minister of the Economy is that those 

meetings are being organized. Employees can expect to hear 

from the rapid response team in terms of the meetings beyond 

what we’ve already done in terms of contacting the company. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a habit of 

coming up with a snappy catchphrase that sounds good, Mr. 

Speaker, but doesn’t actually deliver for Saskatchewan families. 

The title of the government’s news release proudly proclaim, 

“Rapid response teams will assist workers affected by layoffs.” 

But the union president said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that 

nothing has really happened on this front. 

 

My question to the Premier: why didn’t any real action follow 

up after the boastful news release? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Isn’t it interesting that the author of the 

phrase smart growth, without anything to back it up, that the 

author of eggs in baskets as the sort of economic theory of the 

NDP [New Democratic Party], would talk about buzzwords? 

 

Here’s the difference. This is serious. Here’s the difference. 

Since 2009, since 2009 this government has established a rapid 

response team. And by the way, Mr. Speaker, the women and 

men who work on this team, they take their jobs pretty 

seriously. And when there is a dislocation, whether it was in 

Moose Jaw at a plant, whether it was with respect to Sears, 

whatever the layoffs have been since they were established 

many, many years ago, they take their work very seriously. And 

as soon as they have the information that they need — i.e., who 

are the employees affected, where are they affected, what could 

possibly be offered in terms of transition — the meetings 

happen. 

 

In the meantime, the press release is issued because the rapid 

response team is dispatched in an event like this. Immediately, 



4428 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

that first contact is made. We can get into all the specifics of 

how this works. I’m happy to do that. But you know, the Leader 

of the Opposition probably owes the people that are on this 

rapid response team a little bit more respect. They’re not a 

cliché. They’re not a buzzword. They’re here to help the 

workers, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve been doing it since 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Provincial Auditor’s Report 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s extremely rare in 

both the public and the private sector for an auditor to issue an 

adverse audit opinion. Yet yesterday, Mr. Speaker, for the first 

time in our province’s history, the Provincial Auditor refused to 

endorse this government’s financial statements. My question is 

for the Premier: does he accept the auditor’s scathing criticism, 

or does he stubbornly dismiss it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again the premise 

of the member’s question is certainly incomplete if not 

inaccurate. Because here’s what the auditor said about the 

summary financial statements of the province of Saskatchewan: 

“We are pleased to report . . .” This is a quote from the auditor. 

“We are pleased to report that we have issued an ‘unqualified’ 

audit report on these financial statements.” She is referencing 

summary financial statements. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have called for us to report on 

summary financial statements. The auditor has called for us to 

report on summary financial statements. The auditor has now 

confirmed that there is an unqualified opinion as to the accuracy 

of the summary financial statements, and moreover that last 

year the surplus in summary financial for the Government of 

Saskatchewan was $37.5 million and this year, at mid year, the 

summary surplus is $467 million. 

 

And the question to the Leader of the Opposition of the NDP is 

this: do they agree with the auditor that the summary financial 

statements of the province are unqualified and are in a surplus 

position? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, some pretty strong attempts by 

the Premier there for deflection on the issue of receiving an 

adverse audit opinion, something that’s unheard of in 

Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier can engage in his rhetoric on this 

issue if he wants, but this is the Provincial Auditor. This is the 

independent officer of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

who refused to endorse the government’s financial statements. 

The auditor said the government General Revenue Fund 

financial statements were “full of errors” and “not reliable.” Yet 

the Finance minister yesterday, Mr. Speaker, simply said, well 

please just trust us on this. 

 

To the Premier: how can Saskatchewan people possibly trust a 

government whose financial statements are proven to be full of 

errors and not reliable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Does the Leader of the Opposition agree 

with the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, when the Provincial 

Auditor says, “We are pleased to report that we have issued an 

‘unqualified’ audit report on these financial statements”? Does 

he agree that those summary financial statements show last 

year’s budget in a $35.7 million surplus? Does he agree that this 

year’s budget under those summary financial statements, which 

we reported, Mr. Speaker, as well as GRF [General Revenue 

Fund], are in a surplus position of $467 million? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s mentor, Pat 

Atkinson, talked about this particular issue. Here’s what she 

said, just in May of 2011. She said: 

 

The NDP held the very same position as the Saskatchewan 

Party does now [that there is a place for the General 

Revenue Fund and summary financial statements, that’s 

what she was alluding to] and we held that position for 

five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they probably held it because it reports on the 

operating fund and it reports on the summary financial basis. 

It’s an unqualified report from the auditor on this province’s 

summary financial statements, an unqualified report on another 

surplus budget in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the adverse audit opinion is the 

first time ever an auditor has issued that in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I don’t think the Premier understands the 

seriousness and the gravity of the situation, of this opinion 

coming from the auditor. The government claimed that there 

was a surplus of about $60 million at the end of last fiscal year, 

but the Provincial Auditor says that the truth is that this 

government ran a deficit of close to $600 million. 

 

For the first time ever, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 

refused to endorse this government’s financial statements. So 

the first time ever in our province’s history, the Provincial 

Auditor issued an adverse opinion and warned legislators and 

the public that “. . . much of the information included in the 

GRF 2013 financial statements is wrong . . .” 

 

My question to the Premier: how many more adverse opinions 

will this government have to receive before it stops inserting 

inaccurate spin into its financial statements? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you can ask the same question 

over and over again. He might want to answer a question. They 

want us to budget and report on a summary basis. That’s what 

they want. They want us to report on a summary basis. The 

auditor wants us to report focused on a summary basis. 

 

On a summary financial basis, this province of Saskatchewan 

has received an unqualified audit from that Provincial Auditor. 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4429 

That is the fact of the matter. I’ve already read the quote, and 

the surplus is a $35 million surplus last year and a $460 million 

surplus . . . And the member from Lakeview’s waving it away. 

Well you can’t have it both ways. You can’t say budget on a 

summary financial basis and then when the auditor says the 

summaries are actually unqualified and right and accurate and 

there’s a surplus, you can’t sort of just change the game then 

and focus only on one thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I hope there’ll be another question because 

the auditor made some comments yesterday in the media about 

the operating fund being a management tool, but how we should 

focus more on the summary financial statements. I think that’s 

something we’re going to look at, Mr. Speaker. We don’t think 

that’s unreasonable that we would feature summary financial 

statements potentially, but also make sure the province 

understands that on an operating account basis this government 

is ensuring that the money coming in is matched and balanced 

with the money going out. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Emergency Medical Services 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, can the Health minister provide 

a guarantee that the Pasqua ER [emergency room] will remain 

open beyond December 15th? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Great news. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we can. 

Some very good news today. I’ve just been informed by the 

Health minister, and there is a release that’s going to be issued 

immediately, that all the shifts have been filled in terms of 

Pasqua ER through until the end of December. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that — even separate from 

the challenges around supply of ER docs that have, you know, 

that have caused certainly issues at Pasqua — Christmas, the 

month of December is actually a traditionally very difficult time 

on the shifting side. So we credit the region. We credit the ER 

docs, those who have been involved in the decision. We also 

credit the ministry and the Minister of Health for their work on 

this file. The Pasqua will remain open until the end of 

December. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the best indicator of future 

behaviour is past behaviour and this government’s record on 

health care services is concerning. So it’s no wonder 

Saskatchewan families aren’t sure they can trust this 

government to keep the Pasqua ER open. 

 

The Wolseley hospital has been shut down for five months. The 

government claims it’s temporary, but local residents no longer 

believe that. And it’s not just Wolseley that is experiencing 

reduced health care services under this government. The 

emergency rooms in Big River, Central Butte, Coronach, 

Spiritwood, and Wakaw are all still closed. After two years of 

waiting, local residents don’t believe the government anymore 

when it says these closures are just temporary. 

 

To the minister: when will this government admit it has no plan 

to reopen these rural ERs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I note 

the Minister of Rural and Remote Health has met even very 

recently, as of the 2nd of this month of December, with those 

from the community involved with respect to the Wolseley 

situation. We’re not going to admit that because it’s simply, 

what the member is asserting, because it’s not true, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I remember not very long ago the NDP sent out a press release 

decrying the closure of the Shellbrook hospital. And then I 

remember being up there a week later with the minister and the 

member when we opened up a brand new hospital, of course, 

that had been open for some time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is about recruiting more doctors 

to the province: 300 more are practising, 1,000 more nurses, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re about investing in health care capital. We 

do have a plan for doctor recruitment, Mr. Speaker. We have a 

plan for the Wolseley hospital that the minister’s been working 

on. And we have every expectation that that particular hospital 

and other situations are going to be rectified by the long-term 

planning and vision of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, health care service reductions 

are happening all over this province under this government. For 

months Wadena and Wynyard have alternated emergency 

services each week, leaving residents to remember which ER to 

race to in the event of an emergency. 

 

The ER in Gull Lake was shut for 36 hours this week, will be 

closed this weekend, and it will also be closed over Christmas. 

The ER in Cabri is closed every weekend in December and also 

every evening from 5 p.m. until 9 a.m. And Big River, Central 

Butte, Coronach, Spiritwood and Wakaw have all been closed 

for two years. 

 

To the minister: how many other hospitals have reduced 

services, and when will this government admit these closures 

really aren’t temporary? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the surest way we can avoid 

any interruptions at all in service in rural Saskatchewan or 

frankly in any other . . . in urban Saskatchewan, in northern 

Saskatchewan is to ensure that we have a proper complement of 

staff: that we have enough doctors practising and available, that 

we have enough nurses here in the province. And as the 

members of this House will know, we inherited a situation 

where we were between 800 and 1,000 nurses short just in 

2007. We now have 1,000 more nurses from that day practising. 

We have 300 more doctors, Mr. Speaker. In long-term care 

we’ve seen significant increases, increases in staff working and 



4430 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

supporting those who need it. 

 

With respect to what’s going on in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, this government has a vision where we want to ensure 

that the proper scope of practice is applied to keep rural 

facilities open. That means the greater deployment of nurse 

practitioners in co-operation with doctors, including RNs 

[registered nurses] as well. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re very 

pleased to note that the CEC [collaborative emergency centre], 

the new collaborative model that recognizes that scope of 

practice, that provides that service, is open and providing 

service in Maidstone, one to open in Shaunavon. The Throne 

Speech highlighted a number of others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think rural Saskatchewan and those communities 

are encouraged by this development. It speaks to the innovation 

we’re going to bring to ensure that rural Saskatchewan gets the 

health care that it deserves. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Classroom Size and Support for Education 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

government seems confused about the definitions of minimum 

and maximum. When it comes to minimum care standards in 

seniors’ care, the government seems to say that minimum 

standards would limit care, as if a minimum standard somehow 

acts as a maximum. 

 

And when we would push for caps in class sizes, the 

government has said a cap would mean school divisions 

couldn’t respond to the challenges related to the composition of 

those classes, like increased needs for support for English as an 

additional language. That’s nonsense. A cap would just specify 

the maximum number of students in each classroom. It would 

simply mean an end to overcrowded classrooms. 

 

To the minister: has he heard enough about the negative effects 

of overcrowding yet, or is he still just ready for more strange 

excuses about why he won’t implement a cap on classroom 

sizes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, our government has provided $266 

million for support for learning, an increase of over 4 per cent 

from the previous year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member specifically raised the issue of 

English as an additional language. Mr. Speaker, I can advise 

that, because of the increase in growth in our population of 

100,000, a lot of those people came from other countries, and 

supports for English as an additional language is something 

that’s important. And we have in fact increased the number of 

EAL [English as an additional language] teachers by 15 per 

cent since the previous year. Mr. Speaker, we’re proud of that 

record. And we will watch and monitor the immigrant 

population coming into our province and, where required, we 

will provide those supports. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this is what’s happening in 

Manitoba. Manitoba is phasing in a cap on class sizes, and it’s 

added 130 teachers this year as it works towards a full 

implementation of that cap. But here in Saskatchewan we know 

that a number of teachers has not even kept pace with the 

increase of the number of students. And that’s simply not 

acceptable, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: why do other 

jurisdictions recognize the importance of having smaller class 

sizes, but this government doesn’t? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, an easy answer for us to 

give would be to say that it’s not the number of students that are 

in the classroom, but it’s the composition that matters. And 

while that may be important, I can advise the member opposite 

that we’ve looked carefully at EAL. We’ve looked at special 

supports. We’ve increased this by approximately 266, $267 

million last year. 

 

But if we want to talk numbers, the most recent provincial data 

reports an average class size of 17.9, which is down from the 

2007-2008 number of 18.1. There are certainly exceptions . . . 

[inaudible] . . . there are pressures. We’re working to address 

those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite that Saskatoon 

Catholic was hiring 24 more teachers this year. Saskatoon 

Public was authorized to hire 36 more teachers this year. Mr. 

Speaker, the bottom line in our government is that there are 

more students. There are more teachers. That will continue to 

grow. It is something that we make no apologies for, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re moving forward. There’s more work to do. But, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s getting better, not worse. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Children in Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a few 

fundamental responsibilities of a government. One is to provide 

accurate information about the public’s finances. Another 

fundamental responsibility of government is to do everything 

that it can to protect our most vulnerable citizens. We keep 

hearing concerns, Mr. Speaker, about their child protection 

system. 

 

In recent months, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard of another tragic 

death of a foster child, the fifth child in care to die under 

suspicious or criminal circumstances in just the last several 

years. And just yesterday the Provincial Auditor reported that 

the government is still not doing enough to protect vulnerable 

little ones. My question to the Premier: does he accept the 

auditor’s judgment, or does he dismiss it? 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Fewer children in care is the answer. Mr. 

Speaker, that is an important measure of a government, is how 

that society, when the government is obviously in operation, 

treats those who are most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. And actually 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4431 

it’s an important measure for us. It has been whether it’s 

children in care, whether it’s the disabled community in this 

province, whether it’s seniors or those who are on . . . those 

who have low income, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, we can inform the House again that child welfare 

caseloads are down by 20 per cent over the last four years. I 

would point that out. I would point out that the number of 

front-line child care protection workers is up over 90, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The auditor has highlighted ongoing concerns. We share those 

concerns. We understand and this Minister of Social Services 

understands that we need to continually strive to do better 

because we’re talking about our kids in this province and those 

who need the help of government more than any other. And 

that’s why we have deployed more resources. That’s why we 

see less children in care. It’s why even caseloads are down, but, 

Mr. Speaker, as long as there is one, work must continue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to the words that the 

Premier provides about more resources, we’ve heard from the 

Children’s Advocate a very different scenario, a very different 

situation and concerns. 

 

My question in the previous question, Mr. Speaker, was 

whether or not this Premier accepts the judgment of the auditor 

or whether he dismisses it. And saying that more resources are 

provided, Mr. Speaker, to me would suggest that he’s 

dismissing the concerns. 

 

We know the Children’s Advocate said cutbacks at the Ministry 

of Social Services means the management of cases is not what it 

should be. And the Children’s Advocate has drawn a direct 

correlation between the deaths of children in care and 

non-compliance with ministry policy. In reference to the deaths 

he said, “These cases shared common themes regarding 

non-compliance with Ministry of Social Services policy in the 

areas of risk assessment, child protection investigations, and 

case management.” 

 

And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor said, “The 

ministry has not yet achieved an acceptable level of compliance 

with its established standards, both at First Nations agencies 

and in its own service areas.” 

 

My question to the Premier: in light of the words from the 

Children’s Advocate, in light of words from the auditor, why 

has this not occurred? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a premise to 

this question again that I simply can’t agree with. The Leader of 

the Opposition would have people watching believe there’s 

been inaction. It’s just not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Since our government took over, we’ve seen increased funding 

to child and family services by over $104 million, Mr. Speaker, 

despite the fact that there’s a declining number of children in 

care. We have announced over $8 million lift even this 

December for front-line workers, 4,000 to $6,000 per year lift; 

invested 53.7 million in the last three child and youth agenda 

budgets; 90 additional child protection workers, Mr. Speaker. 

This speaks to a government that’s acting. 

 

It’s also speaking to a government that will listen when others 

are pointing out different things we can do. We are interested in 

specific ideas that the Leader of the Opposition might have that 

we’re not doing, frankly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also under the understanding that in order 

for us to afford these increases in resources in this province, in 

order for us to ensure quality of life for those who are 

vulnerable, for better education or health care, we’re going to 

need an ongoing strong economy in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And that gives me the greatest hope of all that 

we can continue to make progress because our economy is 

growing, Mr. Speaker, in ways that we haven’t seen it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think we need to ensure that the elements of 

our growth plan are continuing in Saskatchewan so that we can 

see that growth continue so that we can provide the very best 

quality of life for all the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 216 to 222. 

 

The Speaker: — Would the member please repeat that so we 

can hear. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 216 to 222. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

216 to 222. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Investment in Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure today, on our last day of this sitting, to be up today to 

speak about this very important issue that the people of this 

province, and more so I can say my actual family, is having the 

great privilege of experiencing under this government. 

 

Because as everyone in the House knows, and the public that 

watches and listens to me, whenever I get a chance to brag 

about them, my two girls Alyssa and Mackenzie who are 

currently students, University of Saskatchewan: second year for 

Alyssa, first year for Mackenzie. And I’m very proud to say of 

course that my wife and I both graduated from the University of 

Saskatchewan as well. So one of us was on the dean’s honour 



4432 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

roll; one was not. I won’t tell you who was which one, but I 

think everyone can understand that one pretty quickly. 

 

But it’s today’s debate that is important to me as a father, and 

not just as a politician. Because at the close of my comments, 

I’ll move a motion that talks about the actions of this 

government, the investments of this government, into 

post-secondary education. 

 

Now I talked about the University of Saskatchewan. I also want 

to talk about SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] and the other levels of post-secondary 

education as well, which my other colleagues will do when they 

get up to speak, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One thing that’s really important here is that I find that as a 

government since 2007, the ministers who’ve been in charge of 

this particular file have worked hand in hand with their partners 

in the academic institutions. And I want to give especially the 

thanks to the officials in the ministry who have recognized over 

the years serious shortfalls in planning for the future. One thing 

this government takes a lot of pride in, Mr. Speaker, is that we 

have had a growth agenda. We have a plan for that growth 

moving forward, and we rely greatly on the academic 

institutions in this province to train our children, our youth, in 

some cases maybe some adults, to get ready for the workforce. 

 

In this case I can speak about my daughters, specifically that 

within the College of Arts and Science they’re finding some 

great challenges in the academic endeavours they’re 

undertaking, but they’re loving the learning opportunities that 

are provided by the professors there. And their friends are also 

experiencing the same kind of challenge, but the same kind of 

experience as a lot of us did by going to university. We had a 

lot of fun in university, but we had the challenge of opening up 

our minds to new thoughts, new endeavours, and new research, 

and new opportunities for our future. 

 

That’s one thing that we can’t lose sight of, Mr. Speaker, is this 

government has always wanted to work towards a mandate of 

leaving what we have today better for the future. And every day 

we walk out of this House, we on this side believe firmly that 

our actions relay that to the public in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we do not legislate and change the law for the 

sake of merely changing the name of a law or to have fanfare 

around legislation. We do these things in concert with 

consultation with the ministry officials and those in institutions 

that rely on change to adapt as well to the growth that’s 

happening in this province.  

 

And what I found very concerning in regards to this most recent 

legislative change the minister has put forward in regards to Bill 

118, we talk about changing SIAST into a polytechnical 

institution, a learning realm that is something new in this 

province. Because what it does, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’ll be 

honest. I’ve had some chance to look at some of the proposals 

of the minister and his staff, how this is going to change.  

 

One thing we’re recognizing in this province, Mr. Speaker, is 

that for years, too many years, institutions and the academia and 

the working public, the corporate partners in this province 

always seem to have the best intentions of the province in mind 

and the future. But one thing that we started to see, Mr. 

Speaker, is that there was a need for more research. And we 

were training students in the academic institutions, especially 

SIAST, that were hands-on technical training to get them ready 

for the workforce in the community. 

 

And in cases now, Mr. Speaker, what we’re finding is that as 

we’re seeing corporate Saskatchewan expand and opportunities 

develop for our future generations, those same employers, those 

same corporate entities would like to expand and look at 

research on how applied research can help them and assist them 

in their bottom line. Input costs can be reduced means more 

labour can be hired. More profits isn’t a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, 

because they reinvest again into the community and this 

province and in our youth. 

 

So in this case with the polytechnical changes to Bill. No. 118, 

we are going to see, and has been acknowledged by the 

president, Dr. Larry Rosia — I believe is how you pronounce 

his name — when it comes to SIAST is we’re going to see a 

partnership develop unlike no other time before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to see corporate Saskatchewan, the business 

community in Saskatchewan, who wants to have an idea looked 

at in a practical sense and applied research model using our 

academic institution, SIAST, and the students in those technical 

institutions to take new technology, new applied learning 

concepts to actually look at what is needed in corporate 

Saskatchewan and the business community and then study that 

inside the school environment under the supervision of the 

instructors. But also looking at those instructors liaisoning with 

the corporate Saskatchewan and business community and the 

experts in the field to ensure that the applied research is going 

to be used in the short term. And maybe if it’s not, then they’re 

going to find the reasons why it didn’t work. And the students 

will learn from that and then better themselves by learning more 

so under the applied research models to apply the data and those 

techniques into the community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, I’m thinking that as a government we are going 

to keep moving forward — I know we will — to ensure that 

every time we look at a legislative change, we’re doing it for 

that purpose alone. 

 

Now the member from Saskatoon Nutana stood up in the House 

and made some initial comments to Bill 118. And I’m very 

concerned at her take on this because she is a well-educated, 

learned individual who I would have thought would have done 

much more research and homework in this field. But this is a 

quote from Hansard from November 26, 2013. The member 

from Saskatoon Nutana said, and much to my dismay: 

 

So I think what we’re talking about here really is merely 

semantics, and despite the great fanfare and excitement 

with which the minister announced this new brave new 

world of the polytechnic in Saskatoon, I think it’s just a 

word. And I don’t think that a whole lot of attention needs 

to be paid to that. 

 

Well that’s bothersome, Mr. Speaker. That’s bothersome to me 

as a member of this Legislative Assembly, but more so as a 

parent. And I have lots of friends who have children who are 

now currently in SIAST, in university, and their children will 

move forward in the future. For a member opposite to have that 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4433 

level or lack of level of understanding, and what this bill truly 

means and how it’s going to advance the co-operation level 

between our academic institutions and business community in 

Saskatchewan to tackle new, innovative ways of applying 

concerns in the business community to get our students to 

actually look at that research model and then learn from that, 

which gives them problem-solving . . . You know what it is, Mr. 

Speaker? This is a new niche. This is a niche that’s being 

addressed, for too many years was overlooked, I believe, but 

was never looked at in a model of how a name like the 

polytechnic would be able to be advanced into SIAST and then 

utilized to move research models forward. 

 

And one interesting factor of this too, Mr. Speaker, my other 

colleagues would talk about other great things this 

government’s done in regard to student support and academic 

support. I know that. One thing we’re losing sight of when we 

look at this particular Bill 118 as well is the level of corporate 

involvement that’s going to allow for financial support to come 

to institutions like SIAST. Because with the research, these 

corporate entities will be paying and helping, assisting with a 

lot of that funding moving forward because, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

going to have a net gain result hopefully for those corporate 

entities. So it’s no different than a private corporation paying 

millions and millions of dollars for some research foundation or 

company to study something like how you may apply science to 

a certain kind of metal, how a metal might be used in new drill 

bits, let’s say, whatever. 

 

But in cases like this, this money now will be injected directly 

into the SIAST institutions, into programs to assist those 

students, those instructors, to actually develop new techniques 

and learn from those techniques so when those students leave 

school, they have that new, current knowledge base which takes 

them into the future, into this brave new world, as the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana calls it. It’s, definitely it’s a brave new 

world. It’s a new world in Saskatchewan because we’re leading 

the nation in so many aspects when it comes to investment. 

Why not allow the academic institutions to benefit from that 

same kind of monetary investment and allow our students to 

gain from that money insomuch as they’re applying their 

knowledge and their practical hands-on technique to something 

new and innovative that they’re going to use in the future, 

moving out of school, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . We’re moving on, exactly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Greystone talks about Husky, how Husky is 

involved in the academic institutions, how they’re applying 

their needs-based rationale for their business model into the 

academic institutions, using that expertise within our youth who 

are more than willing to learn. They are sponges sucking up all 

this knowledge, Mr. Speaker, and why not give them a chance 

to learn new things? And based on what’s been happening in 

the past, for sure, to build an academic foundation, but if you 

have new, innovative ways of doing business, apply that in the 

academic institutions so the students are ready when they hit the 

field. 

 

I know this is common sense. It should be very much so. But 

again I want to bring up what a member from the other side 

talks about. Again, on November 25th of this year, the member 

from Athabasca who spoke to many, many bills in initial 

introduction, and I understand that. That was his job. He seems 

to be carrying the weight over there, for some reason, on these 

files. You know what . . . is that he says: 

 

They’re not going to change policy. They’re not going to 

change direction. They’re not going to radically 

implement some new way of doing business. All they’re 

simply going to do is their agenda, their agenda in this bill, 

and to address all the issues that we’ve raised in the 

opposition. [And] . . . they’re going to do is change SIAST 

to the name Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that is blatant disregard for the hard work 

that’s been happening within the ministry officials and the 

academic leaders in this province. To have that ignorance of 

what’s happening around the entire file is bothersome to me as 

a member. Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? This is all 

about academics. This is all about learning. This is all about 

research. Members opposite should do some homework, do 

some simple homework like I did. Just google what polytechnic 

is. Talk about what’s happening over . . . Look what’s 

happening in Alberta with SAIT [Southern Alberta Institute of 

Technology] and how they’ve developed a relationship in the 

business community to develop new, innovative ways of doing 

product development, applied research, and then using it in the 

field, Mr. Speaker. It’s very bothersome when I hear members 

opposite come up with these kinds of quotes. 

 

You know what? It’s also very bothersome, Mr. Speaker, when 

the members opposite fail to recognize that when it comes to 

advanced education funding, you know what? We have a record 

of injecting money, resources into this, into the institutions, 

which we understand is required and important, not just for 

capital dollars, that’s important too, but assistance to those 

students who are going to be the leaders of this province. 

They’re going to be the corporate business leaders, the 

innovative leaders, the research and development people that 

are going to be moving things forward long after we’re all gone, 

Mr. Speaker. We have to recognize that. And my daughters, I 

hope, will have that opportunity because of what’s happened 

within the academic institutions, to benefit from these kinds of 

funding models, Mr. Speaker. This is very important stuff. 

 

I think what’s also really important, Mr. Speaker, is that, you 

know what? When I talked about Husky there for a second, Mr. 

Speaker, you know what? SIAST received — and this was 

reported in The StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, on November 21st of 

this year — $1.25 million was injected to the power engineering 

program at SIAST, Mr. Speaker. Now let’s just talk about that 

alone. The power engineering program’s been on for many, 

many years. We know that. And they’ve produced many a grad 

who’s gone out to work in the business community, in the 

heavy plant, in the industrial sector of our province, and also 

across Canada, and I would think even around the world 

because of the great graduation rates we see from SIAST. 

 

But with this dollar injection, this kind of new way of doing 

business, with opening up the concept, for once, of partnerships 

with business, we’re allowing for this kind of corporate 

donation to come in to help support and fund specific 

engineering programs, in this case to possibly advance to new 

equipment purchases, largest ever in this time, Mr. Speaker. 



4434 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

You know what’s important here is that these corporate leaders 

now have a mechanism and will have the mechanism because 

of the good work of the Minister of Advanced Education, 

because of this Act change, to actually make a new way of 

doing business into this brave, new world that we hear opposite 

from the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

I have to question why the members opposite would be so 

opposed to this bill, moving this legislation change forward to 

give our youth, the future of this province, the best thing 

possible that could ever happen — chances for advancement, 

chances for education, chances to learn, Mr. Speaker. And you 

know what? It’s one of those things that really . . . when you sit 

back as a member of the government and you listen to the 

rhetoric from the other side on this particular file especially, 

that they’ve failed to recognize all of the great things that have 

been done by this government to make the future of our 

children that much better, all the opportunities that are around 

are helping the corporate people in this province, the business 

sector in this province, recognize that we have some of the 

highest, brightest, sharpest minds, highest learning minds in the 

country because of the fact that we’re giving all this 

advancement to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this isn’t in spite of some glamorous, big, flashy news 

release. We want to do these things to prepare this province 

because it’s part of our growth plan. Without these kind of new 

ways of doing business, without the great leadership that we 

have in cabinet from ministers who are every day proposing 

new ideas to make this province better, Mr. Speaker, if we were 

to lay the groundwork with the NDP and done nothing more 

than leave it, we’d be so far behind right now, Mr. Speaker. So 

it’s important to recognize that. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I will close off in conclusion by reading 

my motion: 

 

That this Assembly supports the government’s actions and 

investment in post-secondary education across the 

province so that Saskatchewan is prepared for growth by 

continuing to be a leader in research, innovation, and 

supports for students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s very important. I look forward to hearing 

what my colleagues have to say. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton: 

 

That this Assembly supports the government’s actions and 

investment in post-secondary education across the 

province so that Saskatchewan is prepared for growth by 

continuing to be a leader in research, innovation, and 

support for students. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate the opportunity to provide some comments today on 

this motion. 

 

I think there was some miswording in the motion though 

because it should have read that this Assembly condemns the 

government’s inactions and investment in post-secondary 

education across the province so that Saskatchewan is prepared 

for growth. Because we know full well, Mr. Speaker, that 

there’s a number of areas where this government has not been 

active, and they have not provided the leadership that’s required 

to support education in this province. 

 

We were quite surprised to see the wording in this motion and 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the member from Moose 

Jaw is asking, what am I talking about. Just give me a chance 

and I’ll let you know because there’s certainly a number of 

points that we need to raise in this debate. 

 

Let’s start with then where the inactions and lack of investment 

start. And we can talk about the University of Saskatchewan. 

Here we see that there are a number of job cuts, that it’s been 

off-loaded with a huge amount of debt from this government. 

It’s the largest university in the province but we saw 248 jobs 

cut last August. We know that more job cuts are on the way, 

perhaps even the beginning of next week. We know that this 

government pushed $100 million on to the books of the 

university. And why? Just so they can arrange their accounting 

a little bit differently, and we know what the auditor has to say 

about that. 

 

We know that the university was required to borrow money at a 

high interest rate to build an Academic Health Sciences 

Building. We know that the accreditation at the medical school 

is a serious issue for the university, and the minister said it 

would never happen under his watch. Guess what, Mr. Speaker? 

It’s happened. The lack of accreditation really threatens our 

health system and we know that the Sask Party’s abandonment 

of the health sciences project will have devastating 

consequences when it comes to attracting all the doctors and 

nurses that this government talks about attracting. So this is a 

serious, serious problem that completely belies what the 

member said in his motion. So it just isn’t making sense, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We know that the University of Saskatchewan has the 

second-highest tuition in this country. We know that tuition has 

increased during this government’s watch. We know that the 

tuition this year was the highest, year over year, in the country. 

And we know that the Premier told reporters that Stats Canada 

was wrong. That’s their approach to this. But Stats Canada says 

the Sask tuition average is $6,395. The Premier never 

apologized for that. He just assessed blame on Stats Canada and 

walked away from the issue. 

 

We know that students are struggling. They’re struggling with 

high student loans. They’re struggling with high rental costs. 

They’re working very hard to pay for their university education. 

We know that this government just did away with any kind of 

tuition freeze and to provide students that financial support that 

they need to get through their advanced education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Look at the Throne Speech for example, Mr. Speaker. In the 

Throne Speech we have very limited mention of this subject 

and it again completely belies what the member’s motion is 

trying to say. There was only 50 forward-looking mentions in 

the Throne Speech. And in the Throne Speech we had a very, 

very sparse mention of post-secondary, so obviously not a 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4435 

priority, but you had the audacity to bring forward a motion that 

says that. Clearly this motion does not meet the actions of this 

government. 

 

We have a year old . . . Or let’s talk about SIAST. We know 

that changing the name is just rebranding. There’s absolutely 

nothing new in the bill. There’s a few minor changes, but 

they’re trumpeting it as if it’s a brand new bill. There are minor 

changes in the previous bill that are being presented under this 

new bill, and that’s clearly obvious, Mr. Speaker. If you take 

the time to compare the old bill and you’ll . . . used to be a CEO 

[chief executive officer], now it’s a president; used to be an 

institute, now it’s a polytechnic. 

 

We see in New Zealand they’re doing the exact opposite. 

They’re changing the name of their polytechnic to institute. It’s 

just a rebranding and a new name, and the member didn’t speak 

about that at all in his initial comments. So I think if he’s 

concerned about the rebranding, he should speak to the Minister 

of Advanced Education if he’s concerned about that. 

 

We know that this government is more focused on the name 

change than any other substantial changes to help. We know 

SIAST needs more training spaces. That’s what’s needed and 

this bill does nothing to address that. We know the labour 

shortage that exists in this province. We know we need skills 

training, and we know this government has shown a dismissive 

attitude to putting in place the number of seats that are needed 

to meet the economy’s needs. 

 

We see all kinds of oversight in advanced education, and a good 

example of that is the International Performance Assessment 

Centre, IPAC-CO2 [International Performance Assessment 

Centre for geologic storage of CO2]. And we know that the 

geologic storage of carbon dioxide research project has 

struggled under the weight of overspending, millions of wasted 

dollars, and conflict of interest problems. We know that there 

are other financial and contractual mismanagement concerns 

raised by the Provincial Auditor. 

 

So we do know, one thing that is admirable in this current 

session, Mr. Speaker, is the introduction of 700 new seats in 

adult basic education. That is a step in the right direction, and 

we congratulate the government for that. But we know that 

more work is needed, and that’s certainly one of the favourite 

phrases of this government, and we would absolutely agree with 

that. 

 

When we look at the motion, again, as I say, it’s not properly 

worded because it should say that we condemn this 

government’s inaction in post-secondary education. They’ve 

changed the name of an institute, but we know that there’s all 

kinds of reports that are coming out. And again I want to 

mention again the tuition increase. We see the CBC posted a 

story in September of 2013, and they say that university 

students in Saskatchewan were hit this year with the biggest 

tuition increase in Canada. 

 

And what we’re opposed to is inaction on the part of this 

government, Mr. Speaker. We see the corporate community 

stepping up to the plate. We see the corporate community filling 

in where the government should be a leader. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, when I had a conversation with the president, the 

current president of the University of Saskatchewan, she 

indicated that when it comes to applied research, the corporate 

community is doing its part, but when it comes to pure research, 

that there’s a serious lack in funding and that they were falling 

behind. She did say that, and we’re behind in that area and that 

we need more leadership in the area of pure research because 

pure research is looking 20 years down the road. And although 

there is considerable investment in pure research, but there 

could always be more. 

 

And that’s the thing, Mr. Speaker, that we’re . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, the minister’s going to check it out and 

I’m glad he will because that was basically something that we 

needed to look at. So pure research is important and the 

member opposite made no mention of pure research at all, and I 

think that’s something where we could see further investment. 

 

Applied research, we are proud to see that the corporate 

community is stepping up and that’s an important part of 

research for sure. But we’re looking for support across the 

board, Mr. Speaker, in all kinds of research and not just applied 

research. 

 

Again, articles about the medical school put on probation. We 

see on October 5th from The Globe and Mail, “There’s bad 

news for the University of Saskatchewan’s College of 

Medicine. It has now been officially put on probation by the 

committee on accreditation of Canadian medical schools.” This 

is something the minister said wouldn’t happen under his 

watch, but it has. And there’s a lot of things . . . 

 

It says our only medical school is found to be weak or deficient 

on 10 standards, such as faculty not providing timely feedback 

to students. There has been insufficient progress on fixing 

problems that could mean continued warning of probation or 

probation itself. And certainly the president has acknowledged 

that and makes it clear that restructuring of the college remains 

a very critical priority. 

 

We see another story from The StarPhoenix on August 7th of 

this year, “Workforce planning cuts 248 U of S jobs.” So again 

we see all the bad news is coming out in the newspaper, which 

is contradictory to the motion that members moved. And that’s 

why I suggest that perhaps he misworded the words. Because 

we see there’s inaction on that part, and we see all these cuts 

coming in the University of Saskatchewan — quite alarming. 

 

I know that others of my colleagues are waiting to enter the 

debate and speak about the failure of this government on the 

part of education of First Nations. And we’ve heard lots of 

questions in the Assembly this session, Mr. Speaker, about the 

weaknesses in this government’s approach to First Nations 

education. 

 

We see them failing to support a motion to condemn the federal 

government for . . . In fact they wouldn’t even allow the motion 

to be introduced, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government 

should be condemned for memos coming from the PMO [Prime 

Minister’s Office] suggesting that Aboriginal education is not a 

priority and that the Senate should follow the party line when 

they’re introducing those kinds of memos. This government 

refused to bring that to the attention of the federal government 

and call them on it. And we think that’s a real shame, Mr. 



4436 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

Speaker. 

 

So again I think the wording in the motion is wrong, that 

inaction would be a better description. And that really in this 

Assembly, we should be condemning this government for its 

failure to provide for pure research, for more advanced 

research, and for supporting students — instead of giving them 

the highest tuition in Canada, to have lower rents and better 

living conditions for students. We see the exact opposite. 

 

So I’m very happy to have been able to rise in the debate and 

look forward to the comments of my colleagues. 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured and 

very excited to enter into this debate. And I think to start out 

with, we have to look at the premise of this motion, Mr. 

Speaker. The Assembly supports the government’s actions in 

investment in post-secondary education across the province of 

Saskatchewan. The premise is, are you in favour of investment 

in post-secondary education? 

 

If you listen to the members opposite, I would argue it’s like 

they don’t. They aren’t supportive of investment in 

post-secondary education. If you further listen to members 

opposite about a number of different issues, almost anything 

happening in this province, you’d think that everything is going 

downhill, including post-secondary education, that everything is 

deteriorating. I think if you look at the record of the province 

and of this government, you would argue that it’s not. 

 

You know, previously one of the members opposite and I were 

speaking at a SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ 

Institute on Parliamentary Democracy] event at one point. And 

something that he said . . . And I pointed it out here before in 

this Assembly, but it really shocked me. I always thought it was 

a bit of an act or, you know, maybe a bit of a game, but he said, 

“New Democrats by nature are critical people.” And I think if 

we sit in this Assembly and we listen to the members opposite 

day after day, we see it. It’s truly in their DNA. I’ve said before 

quite jokingly that my blood type is R-B positive. I’m B 

positive and I think a lot of the members across from me may 

be B negative. 

 

But you know, that aside, Mr. Speaker, are things perfect in 

post-secondary education? No, because if they were, there 

would be absolutely no work to do. There’d be no investment to 

be made. We recognize the needs that the institutions have, 

whether universities, SIAST, the college system, or what have 

you, Mr. Speaker. And I think we address those needs. We 

respond to those needs as quickly and as best as we possibly 

can. And I’m very proud of our institutions, our government, 

the work being done and the strides being made. 

 

And again we have to think, look at this motion and the record 

through fact and logic and not through emotion. So I’m going to 

go through some of these facts as quickly as I possibly can. I 

know 10 minutes is not a whole lot of time. 

 

Let’s just look at the record. 333 million for the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]. That’s a 59 per cent operating 

increase since 2007 and ’08, Mr. Speaker. U of R, 105.3 

million, 36 per cent increase. 147 million for SIAST, a 23 per 

cent increase since ’07-08. SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute 

of Technologies], $5.7 million this year, a 51.6 per cent 

increase from 2007. Gabriel Dumont Institute, 10.55 million 

this year, Mr. Speaker, a 39 per cent increase. Colleges, 61 per 

cent increase operating from ’07-08. 

 

When we look at capital, Mr. Speaker, University of 

Saskatchewan, 260.3 million in capital investment in the last six 

years. U of R, 59.6 million in capital investment since ’07-08. 

SIAST, 31.1 million, ’07-08. Regional colleges, 51 million in 

capital investment since ’07-08. 

 

And I’ll touch on some more investment coming quite quickly 

that I’m very appreciative of our Premier, Deputy Premier, our 

caucus colleagues, treasury board, also the former minister of 

Advanced Education from Saskatoon as well as our current 

Minister of Advanced Education from Saskatoon for the work 

that they’ve done to make this come to fruition to benefit not 

only the east part of the province, Mr. Speaker, east central, but 

the whole province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When we look at student support, 4.6 billion — that’s a “b,” not 

an “m,” Mr. Speaker — since ’07-08 in support for 

post-secondary institutions and students, $115.5 million in 

student supports this year alone. 

 

Let’s recap some of this, Mr. Speaker. SIAST, 147 million, a 23 

per cent operating increase since ’07-08; 31.1 million in capital 

operating since ’07-08. And I know these are a lot of numbers, 

and the members might want to check Hansard later. It might 

be difficult to write them all down. Since ’07, apprenticeship 

seats have increased by 70 per cent under our government. 

 

Now let’s look at some of the record of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

Since 1991, between ’91 and ’07, the NDP allowed tuition at 

SIAST to increase by 336 per cent. Now we hear over and over 

about tuition freezes and all the like, Mr. Speaker. But if we 

look at the record of our government, the increases under our 

government, small increments that have increased to make sure 

that the educational institutions stay feasible, that they stay on 

solid financial ground, Mr. Speaker. It only makes sense to 

slowly increase so it’s not a big impact to students. They have 

the financial wherewithal to continue operating. Not like under 

the members opposite when they’d have drastic increases in a 

short period of time to make up for freezes that they had put in 

place. And that doesn’t serve the people of the province well. It 

doesn’t serve the students well, Mr. Speaker. And it definitely 

doesn’t serve again the educational institutions of this province 

very well at all. 

 

My focus, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to focus more on the regional 

colleges in the province. Again, the operating funds increased 

by 61 per cent in the last six years, 51 million capital 

investment. And again, the commitment to the area of the 

province I’m from, to Parkland Regional College — I’ll touch 

on that a bit more — 4,681 students enrolled in ’11-12, with 

over 50 per cent being First Nations and Métis, Mr. Speaker. 

And I know the work that the regional college does in Yorkton 

is great when you go to the graduation classes there and see 

how many of our First Nations and Métis students are 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4437 

graduating, getting engaged in the workforce, and helping to 

address the labour shortage that we have in the province. 

 

When we look at student housing, Mr. Speaker, another support 

that we sometimes don’t really attribute or don’t equate to 

post-secondary education, but huge advancements in our 

housing for students in the province: 34.8 million towards 

student housing since taking government; 1,136 new units 

complete or under construction for students in communities like 

La Ronge, Saskatoon, Meadow Lake, and Prince Albert. This 

budget provides the U of R with 10 million to begin 

construction with a new 605-bed student residence and a child 

care facility, Mr. Speaker. At the U of S we’re providing $15 

million for 400 beds. That’s the first investment in student 

housing there since the 1960s. 

 

So between ’91 and 2007, under the 16 years of the NDP, they 

did not fund any student housing projects at the U of S or the U 

of R. We have. From ’01 to ’07, the NDP provided only 

840,000 for student housing province-wide. We have provided 

a 4,000 per cent increase in our first six years compared to the 

NDP’s last six years. 

 

When we look at other supports for students, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’ve talked about, I’ve touched on tuitions briefly. And yes, 

there have been slight increases, but I want to point out a few 

things that the government, our government has done to support 

students. 

 

A recent development is the Saskatchewan advantage grant for 

education savings which allows parents to top up and add on to 

their RESPs [registered education savings plan] for their child’s 

education. 

 

The Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship, $5 

million matched by institutions for senior undergrad and grad 

students as well as I know our government has been matching 

bursaries and scholarships at the college level as well. In fact 

this last semester, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a contribution by the 

Yorkton Tribal Council of $150,000 matched by our 

government totals, in that one little program alone, that one 

little segment of it alone, $300,000 for support for students 

when it comes to cost of education. 

 

Our graduate retention program, we all know what that’s about 

— $20,000 over a seven-year period for those that choose to 

stay and work in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 40,000 students 

have taken advantage of that program and more all the time, 

another way that students get some of their tuition back once 

they stay and earn in the province. 

 

We have the rural physician nurse retention program for 

underserved health areas although not directly attributed to . . . 

you know, maybe more for health and developing health care in 

our rural areas. But another support for those in education . . . 

coming out of their education and helping to address some of 

the issues in the province. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, one health professional I know, have a 

very close tie to, a Saskatchewan resident, she was actually 

recruited by California as well as Sunrise Health Region in the 

Yorkton area. Mr. Speaker, choices all over the world to go, 

where did she choose? Sunrise Health Region in Yorkton 

because of the programs in place, because of our recruitment 

and retention programs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I don’t have a whole lot of time left here and a huge 

amount of information. But I just want to point out, with the 

college system there’s been huge investments. Almost every 

regional college in the province has gotten an infrastructure 

investment in the last six years as well as huge increases as I 

stated with operating capital. 

 

The Parkland College in Yorkton, as we all know, our 

government contributed $10 million for that project. We’re 

looking at sod turning very shortly, if it hasn’t happened 

already. Design stage is pretty well done. And we’ll be looking 

at that facility opening in the fall of 2015, adding 360 more 

training seats, a wide range of services and skills trades to the 

area. And you know, I’m just so happy with the college. We 

finally got that project under way again with the credit of 

members on this side of the House and with the hard work of 

the community and the college in Yorkton. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this motion put forward 

by the member from Carlton, and I won’t be going onside with 

any members opposite any time soon. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Glad to join the debate today on post-secondary education and 

its place in Saskatchewan and the support that is forthcoming or 

not from this government, the plan that is forthcoming or not 

for the sector from this government. 

 

And it’s often said, Mr. Speaker, that post-secondary education 

is, education generally is one of the great levellers in our 

society. It’s that key to a better future, better jobs, better pay, 

better standard of living. 

 

And certainly that’s been the experience in my family, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And for me, the opportunities I was afforded 

by my parents saving, by my grandmother saving, and in terms 

of our generation, in terms of my brothers and sister and I 

having that opportunity to go on to post-secondary education — 

be it through SIAST, as in the case with one sister; or through 

Briercrest Bible College, as was the case with my younger 

brother; or through the University of Regina and then on to 

global opportunities through post-secondary education, as is the 

case with my older brother, but again building upon a firm 

foundation of, in his case, a Bachelor of Admin and economics 

degree from the University of Regina — it is something that 

makes a tremendous difference in peoples’ lives and by 

extension in community and by extension for the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that this government has 

approached post-secondary education, it’s been interesting to 

see the different sort of permutations that have been undergone. 

And in 2007, I can still remember the then member for Silver 

Springs but the Finance critic for the then official opposition 

commenting on our tuition level and saying that, you know, 

Saskatchewan should be at the national average at a bare 

minimum, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that we had the 



4438 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

fourth-highest level of tuition in the country at the time, that 

this was unacceptable, and something needed to be done about 

it. 

 

And certainly into the campaign, Mr. Speaker, in 2007, again in 

2011, there were different measures brought forward that 

impacted post-secondary education, but one of the fundamental 

components of post-secondary education, particularly on the 

university side, is the question of tuition. And the members 

opposite signed themselves up for a negotiated tuition freeze 

and making sure that the universities had the funds that would 

have been otherwise garnered through tuition for the most part. 

 

There’s some dispute about that, Mr. Speaker, but that I think 

was a case of them riding the coattails of what had happened 

under the final years of the Calvert administration in terms of a 

tuition freeze that was fully funded and then the different 

offerings that were made in the 2007 campaign. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, I remember very well, as I was the minister of 

Advanced Education and Employment at the time, bringing 

forward a platform that proposed a $1,000 cut to tuition to 

rebalance tuition and then pegging it to the cost of inflation. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party alongside brought forward a 

platform that said, well we’re going to freeze tuition, and we’ll 

take it from there. And again, Mr. Speaker, there are different 

reasons why people make their decisions in campaigns, but in 

2007 members opposite won that election of course, and then 

for the most part, fortunately carried forward with a platform 

and an approach to policy that made sure that tuition stayed 

within some reasonable balance. 

 

Well it’s interesting. I hear the member from Arm 

River-Watrous yelping from his chair. And you know, for a 

fellow that has got the Carlton Trail Regional College in his 

backyard and the kind of mess that was made of that institution 

by this government, Mr. Speaker, you’d think he’d have a little 

pause when it comes to yelling from his chair, but I guess not. 

 

Anyway in terms of the system as a whole, Mr. Speaker, there 

are different positions brought forward on tuition. But for the 

most part, there was some security provided to students as they 

plan their lives forward in terms of the tuition freeze. All that 

has changed in the recent circumstance, Mr. Speaker, where the 

apparent approach of the government now is not to provide any 

sort of restraint or provide funding to purchase that restraint on 

the question of tuition but instead cut the envelope of funding 

for the sector as a whole. And there’s greater pressure brought 

to bear on tuition, and students wind up being held hostage to 

the needs of the institution. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, and I say this from someone who went 

to . . . in the fall of 1990 was enrolled as a student at the 

University of Regina, I’m a proud grad of the University of 

Regina and am currently a member of the master’s of public 

admin program through Johnson-Shoyama. And one of the 

things that this province got to experience on university 

campuses through the ’90s was the fact that we got to pay for 

the neglect and the bad decisions that were made in the 1980s. 

And in terms of one generation racking it up for the one to 

come, you know, I got some direct experience in that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’ve also got some direct experience in the fact that for some of 

the years that I was a student on the University of Regina 

campus, the physical footprint of the University of Regina 

doubled in the time of the Romanow and Calvert 

administration. I’ve also got some direct experience from the 

fact that when, you know, there were some very tough years 

immediately after that ’91 election, Mr. Speaker, and for 

reasons that, if members are being honest in terms of how they 

approach the question and not just spinning themselves, they’ll 

understand that there was some very serious things that this 

province had to address. 

 

But on the whole, between 1993-94 and 2003-2004 — and 

don’t take our word for it, Mr. Speaker — the Canadian 

Association of University Teachers says that Saskatchewan was 

one of two jurisdictions in all of Canada that stood by the sector 

and increased funding, to the tune of 24 per cent operating 

funding increase over that period. The only other jurisdiction to 

increase post-secondary education funding in that time, Mr. 

Speaker, was BC [British Columbia], and they were on the 

order of I think 4 per cent cumulative for that decade. So by that 

one measure, Mr. Speaker, there is an exciting, diverse sector, 

Mr. Speaker. But for the funds that were being put up, the only 

time that the provincial government got some security for 

students on the question of tuition was when we entered into the 

question of whether or not there should be a freeze directly. 

 

What we’ve seen since then, Mr. Speaker, is a system where 

there’s increased demand in terms of the training spaces on the 

training side of the equation, Mr. Speaker. And the pressures 

there are very concerning because again, in terms of adding 

value, in terms of greater productivity, in terms of innovating in 

our economy, you know . . . I’m fine with the polytechnic 

announcement for SIAST, Mr. Speaker, but in many ways 

that’s primarily a rebranding exercise. And in terms of 

providing degrees, that power has been extended to SIAST, and 

we’re glad to see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of whether or not we’re going to be meeting the great 

demands that students are looking to institutions like SIAST 

and the regional college system, SIIT, First Nations University, 

and to our universities — University of Saskatchewan, 

University of Regina — whether or not we’re going to be able 

to meet those demands are very much questions of tuition. 

They’re questions of quality, and they’re questions of 

accessibility in whether or not we have the capacity in the 

system to meet this tremendous demand. 

 

I think of one last item, Mr. Speaker, where the First Nations 

University of Canada was up in Prince Albert on Monday and 

announced that they are looking to meet better the demand out 

of Prince Albert and the North, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

again if this was a government that was truly attuned to the 

sector, it’s funny that a member from Prince Albert should 

move this motion and start off the debate. But those hopes and 

dreams and the need for that support for that institution was 

apparently nowhere in the speech. 

 

But again that’s the difference between the hype that we hear 

from members opposite and the reality on the ground are two 

different things, often as not. And we think of that particularly 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4439 

as we know that that government are going through the treasury 

board process to assemble the next year’s budget. And we hear 

things like a 1.5 per cent reduction being bandied about for all 

departments, and we wonder how that is going to impact 

post-secondary education in this province. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take my place and await the next 

round of back-patting from members opposite. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Advanced 

Education for asking me to enter into this debate about 

something that is very personal to me, because it’s obviously 

right within my constituency at the U of S of Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been able to attend over 25 events at 

the University of Saskatchewan, seven events at the U of R, and 

probably another dozen at SIAST. It’s very exciting to sit down 

and talk to the faculty and talk to the staff and to the students as 

how things are going within the university and within the 

technical institutes. And I can report to you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that they’re very happy with the investment that this 

government is able to provide for them versus what was 

happening in the dark days of the NDP in the 16 years. 

 

First off, our government . . . I want to talk about student 

housing which is very critical to students. And certainly as 

Legislative Secretary of Immigration, international students 

coming through, all around the world, coming back to 

Saskatchewan, it is very important for them to have secure 

housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is a very calming feeling for 

students. 

 

I remember sitting in Saskatoon and watching the papers every 

August and September, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When the NDP 

were in power there was a housing crisis. Every year students 

were scrambling for beds. They were scrambling to find a place 

to live. Some of them have come throughout Saskatchewan and 

around the world. This is the stress that they don’t need coming 

back to the university, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I wanted to 

say that this government, since taking power in 2007, is 

working very hard at addressing all of these needs. 

 

We’ve invested $38.4 million toward student housing since 

taking government. I think that’s a huge number, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. At the U of S we provided $15 million for 400 beds, 

the first investment in student housing since the 1960s. The 

total number of beds on campus at the U of S is more than 

1,000 in just three short years. Between 1991 and 2007 the NDP 

did not fund any student housing projects at the U of S, U of R 

at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have increased student housing 

funding by over 4,000 per cent in six short years. 

 

You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I was really encouraged 

that the NDP were going to bring this up in debate. They were 

going to stand up and talk about this in the House and we were 

going to have a good exciting debate about post-secondary. But 

as it turns out, they have no ideas. They have no plan for 

post-secondary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All we got from the 

leader was his famous saying about more eggs in more baskets. 

I would like to ask the Leader of the Opposition now, what is 

the egg in the basket that is for post-secondary? I would like to 

hear from him what his plans are for post-secondary. It was just 

embarrassing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all he could come up 

with was his cliché of eggs in baskets. I would like to hear a 

little bit more about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the good 

news is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this side of the House, we do 

have a plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I can absolutely say that 

our plan is working. 

 

Here’s what’s happening in Saskatchewan overall. There are 

more people living here than ever before, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There are more people working here than ever before, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment 

rate across Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in reference to 

post-secondary, $117 million for student supports this year — 

$388 million in student supports since we took government in 

2007. 

 

The Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, $2,000 per new 

Sask high school graduates that are attending post-secondary, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and over 4,500 students have accessed 

that. The Sask advantage grant for education savings allows 

parents to put an extra $250 away in their child’s RESP for 

post-secondary. The Saskatchewan Innovation and 

Opportunities Scholarship, $5 million matched by institutions 

for seniors and undergraduates and graduate students. The U of 

R alone, $59 million in capital investments. SIAST, $31 million 

in capital investments since we took government. Regional 

colleges, $51 million in capital investments. $4 billion since 

’07-08 in support for post-secondary institutions. 

 

Now I’ll flip it over to what they did. Here’s what they did 

between 1991 and 2000. Students faced substantial tuition 

increases. U of S, 175 per cent increase. U of R, 144. And in 

SIAST, Mr. Deputy Speaker — this is outstanding — a 336 per 

cent increase in tuition rates. And on top of that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they just didn’t increase the tuition rates, they also cut 

funding on the other side of it —’93-94, down 1.3 per cent at U 

of R, down two point five at U of S; ’94-95, 4 per cent cut at U 

of R, 4 per cent cut at U of S; 1997-98, point six per cent cut at 

the U of R and point one per cent cut at the U of S. 

 

By the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we recently saw a YouTube 

video from the Leader of the Opposition. We were expecting 

him to come out with his growth plan and how he was going to 

address all the needs within Saskatchewan. This YouTube video 

had nothing to do with post-secondary, not even mentioned in 

this. This is how this leader wants to lead the province at some 

point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker? He can’t even talk about 

what his plan is in the universities and growth, agriculture, 

manufacturing — all very vague ideas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s very disconcerting for the people of Saskatchewan to see 

that the opposition is so ineffective at what they are doing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to touch base on what the 

member from Athabasca said when he was talking about this 

bill. Quote, Bill No. 118, which I think is the cornerstone of that 

government’s post-secondary agenda. Mr. Speaker, they’re all 

doing today under this bill, and they’ve announced it with great 

fanfare. They’ve done what they’re going to change the name. 

They’re going to change the policy. They’re not going to 



4440 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

change direction. They mean they’re not going to do anything 

radical about doing business. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I really don’t think that they actually even 

read the bill on this one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there is 

more than just changing a name in this. We are evolving 

post-secondary within Saskatchewan to make sure that it is up 

to par and at a lot of places above the national average to make 

sure that our students here in Saskatchewan have the best 

advantage to moving their education forward. 

 

And I just want to mention some of these numbers again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because I think it’s very critical. Our record, 

$333 million for the U of S, a 59 per cent increase; 105 million 

for U of R, 36 per cent increase; $147 million for SIAST, 23 per 

cent increase; 10.5 million for Gabriel Dumont Institute, a 39 

per cent increase; the U of S, $260.3 million in capital 

investment. 

 

And I want to touch on the Health Sciences Building just for 

one second, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They announced a Health 

Sciences Building a long time ago. Then they announced it 

again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and yet they still didn’t do 

anything. They talk about having fanfare? They are famous for 

making announcements, but they’re not actually doing anything 

on the ground. Shovel never hit the ground. Lots of press 

releases, but never actually did anything. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I think it was the member from Regina Lakeview who made 

that announcement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What this government 

is doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we are talking about growth 

and we are talking about the evolution of Saskatchewan to the 

new Saskatchewan. We are tired of the 16 years under the NDP 

where everything the status quo was the norm. Things have to 

change here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is the change on this 

side of the House. The NDP will not evolve, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They are stuck in the past and they do not have the 

ability to evolve. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very, very honoured to talk about this 

on behalf of the Saskatoon Sutherland constituency which the 

University of Saskatchewan is in, as well as on behalf of the 

government. It is very, very impressive what our government 

has done in six short years. We have done more for 

post-secondary in six years than 16 years with the NDP. 

 

It is absolutely embarrassing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they 

stand up and criticize what we are doing when they did nothing 

for students. They did nothing on capital and they did nothing 

for operating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They should be embarrassed 

about talking about this. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 

thank you for allowing me to enter into the debate, and I 

support the motion of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

honoured and pleased to participate in the debate that’s being 

presented today. And, Mr. Speaker, I find it completely strange, 

somewhat strange that in light of all the trauma in the potash 

industry as a result of the layoffs, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 

having the Saskatchewan Party bring forward a motion, again 

back-patting themselves when it comes to post-secondary 

education, Mr. Speaker, when all the tough decisions being 

made in the . . . and of course the trauma to the families 

impacted and affected by all the layoffs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many families, not just the 

440 that were impacted with a direct layoff notice in the potash 

sector, but many people that provide contracts. I understand one 

company alone had to lay off 45 workers, and there’s contracts 

and other services, Mr. Speaker. And a few weeks away from 

Christmas, we see the Saskatchewan Party taking the 

opportunity on a debate to talk about their commitment to 

post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I want to point out, and I think it has a lot of relevance to 

this, Mr. Speaker, and I want to talk a bit about a press release 

that talks about Saskatchewan emerging as a star. In some of 

the quotes, Mr. Speaker, it says: 

 

In fact, the lineup, by the only measure . . . of economic 

growth that really counts, is quite different. 

 

The winner is Saskatchewan . . . 

 

That’s one of the quotes, Mr. Speaker. And another quote that 

we have, Mr. Speaker, from the same article is that 

“Saskatchewan has had so many economic . . . [challenges] in 

recent years . . .” And, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say that “. . . 

the province’s stunning expansion in the first two years of the 

decade.” And the quote that we have here, “With such a good 

start, and with a couple of . . . [rather] good years, 

Saskatchewan’s economy grew more than 32 per cent over the 

decade,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it all talks about how Saskatchewan is a star, 

of how Saskatchewan is really coming on strong and that 

there’s great promise that the province has, Mr. Speaker. And 

the article, Mr. Speaker, is back from the year 2000. And it’s 

really important to note that the people of Saskatchewan know 

the history of the province and that people were really . . . It 

took many, many years to rebuild. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we hear the bragging that the Saskatchewan 

Party is doing as it talks about some of the post-secondary 

challenges. Mr. Speaker, the point that we would raise — and 

not one of them can challenge this — the question I would have 

for them: are the universities deeper in debt, Mr. Speaker, as a 

result of this government’s choice to put some of the debt load 

onto the universities? The answer is yes. The universities are 

deeper in debt. This government allowed the universities to go 

further into debt, Mr. Speaker. And there’s no question about it 

that someday that bill will come due. 

 

The second thing, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll ask which is factual, 

Mr. Speaker, is you look at the overall challenges with the 

tuition rate. Why does Stats Canada say that Saskatchewan has 

the second-highest tuition rates in the country, Mr. Speaker? 

The fact is Stats Canada says that’s the rate. They’re the 

second-highest in the country. And yet the Sask Party says, oh 

no, that’s not us. 

 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4441 

Mr. Speaker, you look at some of the issues of the layoffs that 

are occurring, both at the U of S and the U of R, that these are 

some of the things that really impact people’s lives. And, Mr. 

Speaker, you look at the tuition rates, second-highest in the 

country. You look at the debt load increasing, Mr. Speaker. And 

now we look at some of the layoffs. So you can’t tell me then in 

this Assembly that the Saskatchewan Party coming along, 

bragging about all their money that they’ve invested into the 

post-secondary system in the province, that they haven’t dealt 

with the real serious issues that many of our post-secondary 

institutions need a lot of help from this government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the time that they have a vast amount of 

wealth, they’ve got tons of money, Mr. Speaker, and yet they 

have not correspondingly supported the institutions of higher 

learning to the degree that’s going to be effective for 

Saskatchewan for many, many, many years. Tell me this today, 

Mr. Speaker. If all the money that they’re talking about, and all 

we hear from the members across the way is millions here, 

millions there, Mr. Speaker, why is it the net effect is that 

universities have a huge debt burden today? Why is it university 

students in our province are paying the second-highest tuition, 

Mr. Speaker, in the country, Mr. Speaker? And why is it today, 

the third point I will make, you’re seeing layoffs occur on a 

grand scale at many of our institutions? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I made a comment about SIAST changing 

the name, you know, from SIAST to Polytechnic. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, we obviously want to modernize the language. That 

was my point earlier when I talked about modernizing our 

institutions and modernizing our language. Those are important 

gestures to make in concert and consultation and agreement 

with the institution. But you notice how, Mr. Speaker, how the 

Saskatchewan Party tries to change the channel, deflect 

peoples’ attention, not from the issues that they refused to deal 

with, but rather the ones they want to highlight. 

 

And the issues that they refused to deal with, I will remind the 

people of Saskatchewan, these are the actual facts, and I’d like 

anybody in the Saskatchewan Party to stand up and challenge 

these facts. Fact number one, the universities have a greater 

amount of debt today because the Saskatchewan Party 

government forced that debt upon them by withdrawing 

financial support at a crucial time on some of their capital 

projects. The second point, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, 

the students of the province of Saskatchewan are paying the 

second-highest tuition rates of all the provinces, Mr. Speaker, 

the second-highest in the country. That is also a fact, Mr. 

Speaker. And now we look at the layoffs occurring at many of 

our institutions. That is also a fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we look at all these points, Mr. Speaker, and people across 

the province will say, well those are facts. But why is the Sask 

Party keep talking about their money? The bottom line, Mr. 

Speaker, is they have not done enough. A name change is not 

enough to support SIAST, Mr. Speaker. And some of the 

dollars that they speak about is not enough to avert the high cost 

of tuition that many of our students and our families pay, Mr. 

Speaker. And the money that they’re talking about today is still 

not enough to avert a lot of the massive layoffs that have 

occurred in the past. And we anticipate that more layoffs are 

coming our way as we talk about places like SIAST, the U of S, 

and you know, and the U of R. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you look at the situation, and it’s really 

amazing how the Saskatchewan Party just want to forget about 

history. The world began in 2007; Mr. Speaker, that’s their 

world. And nothing occurred, nothing occurred before 1991. 

And what a lot of people know in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and history will prove it, the 

conservatives across the way, they refuse to talk about the 

billions of dollars of debt they left this province in. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what they refused to also admit today is that they 

inherited tons of money from this administration and the people 

of Saskatchewan. And they have squandered that opportunity. 

They have squandered the opportunity. 

 

We see problems in health care. We see problems in not only 

reporting the finances of the province where the auditor has, in 

the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, lambasted the 

government for not properly recording the books, Mr. Speaker. 

And now we see their bragging rights on how they’re bragging 

about all the money they put into post-secondary schools in our 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from our side of the House, we understand the 

history. We know the challenges. But I point out to the people 

of Saskatchewan, all the bragging they do, why do we still pay 

the second highest tuition rates? Why are there always layoffs 

at the U of S, U of R, and SIAST? And the third point is, how 

come they have so much debt? All those three problems are 

courtesy of that Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for 65-minute debate has 

expired. Questions? Ten minutes of questions. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

My question is for the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. And 

we heard the Premier say that Stats Canada was wrong when it 

says that Saskatchewan has the second-highest tuition in 

Canada. Who does the member agree with? Does he agree with 

Stats Canada or does he agree with the Premier? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Who I agree with is the Minister of Advanced 

Education who stood in this House last week and listed off all 

of the universities that have a higher tuition than our current 

universities. Very proud to say that the Minister of Advanced 

Education can look at the whole picture and see what’s going 

on within Saskatchewan and be able to make sure that our 

students are paying a competitive rate, and that they’re 

absolutely looking for housing, and that they make sure that 

they are well taken care of. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Housing is very 

important at our universities, especially for students who move 

from different communities and rural Saskatchewan to attend 

post-secondary institutions. That is why our government has 

invested $34.8 million towards student housing since 2007. 



4442 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

That’s an over 4,000 per cent increase in our first six years 

compared to the NDP’s last six years. Between 1991 and 2007, 

the NDP did not fund a single student housing project at the U 

of S or the U of R.  

 

To the member from Regina Elphinstone: why did you ignore 

student housing needs, especially those of students for smaller 

communities and rural Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone.  

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

terms of the University of Regina, there was funding provided 

to the university to make sure that they had the room to go 

forward with the North and South Residence in conjunction 

with the Canada Summer Games. So when the member comes 

forward with a very narrow definition of what sort of support 

was provided for the university, that’s obviously not 

recognized. 

 

But given that that member’s from the city of Regina and 

represents a Regina constituency, can the member inform the 

House as to whether or not there will be the $10 million that the 

University of Regina is still waiting for for their student 

residence plans? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on September 12, 2013 the 

Statistics Canada said this: undergraduate students in Ontario 

paid the highest average fees in Canada, $7,259; followed by 

students in Saskatchewan who paid 6,394 dollars in university 

student tuition fees. Once again, to the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland: would he agree with Stats Canada or does he agree 

with the Premier, who says that these numbers are wrong? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — There’s a few facts that we have here. 

There is a fact that the U of S, what we have invested in the U 

of S is up 175 per cent, U of R up 144 per cent, SIAST is up. 

What I want to talk about is why the nimble nine over there is 

so focused in on this, when they have such a horrible record, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would almost call it, not the nimble nine, 

I would say it’s almost a nonsensical nine, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

And in regards to the Health Sciences Building, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, what they did is announce things. What we do over 

here is we do things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As Elvis the King 

would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a little less conversation, and a 

little more action please. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, our government is making great 

strides in enhancing post-secondary education support for 

students since 2007. We have increased student supports by 

nearly 120 per cent in our first six years, compared to the 

NDP’s last six years. In the last year alone we have provided 

$117 million to support Saskatchewan students. Additionally 

our government has made improvements to the student loans to 

increase eligibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these young people are the future of our province, 

which is why our government aims to ensure there is financial 

support readily available to these students. To the member from 

Athabasca: why does your caucus continue to ignore the 

benefits and potential of these programs for our students? 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is the 

facts are still before the people of Saskatchewan. 

Second-highest tuition rates in the country, the U of S and the U 

of R have huge debt loads, the layoffs that are continuing to 

happen all throughout our province — Mr. Speaker, these are 

the problems that the people of Saskatchewan see in the 

newspapers every single month, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The challenges we have, Mr. Speaker, is that this government, it 

is much like a hockey game, Mr. Speaker, where you have your 

forwards and you have your defencemen and you have your 

goalie. Mr. Speaker, what happens now is the universities are 

now all by themselves in trying to develop a future for the 

people of Saskatchewan, the young people, and they’re the only 

member of the team that’s on the ice. The government has 

basically taken away the forwards and the defence have no 

game plan. They’ve got high tuition rates, high debt, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s not a good game plan. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Does the member from Sutherland agree that 

the Minister of Advanced Education broke his promise to never 

allow the U of S’s College of Medicine to be on probation on 

his watch? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. What I would like to say is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

here’s how we’re helping out students at the university: the 

Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, first and foremost; the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant in education savings; and the 

Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunity Scholarship. This is 

how we’re helping students on the ground at the University of 

Saskatchewan, the University of Saskatchewan and all of our 

post-secondary institutions. 

 

I can’t believe that the member from Athabasca compares what 

the students are going through in their university to a hockey 

game, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is a very serious subject, and 

to compare it to a hockey game with four people on the ice and 

this and that, it doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I think the member from Athabasca should apologize and 

say that this is a very serious issue for our students. 

 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4443 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 

opposite were second to none when it came to scaring our 

young people out of Saskatchewan. In the last six years, we’ve 

done a lot to reverse this trend. Now more than ever, young 

people are choosing to stay home in our province and to 

continue their education and enter the workforce. This is largely 

due to programs such as the Saskatchewan Advantage 

Scholarship, which over 4,500 students have received since its 

inception, and the graduate retention program that over 40,000 

students have benefited from in the last seven years. 

 

Those are impressive numbers, Mr. Speaker, and the benefits of 

these programs have a lasting impact on our province. To the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana: why does your caucus refuse 

to support these programs that help keep Saskatchewan’s young 

people home in their province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I’m not sure what the question is about, Mr. 

Speaker, because I’d like the member to demonstrate where we 

have refused to support those programs. I think that’s 

misleading at best. 

 

Now what I would like to point out though . . . And when it 

comes to graduate programs here in the province, we see that 

last year’s Stats Canada says Saskatchewan’s tuition increases 

for graduate students was the highest in Canada at 4.9 per cent. 

And we know that it’s even higher for international graduate 

students who have seen an increase of 6.7 per cent in 

Saskatchewan. These students need all the support they can get, 

Mr. Speaker, and we really question why this government is 

failing to provide more support for these people. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again we 

see a bit of a disconnect between Sask Party hype and the 

reality on the ground. In August, the University of 

Saskatchewan announced 248 jobs cut. And if you listen to 

members opposite, somehow that would be a great thing. 

 

And again, TransformUS reports on Monday, and we’ll see 

what they have to say about the workforce complement required 

at the University of Saskatchewan. But these are some very 

hard decisions being made by the university and officials 

because of course they expected one thing in terms of, and were 

led to expect one thing in terms of funding from the members 

opposite, but have been delivered something else. 

 

To the member from Sutherland: to those that have been laid off 

and to those that will be facing an uncertain future in terms of 

their jobs, and at the University of Saskatchewan to name one 

institution, how does he square his rhetoric with their reality? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 605 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Wotherspoon that Bill No. 605 — The 

Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and Accountability 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real 

pleasure to enter into debate on Bill 605, The Public-Private 

Partnerships Transparency and Accountability Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill is a common sense approach and I’m 

proud of the good work that the member from Regina 

Rosemont, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, has done in 

bringing this bill forward. I hope it’s something that we can 

co-operate with the government on in order to pass it and ensure 

that any P3 deals that the government enters into are fully 

transparent and fully accountable to taxpayers. Because the 

reality is that Saskatchewan people don’t want secret deals. 

Secret deals are not in the best interests of taxpayers. What 

Saskatchewan people want is for P3 deals to be transparent and 

accountable, and they don’t want us to go down the P3 road if 

the costs are not competitive. 

 

So what this bill would do is ensure an independent 

accountability watchdog is in place on each P3. This bill would 

prevent the government from using the P3 method for major 

capital projects if there are less than three bidders on the 

contract. And this bill law would also require the full price tag 

of the project, including the cost of credit, to be reported to 

taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, I think all that is good Saskatchewan 

common sense, and frankly it’s just the right thing to do 

because Saskatchewan people deserve transparency and 

accountability from their government. And the need for greater 

transparency and accountability is top of mind for 

Saskatchewan people right now. 

 

Yesterday we learned that, for the first time ever, the Provincial 

Auditor refused to endorse this government’s financial 

statements. It is extremely rare in both the public and private 

sector for an auditor to issue an adverse audit opinion, but that’s 

what the independent, non-partisan Provincial Auditor did this 

week. The auditor says the government’s GRF financial 

statements were “full of errors” and “not reliable.” The auditor 

warned legislators and the public that “much of the information 

included in the GRF 2013 financial statements is wrong.” Mr. 

Speaker, to me that doesn’t sound like transparency and 

accountability to taxpayers. 

 

Now we have a lot of concerns about the way this government 

reports its finances, but we’ll keep pushing those issues in the 

weeks and the months ahead. But today we have an opportunity 

to make some good strides in improving transparency and 

accountability in one particular area — public-private 

partnership deals that the government enters into. We want to 



4444 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

shine a light on P3 deals so government, taxpayers, and the 

opposition can make common sense, fact-based decisions. This 

government is talking about allowing private companies to 

operate our kids’ schools along with other valuable public 

services and infrastructure, so we think facts and ongoing 

responsibility to Saskatchewan people should absolutely be a 

requirement in the law. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I hope the government will agree to co-operate 

with the NDP to pass Bill 605, The Public-Private Partnerships 

Transparency and Accountability Act. I look forward to the 

vote. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the House is Bill No. 605, 

The Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and 

Accountability Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:24 until 12:26.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 7] 

 

Broten Forbes Belanger 

Chartier McCall Nilson 

Sproule   

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 43] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Harpauer Toth 

Doherty Norris Reiter 

McMillan Harrison Wyant 

Tell Weekes Elhard 

Hart Brkich Hutchinson 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Campeau 

Wilson Marchuk Ross 

Kirsch Michelson Doke 

Cox Merriman Jurgens 

Steinley Hickie Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Phillips 

Docherty   

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 

7; those opposed, 43. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion fails. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Acknowledgements and Christmas Greetings 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

being the last day of the session, I’d like to extend some 

thoughts and thank yous on behalf of myself and colleagues in 

this place. 

 

Firstly to all of our families, our spouses, our children, our 

significant others that make this possible. We put in awfully 

long hours in this place, Mr. Speaker, and our families make 

some very, very real sacrifices for us to both serve in public life 

and to attend and serve in this Assembly. And I want to 

acknowledge that on behalf of, I know, myself but also I’m sure 

all other members. 

 

I would really like to thank sincerely the staff here in the 

building who do such a great job for us. From the Clerks sitting 

at the table here in the Assembly to the Pages who have done a 

great job here this session through the Sergeant-at-Arms and his 

staff, to visitor services, the building maintenance personnel 

who do a magnificent job in making sure that this building, this 

incredible building, stays the way it was originally built — all 

of whom do their job with a tremendous amount of pride, a 

tremendous amount of professionalism, and something that is 

recognized by all members, and I want to acknowledge that. 

 

[12:30] 

 

I want to thank the media for keeping people informed as to 

what happens in this place, and they are very diligent about 

their work as well. 

 

I want to acknowledge our staffs, whether it be our constituency 

assistants back in our ridings that deal first-hand with 

constituents, whether it be staffs in a minister’s office, staff in 

Executive Council, our caucus office staff as well, who do a 

great job on both sides of the aisle. 

 

I want to thank my staff as well, Mr. Speaker — Graham 

Stewart who’s our executive director of House business, David 

Cooper, and Jarret Coels, both of whom do great work. 

 

I want to acknowledge as well the Opposition House Leader, 

my friend who . . . We have a very productive and professional 

relationship. One of the things I think outside of this place, Mr. 

Speaker, people don’t realize, is the amount of co-operation and 

discussion between the parties necessary to make the place 

operate in a smooth fashion. So I want to acknowledge that, 

even point out, the example of . . . We actually did two very, 

very significant studies this year, reshaping both the directives 

and the standing orders, actually resulting in the banning of 

omnibus bills in this Assembly, something we didn’t make a big 

deal about but something which I think is significant. 

 

I want to just extend Merry Christmas to all the folks here, all 

the folks watching at home, all of the folks right across the 

province. So we look forward to coming back here after 

Christmas, but in the interim, have a very happy and safe 

holiday season. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 



December 5, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4445 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well amen to that. 

Again this is, as the old song goes, it is in so many ways the 

most wonderful time of the year, this Christmas season. And I’d 

start there, Mr. Speaker, and join with the Government House 

Leader in saying thank you, as is just and right, to so many that 

help us about doing the work of the people’s business. 

 

So again, to add to what the Government House Leader has 

said, you know, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I don’t 

know if I should apologize at this point for anything now or 

future, but I’ll leave that on an as-required basis. 

 

But a very special thanks to everyone, the Clerk and the Clerk’s 

table, with the Legislative Assembly staff generally, the staff in 

the building, staff in the constituency offices, and indeed the 

public service. I’d like to not just thank my colleagues and our 

leader but the incredible group of folks that we work with to do 

our job. And again there’s a lot of talk around about the nine. 

You know, it’s so much more than that, Mr. Speaker. It’s more 

like, you know, 27. But anyway we’ve got a very important job 

before us as the official opposition, and we nine certainly do 

that in conjunction with so many others. So to them I say thank 

you very much. 

 

And I too would like to say thank you to members opposite and 

to the Government House Leader. Again as he had referenced, 

one of the main sort of jobs that we have between us is to make 

sure that, as best we can, ensure that the process works as 

smoothly and as efficiently as possible so that we need not get 

into procedural or process fights because Lord knows we’ve got 

enough to fight about when it comes to the issues of the day. 

But that work, Mr. Speaker, takes a lot of diligence and a fairly 

significant measure of trust. So I just want to say, very publicly, 

thank you to the Government House Leader for that work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again Merry Christmas to all throughout 

legislature land but to the members opposite, to the Premier and 

to everyone across the way, Merry Christmas. And, Mr. 

Speaker, again to everybody that helps us do this work of the 

people’s business, we express our gratitude and express the best 

of the season to them. 

 

The last thing I’d say, Mr. Speaker, to those who have gone on 

from the service in this Assembly, and we’d had a very, you 

know, great recognition today of one such servant of the public, 

but we know there are others throughout the different orders of 

service that are brought to bear here in the Legislative 

Assembly. To them we say thank you so much and Merry 

Christmas. And to those in particular that are able to get out 

there with friends and family, we wish you all the best for the 

season, getting reconnected with constituents as the case may 

be. We wish you Merry Christmas and all the best in that. 

 

And to those that have those tables that don’t have everyone 

around them that has been the case in years past and those that 

are experiencing loss and difficulties in health and those kind of 

hard challenges at this season, Mr. Speaker, those are the things 

that can make what is the most wonderful time of the year kind 

of hard. And all our best goes out to those that are grappling 

with that and that, you know, may the peace and joy of the 

season transcend something of that hardship. So we’ll leave it at 

that, Mr. Speaker. And I’d close off to just say on behalf of the 

official opposition Merry Christmas to all. 

The Speaker: — I am advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor is here for Royal Assent. All please rise. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 12:38 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following bills.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 110  - The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

Bill No. 903  - St. Thomas More College Amendment Act, 2013 

Bill No. 121  - The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable government 

to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 131  - The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 

to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:41.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I move the adjournment motion, it’s 

my pleasure as well to wish everyone a Merry Christmas and 

thank you for an interesting session. 

 

I’d also like to thank all of the legislative staff, especially our 

new Pages who have just learned the system here, and I’d like 

to thank them for their efforts. So I think we should all give 

thanks to our constituency assistants who fill in for us so 

diligently and ably while we’re in session and away from our 

constituencies, and to thank our families as well. 

 

So, ladies and gentlemen, it has been moved by the Government 

House Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned pursuant to rule 

3(1) until 1:30 p.m. Monday, March 3rd, 2014. Is it the pleasure 



4446 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2013 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:42.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4421 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4421, 4423 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4421 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4422, 4423 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4422 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4422 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4422 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4423 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4423 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4424 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4424 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4424 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4424 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4424 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4424 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4425 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4425 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4425 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4425 

 Christmas Greetings 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4426 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4426 

 International Volunteer Day 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4426 

 Rhodes Scholar from Indian Head 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4426 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Government Response to Layoffs 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4427 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4427 

 Provincial Auditor’s Report 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4428 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4428 

 Emergency Medical Services 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4429 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4429 

 Classroom Size and Support for Education 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4430 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4430 

 Children in Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4430 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4430 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4431 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Investment in Post-Secondary Education 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4431 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4434, 4441 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4436 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4437, 4442 

  Merriman ...................................................................................................................................................................... 4439, 4441 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4440 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4441 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4442 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4442 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4443 

 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 605 — The Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and Accountability Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4443 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 4444 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Acknowledgements and Christmas Greetings 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4444 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4445 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4445 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4445 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


