




















































Hansard: May 06, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 58A  MONDAY, MAY 6, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3453 

 May 6, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave for an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to all the members. This week has been declared Missing 

Persons Week in Saskatchewan. Earlier this morning, I had the 

opportunity to join families and community members in 

recognition of this important week along with the Minister of 

Corrections and Policing. 

 

A number of people involved in this event have joined us in the 

legislature this afternoon. Seated in your gallery are a number 

of members of the provincial partnership committee on missing 

persons. This committee has played a significant role in raising 

awareness and educating the public in our province about 

missing persons over the last seven years. 

 

The members of the committee joining us here today are Staff 

Sergeant Maureen Wilkie from the RCMP — can you just give 

us a wave — Inspector Tom Mansfield, Sergeant John Walker 

and Constable Sarantopoulos from the Regina Police Service; 

Trish LaFontaine, from the office of the provincial interlocutor; 

Sergeant Kenneth Palen from major crimes, north historical 

case unit; Joanne Michael of the Alzheimer Society of 

Saskatchewan; Pat Faulconbridge from the Ministry of Social 

Services; Pat Thiele, Betty Ann Pottruff, Janice Wilby, and 

Karol Douglas from the Ministry of Justice; Chief Coroner Kent 

Stewart from the office of the chief coroner; Derek Schmidt 

from search and rescue, Saskatchewan Association of 

Volunteers; Phyllis Hallatt and Susan Ramsay from Child Find 

Saskatchewan; Tracy Knutson from Saskatchewan Towards 

Offering Partnership Solutions, and Lisa Weeksuk from Métis 

Family and Community Justice Services of Saskatchewan. The 

partnership committee has played a role in raising awareness 

and educating Saskatchewan public about missing persons over 

the last seven years. And I’d like to thank them for their work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank the families and friends of 

missing persons who are joining us here today. They are Carol 

Wolfe and her son, Desmond Wolfe; Wayne Lachance, 

Marshall Dreaver, and Leonard Lachance; and Marilyn and 

Allan Carlson. 

In meeting these people today, we were reminded that the 

consequences of missing persons cases reach far beyond the 

missing person. It affects their family, friends, and their entire 

community. So I want to recognize the faith and bravery of 

people who continue to search and share their stories. I admire 

their courage in reminding us that all those who are missing are 

indeed missed. I would ask all members of the legislature to 

join me in welcoming these people to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 

minister in welcoming the families and friends of the missing 

people plus all of the other officials who are working together 

on the committee to deal with this problem, which is a problem 

for all of us. They’re our missing family in the same way. So 

welcome to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Request leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and members. To 

you and through you, I’d like to introduce some individuals 

seated in your gallery. Here today we have many esteemed 

representatives from all over the province who join myself and 

Ms. Draude as we proudly announce their disability strategy. 

These individuals seated in the House today will play a 

significant and essential role in ensuring that, as we move 

forward in developing the disability strategy, we will find 

success and inclusion for all members of our society who have a 

disability. 

 

Without further ado, Mr. Speaker, we have Amy McNeil, 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres and Sarcan; Melanie Weiss, director of 

member services for the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres; Merv Bender, Chair of the project 

implementation advisory team and executive director of 

Community Service Centre in Prince Albert; Theresa Savaria, 

executive director of the Autism Resource Centre; Michael 

Lavis, executive director of Creative Options Regina. 

 

From the Ministry of Social Services, we have Tiffany Hewson, 

senior policy analyst; Craig Torgunrud, senior policy analyst; 

Murray Wall, senior policy analyst; Joanna Popescu, senior 

policy analyst; Shauna Wouters, director of the strategic policy 

branch. I’d like all members to join me in welcoming these 

incredible people to their provincial legislature. And thanks for 

all your help. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 



3454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2013 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming all the folks from 

across Saskatchewan who do great work in supporting those 

who have disabilities. And I know that you’ll put a great deal of 

effort into your work over the next year and a half. I understand 

that the consultations will begin next spring, and we look 

forward to being part of that work in doing whatever we can to 

help out as well. 

 

So thank you for all that you do with respect to supporting 

people who have disabilities, in ensuring that there is a high 

deal of inclusion and support offered to people who could use 

the services. So thank you. I’d ask all members to join with me 

as well in welcoming these folks to their legislature. 

 

While I’m on my feet, I’d actually like to recognize and 

welcome Marcel Petit to his Legislative Assembly. Marcel is 

not a constituent of mine. He, I believe, lives in Saskatoon 

Centre, but he worked, did a great deal of work for the Core 

Neighbourhood Youth Co-op and just wrapped up his time 

there a few months ago. And the Core Neighbourhood Youth 

Co-op is a huge part of the community of Saskatoon Riversdale 

and is very important. So thanks to Marcel, who did great work 

at the Core Neighbourhood Youth Co-op and is a filmmaker 

and an activist in Saskatoon and contributes a great deal to our 

city. So I’d like everyone to welcome Marcel to his Legislative 

Assembly as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a 

pleasure to welcome a group of students from Vanier Collegiate 

in Moose Jaw. And they’re on the left; I’ll just ask them to give 

a little wave so we know which ones they are. Mr. Speaker, this 

is a great school because two of my kids went to that school, 

and so did the member of Wakamow’s also attended that 

school. If we talk about the bright, young future, well, Mr. 

Speaker, in that gallery, that’s where they are. So I’d ask 

everyone to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly this 

afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. To you and all my colleagues 

in the House, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a group in the 

west gallery of 22 grade 12 students from F.W. Johnson 

Collegiate from here in Regina on Fines Drive. Their teachers 

accompanying them are Donarae Deringer, Mandy Crossman 

once again. They’re frequent visitors, and we really appreciate 

them always bringing their classes out. I look forward to 

meeting them after question period so, colleagues, help me 

welcome them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the Legislative Assembly two guests that are joining us in 

your gallery: first of all, Dr. Hope Bilinski, who is a professor at 

the College of Nursing in Saskatoon; as well as Heather Keith, 

a nurse practitioner from Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both of these nurses have been recognized for 

their tremendous contributions to the health care system and to 

the nursing profession, and we’ll hear more about that in a few 

moments. But, Mr. Speaker, on this, the beginning of National 

Nursing Week, I’d ask all members to help join with me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d love to take 

the opportunity to welcome the Provincial Ombudsman, Kevin 

Fenwick, seated in your gallery. Mr. Fenwick has been the 

Saskatchewan Ombudsman for the last nine years. 

 

Later this afternoon, I’ll be joining Mr. Fenwick in celebrating 

the 40th anniversary of the Office of the Ombudsman in 

Saskatchewan. In the celebration, May 5th to 13th has been 

declared Ombudsman Week in this province. And I look 

forward to taking part in that milestone with Mr. Fenwick and 

thank his office for all the very good work that he’s done for the 

people of Saskatchewan over his term in the office. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join in welcoming Kevin Fenwick to the legislature. As 

Ombudsman, he has served the citizens of Saskatchewan very 

well. And we want to thank him and, I think, more importantly 

all his staff who work very carefully with him to make sure that 

the questions that citizens have are appropriately dealt with. So 

welcome to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity as well to 

welcome Mr. Kevin Fenwick, the Provincial Ombudsman, to 

the legislature, and to welcome the group from Vanier school 

and Doug Panko. Doug is part of the SSTI [Saskatchewan 

Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 

Democracy] program, for all the teachers that might be 

interested. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning care for our seniors here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 

including creating more spaces and more choices for 

seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 

facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 

appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and 

providing more support to help seniors remain 

independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 



May 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3455 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

petition to the Assembly from over 100 Saskatchewan residents. 

Northern Saskatchewan’s being targeted by the Nuclear Waste 

Management Organization to become a storage site for millions 

of used, irradiated, nuclear fuel bundles. These radioactive 

nuclear bundles would be shipped on provincial highways. 

Some provinces have already banned the storage or transport of 

used nuclear bundles. And I would like to now read the prayer. 

It reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly pass 

legislation to permanently ban nuclear waste storage and 

transportation of nuclear waste into, out of, and through 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Asquith, 

Saskatoon, Leask, North Battleford, Spiritwood, Vonda, 

Flaxcombe, Warman, Gronlid, Hague, Prince Albert, Holbein, 

Birch Hills, Hepburn, and Martensville. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

asking for the repaving and repair and maintenance of north 

road, Highway 102 from La Ronge to Sucker River. This road 

is a major highway used by buses transporting our students to 

schools, tourism for camping and fishing, and by the mining 

and forestry industry. Mr. Speaker, people are very concerned 

for their safety. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the repair and 

maintenance on the La Ronge north road, Highway 102, is 

important to northern residents and must be undertaken 

immediately. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is signed by many La Ronge and area residents. 

I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Missing Persons Week 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 5th to the 

11th has been proclaimed Missing Persons Week in 

Saskatchewan. It’s an important time to acknowledge this very 

serious and complex issue. As was mentioned during 

introductions today, the Minister of Justice and the Minister of 

Corrections and Policing joined families, community members, 

and representatives of the provincial partnerships committee on 

missing persons to recognize the ongoing need to resolve 

missing persons cases. 

 

This is the first year that the province has recognized a week 

related to public information and education about missing 

persons. We are confident that this will serve as a benchmark 

for similar activities in the coming years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sadly, there are currently 114 missing persons 

cases in Saskatchewan. I wish to have a list of those names 

tabled today. I have it with me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unless we personally have experienced the 

devastating impact of a missing loved one, it’s hard to imagine 

the tragic consequences — wondering where they are, whether 

they are safe, and when they will return. These are the reasons 

why the work of the provincial partnership committee of 

missing persons is so important. This includes cultivating 

awareness, generating research, dispelling myths, and most 

importantly, providing assistance to the friends and family of 

missing persons. The excellent work of this committee ensures 

that missing persons are in our thoughts this week and every 

week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Women of Distinction Awards 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I had the honour of 

attending the 32nd annual Regina and region YWCA [Young 

Women’s Christian Association] Women of Distinction Awards 

gala. It was a special night of inspiration and celebration, and 

tremendous nominees and award recipients abounded. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, there was an astonishing 142 nominees overall, 

each one worthy of thanks and congratulations. 

 

In Leadership and Management category, the award went to 

Kathy Hillman-Weir. The Circle of Friends award was garnered 

by Sharon Finnik and Candace Isbister. In Wellness, 

Recreation, and Healthy Living, the winner was Dr. Sarah 

Liskowich. Anna Davis received the Young Woman of Promise 

award, and Joanne Skidmore took home the prestigious Jacqui 

Shumiatcher Arts Award. Community Leadership and 

Enhancement went to Danah Hysuick, and Contribution to a 

Rural Community to Jeannie DesRochers. Cultural Heritage 

Award recipient Jaqueline Anaquod, brought the audience to its 

feet in ovation with her acceptance speech. Dr. Carol Fulton 

received the Education and Mentorship Award. Enterprise and 

Innovation was a tie between Valerie Sluth and Jacqueline 

Tisher, and the Lifetime Achievement Award went to Anna 

Mann. 

 

It was an incredible night, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank 

everyone who helped to make the gala such a great success. 

Particularly I want to commend the efforts of gala host Lorie 

Lindsay, gala committee Chair Carrie Kotylak, and Regina 

YWCA president Diana Adams, and Regina YWCA executive 

director Deanna Elias-Henry for another great Women of 

Distinction gala. And a final word of thanks goes to the staff, 

volunteers, and supporters of the Regina YWCA for the great 

work of caring and support that they do the whole year through. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 



3456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2013 

Recognizing Flood Responders and Volunteers 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

this Assembly to recognize the teams of Saskatchewan flood 

responders and volunteers who have worked so diligently to 

protect their communities this spring. 

 

Thousands of citizens across our province have donated many 

hours of their time to help protect and provide flood relief for 

their communities, whether it be through making sandbags and 

berms or lending a hand or even a home to community 

members who were forced to leave theirs due to rising flood 

water. 

 

While flood relief efforts have been going strong in many areas 

around the province, I would like to make a special mention of 

those volunteers working extra long hours in 13 communities 

which are currently under a state of emergency. Mr. Speaker, in 

my constituency, the RM [rural municipality] of Wilton, from 

April 26th to today they have logged over 1,200 man-hours. 

From Friday, April 26th to May 3rd they had crews working 24 

hours a day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in recognizing and 

thanking all of those individuals who have worked around the 

clock to protect their neighbours and communities this spring. 

The volunteer spirit seen across our province in times like this 

is what makes Saskatchewan such a truly special place to live. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Occupational Health and Safety Week 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is North 

American Occupational Health and Safety Week. Occupational 

health and safety is an issue that impacts workers through 

Saskatchewan. This week is especially important, given the 

tragic workplace-related deaths of 60 people this past year. 

Saskatchewan also has the dubious honour of the second worst 

rate of workplace-related injuries nationwide. Clearly, we have 

a lot of work to do in addressing the real risks that individuals 

are facing in their workplaces. 

 

We are all pleased to see the work that Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board is doing to tackle the issue of workplace 

injuries with its Mission: Zero campaign. Shifts in workplace 

culture will take the co-operation of both employees and 

employers. And we’ve also seen real progress this year with 

two issues that we raised. Jimmy’s law and Howard’s law are 

two concrete steps towards protecting the rights of workers in 

safe workplaces. 

 

Our concern is that occupational health and safety will not be 

adequately addressed in Bill 85, and we hope to flesh that out 

more in committee this week to get this important job done 

correctly. That may mean, Mr. Speaker, that we slow this bill 

down in order to ensure that workers get the protections they 

need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Occupational Health and Safety Week is a great 

opportunity for us all to commit to safer workplaces. This is a 

conversation that involves workers of all ages and abilities and 

employers from both large and small workplaces, Mr. Speaker. 

I look forward to continuing this discussion. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Family First Radiothon 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday I along with the member from Moose Jaw North were 

pleased to participate in the seventh annual Family First 

Radiothon. This event was put on by 800 CHAB for the Moose 

Jaw Health Region and held at the Town and Country Mall 

from 6 a.m. May 2nd until 6 p.m. May 3rd. 

 

All proceeds went towards the new nursery equipment that will 

be used in the new hospital, Mr. Speaker. The event raised a 

whopping $182,369. Moose Jaw and area residents were able to 

purchase a Radiothon heart to be entered to win concert tickets, 

food certificates, an autographed Steve Yzerman Detroit Wings 

jersey, and more. To date the Radiothon has raised over $1.2 

million for new hospital equipment in Moose Jaw. 

 

I would like to take a moment to thank all those people who 

supported this event. I would also like to give a special thanks 

to Mr. Kelly McElree and all of the organizers that made this 

year’s radiothon a great success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing the 

Family First Radiothon 2013 and the generosity of the Moose 

Jaw area residents in raising money for new nursery equipment 

in the new hospital. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

National Nursing Week 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. May 6th to 

12th is National Nursing Week. This is a special time we set 

aside to honour the vital role all nurses play in our health care 

system in all of our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a moment to tell you about Dr. 

Hope Bilinski and Heather Keith, both guests today in the 

legislature and wonderful examples of Saskatchewan nurses. 

 

Dr. Bilinski is a nursing professor in Saskatoon who is part of a 

team that received 3.6 million to partner with organizations in 

northern Tanzania to improve health services for mothers and 

their children. Current patients receive health care at the Mama 

Kwanza or Mother First clinic. They also need economic, 

social, nutritional, and educational support to keep them 

healthy. Congratulations, Dr. Bilinski, on your very prestigious 

grant. 

 

Heather Keith is a nurse practitioner who recently received the 

Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal for her outstanding 

work in health care. She worked in Sandy Bay for many years 

and is passionate about advancing health care for people living 

in northern Saskatchewan. After leaving the North in 2007, 

Heather remained dedicated to northern people, becoming 



May 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3457 

director of nurse practitioner education for the three northern 

regions and authorities. Congratulations, Heather, on receiving 

the Queen’s diamond medal jubilee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in thanking all 

the nurses for their ongoing contributions to the health care 

system and in wishing them the very best this week. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Provincial Disability Strategy 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to inform all members that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has taken another important step towards making 

this province the best place to live in Canada for people with 

disabilities. This morning, the process of developing a 

comprehensive disability strategy for the province of 

Saskatchewan was launched. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the disability strategy will focus on the priority 

areas specified in our government’s plan for growth: 

accessibility, affordability, and availability of housing, 

transportation, employment, education, support for community 

inclusion, and support for caregivers. Other priorities may 

emerge during the consultation process. 

 

Nominations are currently open for the citizen consultation 

team, and we invite interested individuals to submit their names 

for consideration. The members of that group will be 

announced in the fall and will get to work right away on 

developing the public consultation process. 

 

Preliminary plans call for a number of consultation methods to 

be utilized — including video conferencing, online 

submissions, written submissions, and face-to-face public 

forums — to ensure access for persons with disabilities. 

Community forums will also be held across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is growing. We need to ensure that 

everyone is able to share in the opportunities created by that 

growth. We’ll do that by hearing from as many people and as 

many different viewpoints as possible in the development of our 

disability strategy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday I raised 

the concerns of Craig Bayliss who visited the Premier’s 

constituency office at least four times since March to seek a 

group home placement for his son. 

 

Craig’s son requires round-the-clock care due to intellectual 

disabilities and significant mental health challenges. And Craig 

and his wife are unable to care for their son because of their 

own health concerns. Despite repeated trips to the Premier’s 

office, Craig wanted his son’s case raised in question period in 

the legislature in order to get the attention of the Sask Party 

government. My question to the Premier: why was Craig 

Bayliss ignored when he sought help from the Premier’s office? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We certainly 

didn’t ignore the requests from the Bayliss family, from Craig, 

on behalf of their child who needs placement with respect to a 

group home and program services. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we 

undertook to raise the issue with Social Services as well as with 

the excellent NGO [non-governmental organization] that 

operates group homes in the Southwest, called the Southwest 

Homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can report to the House that a space, a permanent 

space in Swift Current was offered to the young individual with 

the intellectual disability in spring of last year. Southwest 

Homes held off for six months before they actually had to give 

that space up to another that was waiting, but the family had six 

months to decide on a space for their child. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since discussions 

occurred with the family, Mr. Speaker, what has changed is the 

health situation of his parents and their ability in order to take 

care of their son. And it’s that reason, Mr. Speaker, that they 

went to the Premier’s office so many times in Swift Current. 

 

What’s also puzzling, Mr. Speaker, is that their concern is still 

being ignored. When I raised this issue on Thursday in question 

period, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Crown Investments said 

someone would contact the Bayliss family immediately after 

question period to offer some assistance. Well, Mr. Speaker, as 

of 1:20 p.m. this afternoon, the Bayliss family had still not 

received a phone call from anyone. 

 

It’s bad enough, Mr. Speaker, that they were ignored when they 

went to the office. But to have the issue raised in question 

period in the legislature and to still not have appropriate 

follow-up, Mr. Speaker, that’s completely not acceptable. My 

question to the Premier: since the Minister of Crown 

Investments said the family would be contacted following 

question period, why is it that the Bayliss family has not been 

contacted? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we take this case, we take all 

cases brought to the constituency office very, very, seriously. 

The government takes these cases seriously. That’s why we’ve 

implemented the 440 wait-list and met those on the wait-list, in 

fact 215 beyond the list who are getting programs and services. 

 

And I need to repeat for the Leader of the Opposition that a 

permanent space in Swift Current was offered in this particular 

case last spring, not that long ago, just in the spring. The space 

was held on for six months, empty basically, and available for 

six months by Southwest Homes, is my understanding, waiting 

for the family to be able to make the decision. They were 

unable to for whatever reason. Obviously parents make these 

decisions, and should, but as a result, the Southwest Homes had 



3458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2013 

to give this space up to someone else last fall. 

 

Since then, Mr. Speaker — and our office is certainly aware of 

it — Social Services has been working with the family. 

Southwest Homes has continued to work for the family. So 

what the Hon. Leader of the Opposition is alleging simply isn’t 

true. In fact I understand . . . I believe there’s some respite 

programming over the weekend that they’re making available in 

the interim until another space can become available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have many, many more spaces in Swift 

Current. That’s a good thing. But there, in this case, was a space 

offered, held on for six months, and now in the interim we’re 

working on programming until a permanent space is found 

again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, from Hansard last Thursday 

when this was raised, on page 3431 the Minister for Crown 

Investments said, “Mr. Speaker, we will definitely arrange for 

someone, immediately following question period, to meet with 

Craig and his family.” It went on to say, “But as I said, we’ll 

have someone meet with this family and discuss their particular 

issue.” Mr. Speaker, as of 1:20 p.m. this afternoon, they had not 

yet received a phone call about a potential meeting, about when 

that could occur. 

 

We also raised on Thursday the issue, Mr. Speaker, of Devon 

Birns. Devon’s sister, Jennifer, is his full-time caregiver. And 

she was shocked by the Premier’s slick announcement about the 

elimination of the wait-list for people with disabilities because 

her brother Devon, Mr. Speaker, has been on a wait-list of one 

kind of another since 2006, and he’s never been offered an 

actual spot in a program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, following question period, the Minister for Crown 

Investments went out in the rotunda, stubbornly dismissed 

Jennifer’s concerns and said that she was lying, that she wasn’t 

telling the truth. Jennifer said, “The fact you can say we’ve 

been offered them and refused them is disgusting. If we were 

offered them, we would know.” 

 

My question to the Premier: is it appropriate, when a family 

comes to the legislature with a very real concern, that a senior 

minister would go out into the rotunda and seek to discredit 

those individuals who are caring for their loved ones? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

the Bayliss family, I’m informed that the minister’s office has 

been in touch, and a meeting is scheduled with the minister. So 

what the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] committed to is in fact happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that the facts surrounding 

the Bayliss case were available to the Leader of the Opposition. 

He may want to just call in advance. These are serious issues. 

We take them seriously. I think he does too. He may want to 

call in advance just to understand exactly what’s happened. 

It isn’t just government that’s responding. It’s not all about 

politics. We have NGOs like Southwest Homes. We have 

ministry officials who have taken this issue very seriously, who 

are now providing either a space or programming to 600-plus 

people that were previously not served not very long ago, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

With respect to the Birns family, we are aware that either 

programs or financial support were offered. Mr. Speaker, I 

know the minister is prepared to meet with the family to work 

through these, as are officials at the non-government agencies 

and at the ministry that are involved. Mr. Speaker if anyone 

doubts the commitment on this side of the House to these 

issues, they need only look at the record of this government 

with respect to people with disabilities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for Mr. Bayliss’s situation, what 

he has told us is that a spot was offered two to three years ago, 

Mr. Speaker, and since that time his health has changed, which 

has affected their ability to care for their son. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see with the Bayliss family and the Birns 

family is that these families are not alone. There are other 

families who have contacted us, Mr. Speaker, but they’re afraid 

to come forward because they’re afraid of the response from the 

Sask Party government. 

 

It speaks to a problem with the government, that they will have 

the news conference; they will deliver a self-congratulatory 

news release, Mr. Speaker. But then we see a different story 

emerge and it speaks to another problem with the Sask Party, 

Mr. Speaker. When the concerns of real people are brought 

forward, instead of listening and trying to fix them, Mr. 

Speaker, we see a dismissive attitude, a stubborn attitude, and 

we see a refusal to listen. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he apologize to the Birns 

family and Bayliss family for how they’ve been treated? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, again I invite the Leader of 

the Opposition to call. We can have a discussion, especially if it 

relates to my constituency office, what has or hasn’t happened. 

 

We also made available the individual who does an amazing 

job, together with her team, of operating of Southwest Homes. 

The Leader of the Opposition can call and find out some 

information. And perhaps we’re falling short in an area, and he 

can raise it again in the legislature. But, Mr. Speaker, that needs 

to happen if we’re actually going to make progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we became government in 2007, the then 

minister of Social Services presented these facts to the 

government, to the cabinet, that there were at that time 440 

people who were on a wait-list. They needed a program, day 

programming or a place to live — 440 people with intellectual 

disabilities. We set aside $52 million, Mr. Speaker, and worked 

to eliminate that particular list, knowing that this would be a 

process, not an event. We’ve created SAID [Saskatchewan 

assured income for disability] and we’ve added income support 



May 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3459 

for SAID as well. Mr. Speaker, the support for those with 

intellectual disabilities from this government has been 

unprecedented. 

 

In the last 10 years of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government, 99 individuals received this kind of care, a place to 

live or programming. We do that almost every single year since 

we’ve been elected. We recognize that there’s more work to be 

done. If the Leader of the Opposition is serious and it’s not just 

about politics, we want to work with him. He can call about 

specific cases or the general issue as well as raise them in the 

House. But, Mr. Speaker, we encourage him to do that in the 

advance of raising special cases so that we know all the facts 

are presented, and so that he has them as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, at 1:20 p.m., our office called Mr. 

Bayliss and asked if they’d received a call about a meeting. He 

said they had not received a call. So my question to the Premier: 

if the minister has set up a meeting with Mr. Bayliss, why is it 

that he doesn’t know about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my office has advised me 

that there was a discussion about a meeting. I am more than 

willing to meet with the individuals. I do understand that 

circumstances change. I do know that families have the best 

interests of their children at heart all the time. I would be 

willing to meet with them at any time. In fact I was hoping that 

we’d get a chance to meet with them this week. I’ve been 

informed that they had chatted with them. I will check it out 

again. I will make sure that I’m available for them at any time. 

But I do understand also, Mr. Speaker, that families’ 

circumstances change and that we need to be discussing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opportunities that we have to deal with people 

with disabilities in this province is unprecedented. I know that 

the members opposite don’t want to believe that. I know that 

they don’t want to acknowledge the fact that in their last 10 

years of government they had 99 new clients recognized. In our 

first five years we have the 440 wait-list plus 215. That’s 131 

people a year, Mr. Speaker. We do care about them, and our 

goal is to make sure this is the best place to live for people with 

a disability. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following question 

period on Thursday, it’s my understanding that eventually 

discussion of a meeting was talked about with the Birns family. 

My question to the minister: is the minister confusing the Birns 

family with the Bayliss family with respect to a meeting that is 

scheduled? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the meeting is with the 

Birns family this week. The Bayliss family is one that I will 

continue to talk to my staff about. I want to make sure that the 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition is aware that both clients are in 

receipt of funding and/or services at this time. We have ongoing 

discussions with them. The fact that they have a vulnerable 

individual that needs the care of the province is something that 

is important to us. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with 

families and I apologize if I mixed up the names of them. I am 

meeting with one of them this week, and we’ll continue to set 

up meetings. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday the 

Minister for Crown Investments said, “The 440 wait-list at that 

time, of course, now would be five years. And was there an 

emergent wait-list coming behind it? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker.” 

The Minister for Crown Investments said that there was 

absolutely an emergent wait-list. My question to the Minister of 

Social Services: does she agree with what her predecessor said 

so firmly in question period on Thursday? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, obviously in estimates for I 

think it was about four hours, and then at other times we’ve had 

the opportunity to talk about the wait-list, the 440 individuals 

that received no services when we became government. There 

was 440 individuals that were not looked at by the previous 

government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have provided services, developed or 

under development, for these 40 individuals. And we do know 

that along with that, we have another 215 individuals whose 

cases came before us, and we understood that they also needed 

care immediately. That’s why we put the effort into it, the 

funding available to make sure that there was, as we said, 

always a need for services and we would be providing services 

for individuals as they came forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that every year there’s between 20 and 

40 individuals that are going to need the care of the 

government. That’s why this year we put another $1 million in 

to build homes for or services for people with individuals. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 22nd, the 

day of the Premier’s slick announcement about the end of the 

wait-list, I asked the Minister of Social Services, “But so is 

everybody then taken care of? Or do you have an additional 

number of people who are still waiting for services? Or a new 

list?” The Minister of Social Services replied, “No, there isn’t a 

new list.” She went on to say that the government is now 

looking at children in care who will need support down the 

road. Yet last Thursday, the Minister for Crown Investments 

contradicted the Minister of Social Services and said, “We do 

not deny that there has been a wait-list that has emerged beyond 

the 440 wait-list. We totally recognize that.” 

 

Why did the minister say so clearly that there was no new list, 

and why did her predecessor completely contradict her? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 



3460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2013 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting line of 

questioning from the member opposite. She continues to talk 

about lists and I continue to talk about the people. I continue to 

talk about the 215 individuals that we have served, that 

emerged, that came to our attention as we became . . . as we 

were working on the 440 list. And I said not once, not twice in 

Hansard that I understood there was more people that were 

going to be needing help. There always will be. We understand 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact that they are not considered on a list is because we see 

them working into our system all the time. As soon as we meet 

with them, as soon as we identify them through child and 

family services, through community-based organizations, 

through Education, through Health, then we identify their 

needs. We plan with the community. We plan with the families. 

We plan with CBOs [community-based organization] to ensure 

that we will have the appropriate services for those individuals 

as they move forward. 

 

Yes there is always people that are going to need our support. 

But no we’re not going to put 440 people on a wait-list like you 

did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting. On 

the day that the Premier had a slick announcement about the 

elimination of the wait-list, the Minister for Social Services 

adamantly said there is no new wait-list. But then last week the 

former minister for Social Services, the member for Humboldt, 

said there is absolutely a new waiting list. 

 

These two very different stories from the Sask Party 

government have created a lot of confusion and frustration. For 

who? For families, Mr. Speaker. And it illustrates that the Sask 

Party government cares more about spin and PR [public 

relations] than the very real concerns of Saskatchewan people. 

And when these very real concerns are brought forward, the 

Sask Party government is stubborn and dismissive. 

 

When the Minister of Social Services said there is no new 

wait-list, was she aware of the many families who are still 

waiting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the disability community 

participants that were with us the day that we made the 

announcement were very excited about the fact that they 

actually had a government that was listening to them. In fact 

today we have some more of the individuals that came to the 

gallery to talk about the next steps when it comes to disability 

strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t consider it a slick announcement. What I 

do is consider the fact that government is working with 

individuals, that we are able to work with families and 

communities and supply services, respite, day programming for 

individuals who desperately need it. 

 

When we became government, we inherited 440 people who the 

members opposite didn’t seem to care about at all. They were 

on their list of people that they were ignoring. We know that 

there are between 20 and 40 individuals every year who are 

going to come forward. We have already identified them in 

many, many cases, through child and family services, through 

community-based organizations, through Education, through 

Health. It’s not going to be a surprise. We’re not going to have 

a backlog of individuals because we see them as people, not just 

a list. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they most certainly are people. 

And that’s why, when individuals come to the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, they should be respected. They should be listened to 

and their concerns should be addressed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had a situation on Thursday, Mr. Speaker. We brought up 

the situation of Mr. Bayliss and care for his son. The Crown 

Investments minister said that he would be called right after 

question period, Mr. Speaker. I asked the Premier why he was 

not called after question period because, as of 1:20, he had not 

been called. The Premier said there was a meeting, which was 

later cleared up in question period by the Minister for Social 

Services saying, well actually it’s a different family that’s 

having the meeting, and there hasn’t been a meeting set up with 

Mr. Bayliss. 

 

I can understand, Mr. Speaker, how we’re concerned about the 

details when we have conflicting stories from two different 

ministers, and when the Premier says that a meeting is set up 

when in fact there is not a meeting set up. So my question to the 

Premier: following this question period, can he guarantee that 

Mr. Bayliss will be contacted and his concerns will be 

addressed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, I 

guarantee that we will be calling to see if we can set up a 

meeting. I guarantee that our first concern is always for people 

with disabilities. I know that families are going through a lot of 

struggles right now, when they have . . . their loved one is very, 

very vulnerable, and they’re asking government for support. 

Sometimes those needs change. 

 

I know that every year there’s going to be more individuals that 

come forward, and that’s why this ministry has received support 

from this government in every budget, more support, regardless 

of what the economic situation may be in the province. We still 

recognize that a big responsibility for government is our 

vulnerable individuals, not just the wait-list ones, but the ones 

that are emerging. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have not just spent money on wait-lists. We’ve 

talked about the SAID program. We’ve talked about disability 

rental housing. We’ve got approved private service homes. 

We’ve got CBO increments for the people that are working 

with vulnerable people. Mr. Speaker, this file, there will always 

be more to do, and as a province we recognize that, and as a 

government we are committed to ensuring that people with 

disabilities will be in the leading place in Canada. 

 



May 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3461 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, earlier in question period I asked 

the Premier a direct question about the conduct of his ministers, 

and he did not provide an answer. The question was, the 

Minister of Crown Investments, following question period on 

Thursday she went out into the rotunda and blatantly tried to 

discredit a citizen who came to the legislature with concerns 

about her family. 

 

I did not think, Mr. Speaker, that’s how, when people come to 

the Assembly, how they should be treated. My question to the 

Premier: does he believe that what his minister did in that 

situation, in blatantly attempting to discredit a person coming to 

the legislature, what was that appropriate behaviour? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — My colleague, the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation, the former minister of Social 

Services, understands this file very, very well. She understands 

the fact that we have not only the people that were on the 

wait-lists when we became government, but there was emerging 

needs. 

 

She also understands and sits on a cabinet table when it comes 

to working with individuals and knowing that there’s always 

more money to be spent. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

individuals, we’re not really working with politics like the 

members opposite. This isn’t about politics. It’s about families; 

it’s about vulnerable individuals; it’s about children. And that’s 

where we’re putting our priorities always as this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Funding for University 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, at the University of 

Saskatchewan, the Sask Party spin doesn’t match reality. On 

Friday the university put out a press release announcing that a 

flock of sheep the university has maintained for 100 years will 

be the next victim of budget pressures. This adds to the 

dismaying list of developments at the university, such as the 

closure and sale of the Kenderdine Campus, rising tuitions, 

hundreds of layoffs, growing institutional debt, and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if one were to believe the billboards the Sask 

Party has spent taxpayer money on, the situation on campus 

couldn’t be better. But a for sale sign on the flock of 300 sheep 

points to a very different reality. To the minister: does he 

believe his own spin about how great things are on campus? 

And if so, why do we see yet another long-standing and valued 

institution at the University of Saskatchewan being put on the 

auction block? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. When the last election came along, I never would have 

thought that I would have been answering a question about 

sheep in the House. However having said that, Mr. Speaker, I 

do have a little bit of background information. Mr. Speaker, the 

University of Saskatchewan will continue to make sheep 

available to meet teaching and research needs in the College of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the university is an independent institution. We 

will continue to provide them significant amounts of funding. In 

2013-14 we provide $333 million in operating funding, a 59 per 

cent increase from 2007. Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, we’ve 

invested $260.3 million in capital. We’ve provided $15 million 

for 400 beds. It is the first investment in student housing since 

the 1960s. Mr. Speaker, we support the university. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan 

is in fact facing a $44 million operating budget shortfall, and 

that doesn’t even include the broken promise on the capital side, 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government’s broken promise to 

complete the health sciences project which has forced the 

university to max out its credit. I’m sure that the cost of 

maintaining the 100-year-old flock of teaching and research 

sheep wasn’t costing the university $44 million per year. 

 

So after the decisions on Kenderdine, layoffs, program reviews, 

tuition increases, now the university’s selling the sheep, the 

flock of sheep. To the minister: what’s next? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

raised the issue of the Academic Health Sciences Building. Mr. 

Speaker, we have provided $115.9 million to this. Mr. Speaker, 

we are also providing another $4 million this year for 

completion of the A and B wings, and will continue to ensure 

that that project completes on time when it was originally 

scheduled to do so. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the NDP 

announced approval of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

Health Sciences Building in 2003 at a cost of $120 million. Mr. 

Speaker, construction was not started until after the 2007 

election. Now it is going to cost about $270 million, Mr. 

Speaker. Had the members opposite done what they were 

supposed to do on time, Mr. Speaker, we would not be where 

we are today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will continue to work with the university. I am proud to be 

a graduate of that university, and we will ensure that they 

continue to be adequately and appropriately funded. 

 

The Speaker: — I just want to remind members that there is no 

need for animal calls in the House. We may have to call a vet 

with a very large needle if it happens again. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 



3462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2013 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Tuesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:21.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wyant ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3453, 3454 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3453, 3454 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3453 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3454 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3454 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3454 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3454 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3454 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3454 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3455 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3455 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Missing Persons Week 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3455 

 Women of Distinction Awards 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3455 

 Recognizing Flood Responders and Volunteers 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 

 Occupational Health and Safety Week 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 

 Family First Radiothon 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3456 

 National Nursing Week 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 

 Provincial Disability Strategy 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3457 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3457 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3457 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3459 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3459 

 Funding for University 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3461 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3461 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




