




















































Hansard: November 26, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 19B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2013, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4249 

 November 26, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 102 — The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter discussion here this afternoon. I appreciate the 

warm welcome from members opposite. 

 

We’ll discuss here this afternoon Bill No. 102, The Builders’ 

Lien Amendment Act, 2013. And this is all about, this bill 

anyways as expressed, the expressed purposes from the 

minister, is all about balancing, I guess the balance for ensuring 

that the building trades, the construction industry is able to be 

paid in a fair and appropriate way for their services, and that 

there’s some protection and rights afforded to landowners, 

property owners, Mr. Speaker. So it’s about balance and 

ensuring that, as I say, owners have some rights through these 

processes as well. 

 

And the minister suggests that there’s a careful balance that’s 

been struck here. Through our consultations we’ll ensure that 

that’s the case. We know that often when this government 

pushes forward with legislation, it does so without the proper 

consultation that is required. And because of that fail to 

understand the consequences of some of the changes that 

they’re making, we hope that’s not the case with The Builders’ 

Lien Amendment Act because certainly the rights and ability for 

the building trades, for the construction industry to be properly 

paid is important, but also to make sure that balance is there for 

landowners and property owners. 

 

One of the changes that certainly seems to make sense is the 

addition of the land surveyors to the listed services that would 

be brought into this Act. Certainly they’re an important part of 

the building process and they too deserve some peace of mind 

and protection through that building process, not unlike an 

architect or an engineer or any of the other trades along the 

way. So certainly that seems to make sense. 

 

We recognize as well that there is . . . And I’ll quote from the 

minister here: 

 

. . . this bill will also increase the limitation period 

applicable to trust claims from one year to two years. The 

Act currently provides that a trustee is discharged from its 

obligations on the expiry of one year after the contract is 

completed or abandoned. The limitation period is at odds 

with the general two-year limitation period in The 

Limitations Act. Additionally it often catches claimants by 

surprise, as a trust claim is usually brought at the same 

time as a lien claim, to which a two-year limitation period 

applies. 

 

So it seems that there is some harmonization here with other 

laws, other regulations, and that may make sense. We’ll press 

the minister for a little further detail on that front: who impacts 

this, who’s been calling for this, and what are some of the 

consequences as a result. The other piece of this bill changes 

where what’s deemed to be complete for work. And it used to 

be that it was either 1 per cent of the contract or $1,000, 

whichever is less. 

 

And the minister is suggesting that this is no longer an 

appropriate value, based on the times. He suggests that this 

number was brought in in 1986, and that 1,000 is no longer a 

number that’s appropriate. That would I guess reflect the 

inflation in building costs that we’ve experienced, inflation in 

contracts that we’ve experienced within the province. 

 

And certainly there seems to be some merit to that statement. 

Now there’s no longer a set value as there was the 1,000. That 

hasn’t been increased. That’s simply been eliminated. And now 

it’s simply 1 per cent of the contract. So fulfillment of a 

contract is considered to be complete once I guess 99 per cent 

of the work would be complete, if I’m reading this properly, 99 

per cent of the contract price. And so we’ll evaluate with the 

industry, we’ll evaluate with landowners and homeowners, with 

builders to ensure that that’s the appropriate balance, or should 

there be a piece of protection like there was before, recognizing 

that $1,000 simply isn’t appropriate anymore with the 

inflationary pressures that have been experienced. 

 

With that being said, Mr. Speaker, we’ll engage in the 

consultation with stakeholders, making sure we’re balancing off 

their rights, their needs, making sure we’re hearing their 

concerns, listening to their input. Hopefully government’s done 

that already. As I say, far too often we see that government 

push forward without listening, and the consequences are often 

quite hard on those on the ground. And we’ll do our work on 

that front, and we’ll look forward to pressing the minister for 

some broader detail as it relates to this Act. Certainly this 

balance is important to the construction industry. It’s also very 

important to developers, homeowners, landowners, and we 

recognize the value of making sure that this Act meets the needs 

of our province moving forward. 

 

But with that being said, Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien 

Amendment Act, 2013, I’ll now adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



4250 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 103 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

wade into the discussion on Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act. I think before we talk a 

little bit about the Act, I think it’s important to talk about what 

the maintenance enforcement office is actually about, and that’s 

who carries out maintenance enforcement orders. 

 

So it was actually established in 1986, and it’s responsible for 

recording and enforcing registered support orders. So when a 

parent has been mandated by the court to pay support to 

children or is to be paying support to children — not just 

mandated by the court, there are pieces of legislation that 

govern that as well — you can register with maintenance 

enforcement if you’re not receiving support from your former 

partner or the parent of your child. And the maintenance 

enforcement office is responsible for enforcing that support 

order. 

 

There are different tools that currently the maintenance 

enforcement office has before it. Right now the director of 

maintenance enforcement can garnish wages or other income. It 

can suspend the driver’s licence of an individual who isn’t 

paying to care for their child or children. The director of 

maintenance enforcement can apply for denial of federal 

licences such as passports and place garnishments with the 

federal government in order to intercept funds like the GST 

[goods and services tax] refunds and income tax funds. The 

director of maintenance enforcement, the office can attach and 

collapse pension entitlements and RRSPs [registered retirement 

savings plan] and ultimately may apply for seizure of the 

payor’s property, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are the things that are currently in the Act and from the 

Act from 1997. And the bill before us right now will be 

amending that Act to provide the maintenance enforcement 

office with one more tool in trying to ensure that parents take 

responsibility for the children that they have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s . . . I know the minister in his second reading 

speech talked about the proud record that we have here in 

Saskatchewan, or this province has in collecting money on 

behalf of families who are owed it from a partner who should 

also be supporting the children. And the record here in 

Saskatchewan in 2012-2013, that fiscal year, the Minister of 

Justice has said that 91 per cent of payments were collected that 

had been registered with the maintenance enforcement office. 

He had pointed out that that’s one of the highest records in 

Canada, or that’s the highest percentage in Canada, which is 

great. And in the 2012-2013 fiscal year there was a record 

amount collected. And he had pointed out that that was $39 

million in collections, which is great.  

 

But it also gave me a little bit of pause to think that that’s a 

heck of a lot of parents who have stepped away from their 

parenting responsibilities and have had to have been mandated 

and have had to have punishments put in front of them before 

they’ve taken responsibility for their children. And I think that 

that’s quite striking, that $39 million here in Saskatchewan was 

owing or forthcoming to families and the maintenance 

enforcement office was able to help collect that. 

 

But the minister had pointed out the 91 per cent rate, which is 

great. I’ve had the opportunity in my office to deal with some of 

the 9 per cent of those who have not been successful, the 

tougher cases. And I think the ministry has much to be proud 

about around the 91 per cent, but when you think about those 9 

per cent of families who are getting by on one income, often 

supporting a child or multiple children, and the former partner 

isn’t taking responsibility, or is neglecting their responsibility to 

pay for the children that they’ve had, I think that that’s an awful 

shame. And I think about the 9 per cent, and I can think of a 

very tough case here that the poor director of maintenance 

enforcement, Lyle, I think we had him on speed dial in our 

office there for a little while, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think one of the problems with that 9 per cent is that they are 

more difficult cases for any number of reasons. Anecdotally 

I’ve heard that it can be very difficult with self-employed 

people sometimes to get money owed from parents to support 

children. But I think one of the problems is some of the tools 

that already exist aren’t always used to their fullest extent. 

 

I’m thinking of one particular case where the taxpayers in this 

one particular case over a period of years have paid thousands 

of dollars for legal fees. The maintenance enforcement office 

has had to pay thousands of dollars in legal fees to try to get 

money from this one particular individual to support his — in 

this case it was a man — to support his two children. 

 

And back and forth, despite using some of these tools, the 

taking of the driver’s licence seemed to help and dislodge some 

of the money at one point in time. But he was given his licence 

back when he made a small payment and then proceeded to jam 

up the system again and wouldn’t pay for one or two months at 

a time and would be called back into court and would not 

appear. His lawyer would appear and have some excuse as to 

why he couldn’t appear. And this went on and still continues to 

this day, Mr. Speaker. As I said, at one point we basically had 

the maintenance enforcement office on speed dial in our office, 

just trying to, trying to hasten the process for this family who 

. . . There were, I believe it was about $12,000 in arrears that 

this family did not have to pay for children’s basics, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the tools that have been before the maintenance enforcement 

office have been effective to some extent. We see the 91 per 

cent. But that 9 per cent, I mean I always like to think you have 

to strive for that perfect record. Ninety-one per cent is pretty 

great, but what other tools could be put in place to get to that 

100 per cent, Mr. Speaker, so families do have the resources 

they need to be able to make sure kids have the full opportunity 

to lead great lives as kids and have the opportunity to grow into 

productive kids or young adults who are an active part of our 

society? 

 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4251 

So one of the changes here is, one of the amendments is 

permitting the maintenance enforcement officer to be able to 

direct the Minister of Environment to prohibit a hunting or 

angling licence from being issued to a payer who is arrears on 

support payments by at least three months. 

 

So this is another tool that the government is adding, and this 

has come I understand directly from the maintenance 

enforcement office. They’re interested in improving that 91 per 

cent track record, Mr. Speaker, and this is one of the tools that 

they’ve decided to come up with. And I know the minister has 

said that this will complement the existing tools and will only 

be utilized when other actions aimed at financial resources of 

the payer have proven unsuccessful. But I’d be interested in 

hearing a little bit more both from the maintenance enforcement 

officer . . . This might have been a good opportunity for the 

government to cast the net a little bit broader than the 

maintenance enforcement office, who has some serious 

expertise in this area, but so do other people. What other things 

could we do to ensure that parents are owning up to the 

responsibility of financially caring for their children, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

So I’m glad to see that this change has been made, and I have 

no idea . . . We don’t have any answers or any detail in terms of 

how many people the maintenance enforcement office thinks 

that this will impact. But if they believe that it is a useful tool, 

they are experts in that regard. But it would have been nice to 

see possibly some other, looking at outside our borders. And I 

know we’re doing well comparatively but, you know, you can 

always learn from somewhere else as well, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think that there would have been an opportunity here to think 

about how much further we could have enhanced this 

legislation. But on the face of it, Bill 103, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, is good. 

 

[19:15] 

 

This is about making sure that there is timely payment of 

support for children and families, which is absolutely critical. 

You can’t enrol . . . I’ve heard way too many stories from 

families who have such limited resources that they don’t have 

the opportunity to put their kids in dancing or hockey or any of 

the many . . . or sometimes even putting enough food on the 

table or gas in the car, Mr. Speaker. That’s a reality for many 

people, and when it’s left on the shoulders of one person to 

carry that responsibility, sometimes it’s too much. There isn’t 

enough money to be able to do that. So it’s important that those 

who are responsible or should be responsible for their children 

be held responsible. 

 

So with respect to Bill 103 again, as I said, we support this 

move. I would have liked to have seen a few other changes as 

well. And I would have liked to have seen perhaps a 

consultation process outside of the maintenance enforcement 

office and further afield to see what else we could have done to 

improve that 91 per cent rate because I can tell you from cases 

that have come into my office that not having help in supporting 

your children can be a real burden for many people. But with 

that, I do know that I have colleagues who would also like to 

speak to Bill 103, so I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 104 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 104, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment 

Act, is just making some minor changes as per the previous Bill 

103, The Enforcement Maintenance Orders Amendment Act. 

What this is doing is, the sole purpose of this bill is to make an 

English-only consequential amendment to the fisheries Act, 

1994. And this is necessary on account of The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013, which is a bilingual 

bill. 

 

So there’s very little to add to this. Again, as I said, we support 

the principle of the previous bill, Bill 103, which is ensuring 

that parents take responsibility from a financial perspective for 

their children, and making those necessary changes to ensure 

that the tools are there to be able to collect from parents I think 

is important and valid. So with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 105 — The 

Informal Public Appeals Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

pleased to rise this evening to have an opportunity to debate Bill 

No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. This is a very 

interesting proposition, Mr. Speaker, and I think, as far as I can 

tell, it’s the first time in Canada that this type of bill is actually 

being introduced. 

 

We know that there are all sorts of public appeals for funding 

and especially these days on the Internet when you see 



4252 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

KickStart or some of the online fundraising appeals. I’ve 

certainly participated in a number of them through supporting 

friends of mine with their projects. So apparently the Uniform 

Law Conference of Canada in 2011 recommended that the 

Uniform Informal Public Appeals Act be adopted by Canadian 

jurisdictions to govern the operation of these appeals. 

 

And as a person who’s been involved in a lot of fundraising 

activities, there are a number of questions that come to my mind 

about how these will actually operate on the ground. And 

certainly . . . Although when I was in law school, I avoided the 

trusts class like the dickens. I didn’t want to study trusts at all. I 

know they’re complex, and that was one of the reasons why I 

wanted to avoid them. Trusts are not an easy thing to 

understand. A lot of legal responsibilities come with it.  

 

And I’m not sure that, you know, when somebody’s house 

burns down and a community gets together that they have the 

wherewithal to put their head to the legal complexities that are 

in this type of bill. On the other hand though, I think the intent 

that’s behind it is one that’s appreciated. And certainly taking 

up the Uniform Law Conference of Canada on its 

recommendation is certainly of merit. 

 

So I’m a bit of two minds on this bill because I think, on the 

one hand, people who do these fundraisers or these public 

appeals for . . . They’re called informal because they’re usually 

spontaneous. They are often in reaction to a tragic event in a 

community or, you know, an illness in a family where certain 

medical needs need funding, and always, I would think, of an 

altruistic nature or philanthropic nature for sure. 

 

So those kind of things are what Saskatchewan’s all about, and 

I think we see examples of that time and time again. And many 

of the members introduce stories like that in the members’ 

statements here in the legislature, so we know that 

Saskatchewan people are certainly leaders when it comes to 

volunteerism and community spirit that leads to supporting 

families in times of tragedy or communities in times of need. 

 

So yes, a lot of money can be raised in these types of appeals. 

And what the Uniform Law Conference is concerned about is 

what happens to the money. Make sure that it’s properly 

handled because people are giving in good faith. And I know 

quite often when these types of appeals are initiated at a 

community level, the level of expertise that’s needed to handle 

large amounts of money often isn’t there. So I believe that this 

bill is intended to deal with some of those issues. 

 

You can see when you look at the table of contents of the bill, 

there’s five parts to it or six, but the three main parts are setting 

up the trust itself, and the trust . . . what’s going to be the 

governing authority. And the word governing authority, the 

term, phrase, governing authority, is one that’s defined in the 

proposed bill. And it basically says the governing authority is 

the authority that regulates the trusts. And it could be a number 

of things. It could be a constitution, a charter, an incorporating 

document, or bylaws. So sometimes in these public appeals they 

actually form some sort of corporate body. It may just be a 

contract. It could be a court order. And I think that’s one of the 

things this bill offers is the ability for the court to step in and 

regulate or be the governing authority. Or it could be a trust 

document. And I think trust documents are the ones that might 

scare people off who are just doing this just to help out their 

neighbour. So when substantial amounts of money are raised, 

obviously the people that are initiating this are going to have to 

make some difficult decisions or carefully thought out decisions 

on how to manage those sums of money. 

 

The second part of the bill deals with surpluses and refunds. 

And again, you know, it’s hard to imagine a charitable appeal 

where there is a surplus. But I suppose if money is needed to 

obtain some medical equipment in a local hospital for example, 

and that goal is reached and surpassed, what happens to the 

surplus funds? This bill purports to provide a framework for 

those people who don’t know what to do with money if there’s 

money left over. So that’s a helpful portion of the bill. 

 

And then finally part IV deals with the trustee’s powers and 

duties. And again when you start imposing legal duties and 

powers on people that are just trying to help out their 

neighbour, it could be a bit intimidating. So one of my concerns 

about this is, without sort of supporting information available to 

communities . . . And I’m presuming the ministry, in this case 

Ministry of Justice, would ensure that lay people who haven’t 

dealt with these types of formal fund structures are given as 

much assistance as possible to help them wade through the 

technical details that are there to provide the legal support for 

these types of activities. 

 

So I know the minister indicated that the bill is careful not to 

create hurdles for those with good intentions, and he said that 

you can choose not to use the forms to establish a public appeal 

and that there are protections for people that choose not to, but 

to a lesser extent. I think that needs to be more clear. And I am 

again anticipating that the ministry will be able to provide 

adequate documentation to ensure that people are not scared off 

by the forms, that they’re friendly to use, and that there’s 

backup support within the ministry to ensure that people can 

access the bill. 

 

He says the bill seeks to remove traps that have evolved so that 

well-meaning trustees who commence an appeal are not made 

victims of their own good intentions. And I’m not aware of any 

particular situation where that has occurred, and perhaps the 

ministry has had a number of situations arise or it’s been 

brought to their attention. This is a good intention bill, and I’m 

not sure if the need has really demonstrated itself here in 

Saskatchewan or not. 

 

Certainly Saskatchewan is always out front when it comes to 

helping their neighbour, and Saskatchewan people are always 

out front when it comes to volunteering and getting organized 

and supporting their communities. And I guess the idea that 

Saskatchewan’s the first jurisdiction to introduce this type of 

legislation is also an indication of that kind of community spirit. 

But we need to make sure that there aren’t pitfalls within the 

bill itself and that it’s actually really necessary. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, in principle the concept is good. We do 

have a few questions about how this is going to work out on the 

ground; where the need is for it. And the other question I have 

is why the ministry didn’t use the draft bill that was presented 

by the Uniform Law Conference of Canada. There’s one 

available on the website, and when I compare the two, they’re 

quite a bit different, although I think the principles are the same. 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4253 

Perhaps the drafters here in Saskatchewan just felt the language 

wasn’t familiar to our style of legislative drafting here in 

Saskatchewan. So those matters aren’t addressed in the 

minister’s comments and those would be questions that we 

would have. But by and large I think, you know, when people 

are raising this kind of money, if there’s a formal system 

available to them to protect themselves legally, then it’s a good 

thing. 

 

The only other piece that I wonder about is the online 

fundraising appeals that happen and how the monies are treated 

there. Because I think the location of the fund, if it’s in PayPal 

or if it’s located within some sort of online banking institution, 

may create some problems. And I’m not sure a bill of this sort 

can address those issues. 

 

But the minister made no comment about it, so again that might 

be some questions we might have for the ministry when it 

comes to time in committee and it’s . . . I know earlier one of 

my colleagues today indicated that it’s really difficult to 

speculate in this format, and the more details that are available 

from the minister when they give their second reading, the more 

questions that are answered on our part and certainly on the part 

of the public. 

 

So I know we have some fairly short, brief second reading 

introductions by the ministers, and I think it’s important for the 

public and for scrutiny of these bills to ensure that we have as 

much information as possible from the ministry so that we can 

understand the intent behind some of the provisions and behind 

some of the legislation that’s being introduced. 

 

So at that point, Mr. Speaker, that’s the end of my comments on 

this bill, and I’d like to move to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 

105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 106 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 106 — The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m pleased to rise to speak to Bill No. 106, The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2013. We understand that this bill 

was recommended by the Law Society of Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re going to engage with our consultation with the Law 

Society to ensure that the changes that are brought forward fully 

reflect the recommendations that they brought forward. As well, 

make sure we fully understand their intended consequences of 

this bill. As well, understanding if there was a broader scope of 

considerations than just what’s been brought forward in this bill 

from the Law Society. Because when you have the opportunity 

to open up one of these Acts and to make some refinements to 

legislation, you want to make sure that government’s providing 

the opportunity for a broad scope of considerations to ensure 

that you’re building Acts and making changes that will serve 

this province well and our institutions and our societies and 

associations well into the future. And certainly we need to make 

sure that’s the case for the Law Society of Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:30] 

 

A couple points I’ve gleaned from the minister’s comments. 

The minister makes a comment that certainly as a principle that 

the public interest is always paramount to that of the interests of 

a member being disciplined. And certainly that’s appropriate. 

That’s fair. 

 

The second piece of this relates to governance and the 

democratic rules of the Law Society itself. And I understand 

that this provides them some flexibility and some control over 

those processes and would allow the Law Society to, as I say, 

have more control over the number of elected members on 

council. And I understand they’re suggesting that this would 

accommodate demographic changes and improve governance. 

And certainly the good governance of all organizations is 

important, and we look forward to hearing just a little bit about 

how this will support good governance. 

 

The third piece to this Act I understand is really about 

flexibility. And this provides the ability for the society to recruit 

persons who are not members of counsel or lawyers to assist 

with investigations and hearings. And what I’m hearing on this 

front is that this would provide some needed and important 

flexibility to ensure that investigations and hearings can move 

forward in a timely way. And as it relates to justice, certainly 

timeliness is important on that front. So this increased 

flexibility seems to be a very fair and reasonable pursuit and 

something that we will again just simply confirm with the Law 

Society, with stakeholders in a broader sense, and certainly 

from the minister. 

 

I understand that they’re also making some changes as it relates 

to the time period that a decision in a disciplinary process must 

be rendered. Currently there’s a provision in place where that 

must occur within a period of 45 days within a disciplinary 

process. Now this change here in removing that, I understand 

that this is due to difficulties to achieve that timeline in complex 

cases. That sounds fair. That sounds reasonable. We just want 

to be cautious in lifting a bar like 45 days that it doesn’t become 

the norm to have longer, prolonged processes because of 

course, as it relates to justice, again the timeliness of those 

decisions is very important. Undue delays are certainly not 

appropriate. And you know, I don’t suggest that that would be 

the case from the Law Society. And certainly the minister has 

put on the record as well that common law rules of natural 

justice require that decision to be rendered in a timely fashion 

as well. So that certainly seems to be a reasonable piece. We 

just may have some questions on that front with the Law 

Society, with stakeholders, and with government. 

 

And then the final change that I recognize here is that there’s a 

statutory exemption of liability that’s going to be extended to 

encourage . . . to other members of the Law Foundation. And 



4254 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

this I understand would allow or encourage the Law Society to 

be able to bring on volunteers to undertake certainly the 

important work of the Law Foundation. But we just want to 

make sure we understand the full, I guess the full and potential 

costs of that liability, the potential consequences of those 

liabilities, and making sure we’re understanding all the intended 

consequences but also potential unintended consequences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the bulk of what the minister’s spoken to. I 

know there’s other changes within this Act that we’ll be 

consulting with the Law Society, the stakeholders, that we’ll be 

seeking clarity in detail from government on just making sure 

that the consultation process has been a fair one, making sure 

that the considerations from the Law Society, from 

stakeholders, are reflected in the considerations and now 

reflected into this law. Because as I say, when you have a law 

that you’re opening up, a bill that you’re opening, an Act that 

you’re opening up, it provides a wonderful opportunity to refine 

that bill and build its purpose for the next generation in 

supporting, in this case, the work of the Law Society in 

protecting the public and protecting their members but also 

disciplining members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that being said, we’ll engage in the due diligence as an 

opposition, engage with work with the minister and certainly 

with all stakeholders. And so at this point in time, I will adjourn 

debate as it relates to Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession 

Amendment Act, 2013. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 113 — The Powers 

of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la 

Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — To join in debate, Mr. Speaker, of Bill 113, 

The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013. Just looking at it 

the way it’s going, it’s giving some extra or more powers to a 

power of attorney, to an individual that’s been given that 

authority, be it a family member who has a, you know, parent 

maybe that’s deciding . . . It could be an adult. It could be, you 

know, a brother or sister. 

 

And there’s a reason why they have power of attorney. And 

they appoint that person to take care of their finances and take 

care of funds, whether they have property, whatever it is, to 

make sure . . . And there’s due diligence on their end. I guess 

there’s a provision in there, and like the amendment talks about, 

it is to give some protection. And I think at the end of it, it’s a 

bill that will give protection to the individual who has appointed 

the power of attorney or if it’s a court order or that or the 

individual’s signed something saying they give their family 

member the power of attorney over them and to look after their 

assets and make sure their wishes are carried out. 

 

Now it sounds like sometimes if those provisions in there in 

guardianship or power of attorney, it isn’t clear, but this 

legislation and amendment brings in trying to clarify it, making 

it clear what the power of attorney can do and I think what they 

can’t do. I think it makes it very clear. There’s some provisions 

in there. 

 

They talk about gifting, and if it’s something that they were 

doing before and the person was doing it, they’re comfortable 

with that. You know, that’s clear. But let’s say they weren’t 

giving gifts or did not give any gifts, and then all of a sudden 

the power of attorney decides to I guess give themselves a gift, 

thinking that that’s something they wanted to do. Well there’s 

an issue with that, and I guess the legislation wants it clear, 

make it very clear. 

 

If it’s not in writing, if it’s not part of the agreement, if a judge 

doesn’t order it, then there is concerns about accountability. 

And at the end of the day, a power of attorney must provide an 

accounting of the assets that that person’s been entrusted to 

look after for the person that they are a power of attorney for. 

And I think right now it’s voluntary. You have six months to do 

that. The court could also order that you provide that should 

there be something go on, I guess. 

 

So there are some changes they’re making, but I think clearly 

it’s something that probably there’s been an issue so the, you 

know, the minister has been asked to bring this forward. And I 

think it’s clarifying the role of the power of attorney and it’s, 

you know, making clear an accounting practice that needs to be 

dealt with. And there’s provisions in the amendment to do that. 

 

The gifting part I talked about. But I think it gives protection to 

not only an adult who assigns someone power of attorney over 

their assets, but I think it also protects the power of attorney 

individual, whether it be one or two, to look after the assets of 

that person. And you know, it clears up whether they should be 

giving themselves a gift for doing the job. I guess that they feel 

if there’s a lot of work . . . And I know there’s, you know, more 

questions that maybe in committee need to be answered. But 

overall in just looking at it, and you know, there’s not a lot of 

comments in here, but I just wanted to talk about those areas 

and those points that are in the second reading from the 

minister. 

 

But talking about that, I think it refers to a schedule, a schedule 

and fees, and there is a process to do that. And that makes it 

clear so that a person’s not out there taking a gift when you 

shouldn’t have, and you’re thinking, well I’ve done a lot of 

work and I want to have a . . . You know, I think I did a good 

job; I want to give myself a gift. If that wasn’t the practice 

before and the individual hasn’t agreed to that and signed off, 

and I think it just makes it clear for anyone, so at the end of the 

day it protects, again like I said, the adults, and it protects the 

power of attorney to make sure that they haven’t done some 

wrong. 

 

And if they’ve done wrong, I guess the regulations are out and I 

guess the courts can take action and, you know, find that 

individual accountable for what they’ve done. They will then 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4255 

answer to a court and I guess a judge, and to say, you know, did 

you do in good faith what the requirements, the regulations 

require you to do, and did you fulfill your obligations as a 

power of attorney? 

 

And I think it’s important when one takes that role on, they 

understand what it is they’re taking on. And I think this clears 

up some of the gifting and some of the areas of accountability. 

So having said that, it also gives again some protection to 

individuals and adults out there who do sign over. Or if a court 

assigns a power of attorney over an individual, and I guess that 

process could happen as well, and if that’s the case then I guess 

the accounting is voluntary, but the court could ask, like I’ve 

said earlier in my comments. 

 

So at this point I don’t have a lot more comments to make about 

it. I think it clears it up. It gives some protection for both, and I 

think it’s a good start to clearing up some of the information 

and maybe some of the miscommunication that individuals out 

there might be going off doing. So at this point, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m prepared to adjourn debate on this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 114 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise tonight and enter into the debate on Bill No. 

114, An Act to amend The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act. And as I 

understand from the minister’s remarks, this is part of their suite 

of legislation to improve the protection of vulnerable adults, 

and this one deals with health care issues. And this is a 

significant issue and I’m looking forward to hearing more about 

this in committee or however it might come forward, the work 

that has been done and how these all tie together. But they are 

important pieces of legislation. 

 

And I think that we all can think of our own personal 

experiences, whether as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], in our role in that position in our communities 

where people ask or talk about difficulties around some of the 

decisions that have to be made and how do they get made and 

how do we ensure that the right people are making those 

decisions and how do we keep that language current in today’s 

society. 

 

So this is an interesting piece of legislation. Interesting as well 

that, you know, the Minister of Justice is doing a lot of the bills 

here, and I think that it’s been interesting. I always look to see 

who he has consulted with and how many different groups he’s 

consulted with. And in this case, he talks about that more than 

100 groups and individuals were consulted, including people in 

the area of health and mental health, advocacy groups for 

persons with disabilities, senior groups, and many more. 

 

So that would be interesting, and I hope that we can share that 

and we can hear some of who those groups were and what they 

talked about and whether they spoke specifically to this or were 

to the other two pieces of legislation. I’m interested in that for 

sure. And we’ll be asking a question about that so we can get 

more information hopefully that can help us as we ensure that 

this piece of legislation is right on the mark, its impact is 

exactly as people want it to be and it should be, and there are no 

unintended consequences. That’s very, very important. 

 

As the minister talked about, the first gap that was identified by 

the health care sector was decision making for day-to-day 

decisions for those adults who are not capable of consenting to 

health care. And whether they are minor decisions — i.e., 

dental work, that type of thing or even more — it’s important to 

have that. 

 

[19:45] 

 

The second one went to the ability to apply to admit a person to 

long-term care or placement or accept placement of the person 

into long-term care. And apparently up to this point there was 

no clear legislation who would have that authority, and it talks 

about how we now have much more clearer direction because of 

the Act. And I just want to take a moment to talk about that 

because what it says here in the Act that, and this is I guess the 

ranking of who gets to make, who gets to be in that 

decision-making process. Who is the nearest relative? And I’d 

like to read this into the record: 

 

15(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), a nearest relative 

is, with respect to a person requiring treatment mentioned 

in section 16, the person first described in the following 

clauses who is willing, available and has the capacity to 

make a health care decision. 

 

So those three items: willing, available, and the capacity. So 

you have the spouse, (a) the first person is: 

 

(a) the spouse or person with whom the person requiring 

treatment cohabitates and has cohabited as a spouse in a 

relationship of some permanence; 

 

(b) an adult son or daughter; 

 

(c) a parent or legal custodian; 

 

(d) an adult brother or sister; 

 

(e) a grandparent; 

 

(f) an adult grandchild; 

 

(g) an adult uncle or aunt; 

 

(h) an adult nephew or niece. 



4256 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

And then: 

 

(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the relationships 

listed in clauses (1)(b) to (h) include adoptive 

relationships. 

 

Now what I find interesting though is, so in some of these, 

obviously with spouse there’s only one, but adult son or 

daughter there could be more than one. So how do you establish 

who has priority? Is it down from the oldest son, daughter? 

Does it go down that way? Who lives closest to the parent? 

How do we decide that? Adult brother, sister — the same thing. 

So I’d be curious to know if there’s more details and that would 

be one question I might have later on. 

 

But I think it’s important, but I understand . . . Well I think that 

is one thing that we should talk a bit about. So and then, Mr. 

Speaker, the final amendment is about clarifying an enduring 

power of attorney. So that relates back to the other two pieces 

of legislation that we have. 

 

So relatively a short speech by the minister. An important area 

though, and I think as we think about, as we have an older aging 

society that it’s an important one, an important one. And it’s 

one that as families do move about the country — brothers, 

sisters, nephews, nieces, aunts, uncles — it can be quite a 

distance apart. And so it’s important to have these done. 

 

And I appreciate with 100 different consultation pieces in place 

that clearly there’s been potentially some very good 

consultation. But I guess the question is, I would like to hear 

more about what they had said about vulnerable adults, 

protecting them. And we’ll be definitely doing our due 

diligence to talk to some of these groups in terms of what else 

had they talked about. What else had they identified as issues? 

Because clearly this is an important area, and does this piece of 

legislation meet the mark? Do the other two pieces of 

legislation meet the mark? And do they feel like they were 

properly listened to? And the comments they made, were they 

incorporated? Were they dropped off the table? Because 

sometimes we hear that and hear that some of the issues that 

people did identify were dismissed, and unfortunately this 

government’s getting a bit of a reputation for that. 

 

So in this case, I know there will be others who want to speak to 

this issue. And I know that they’ll want to say a few things over 

the next days and weeks, and we’ll be consulting with the 

people that have concerns in this area throughout the province. 

We want to make sure that they have their opinions heard, and 

if there are questions that they should be, thinking we should be 

raising, we definitely will be doing that. 

 

And of course I know, particularly when it comes to seniors, 

that this government is not meeting the mark, particularly when 

we talk in terms of health care or personal long-term care 

homes, that people do have concerns about so many issues, that 

we’ll probably hear an awful lot of other issues that they’ll 

bring up. And while we focus on this, we want to make sure all 

their concerns are brought to the floor of the legislature. After 

all, that is our job, and we will do that job. And I know the 

government sometimes doesn’t want to hear that, and we can 

tell that they get frustrated that actually people are talking about 

the concerns about the kind of attention that seniors are getting 

in Saskatchewan when they should be getting so much more, so 

much more. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 

Bill No. 114, An Act to amend The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act. I do so move. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 115 — The Public 

Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter debate as it relates to Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian 

and Trustee Amendment Act. I understand that this is part of a 

package of bills that have been brought forward by government 

and it relates directly to adults who rely on others to make 

decisions on their behalf. And so it’s individuals within our 

society for whom . . . can be quite vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly Acts and changes to this Act are important. 

 

We’ll be engaging in full consultations and inviting 

submissions on this front to make sure that these changes meet 

the needs, meet the realities of those that aren’t in a position to 

be making decisions on their own. We’re talking about 

individuals here that may be challenged to have the capacity to 

be making decisions in a daily basis or within their lives, and 

certainly we’re dealing with individuals that may be dealing 

with aspects of mental health challenges. 

 

The main portion of this bill moves, I understand, as I quote 

from the minister: 

 

The main portion of this bill moves the provisions 

respecting certificates of incapacity from The Mentally 

Disordered Persons Act, allowing the legislation to be 

repealed. 

 

And I understand now these provisions are built into this Act 

and the package of bills that are brought forward. 

 

This bill as well is about modernization. I understand through 

the consultations, and rightfully so, this government heard that 

some of the language was objectionable. And that they’re 

bringing language in line with the current language that’s used; 

no longer will terminology relate to, you know, language such 

as incompetence or the Act itself, The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act. The language will be respectful of our 

understanding of people and in many ways will speak to 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4257 

capacity or incapacity of an individual to make decisions. 

 

This Act will also, as I understand, bring in the new ability for 

physicians to examine a person for capacity without a request 

from chief psychiatrists. And we just want to make sure in our 

discussions and consultations that we’re understanding the 

scope of consequences of this change. I suspect it’s in response 

to pressures within the community and the needs and the 

responsiveness and flexibility that’s required to deal with 

vulnerable people. So we’ll engage in consultation. I understand 

that there’s also a reduction in time period that can be imposed 

between re-examinations from capacity from one year to six 

months. 

 

There’s a few other changes here as well, amendments that 

update the powers of the Public Guardian and Trustee by 

adding the powers to revoke an acknowledgment to act that was 

signed in error. And certainly just reading it like that, it’s only 

common sense to make that provision. If acknowledgment to 

act was signed in error, then it shouldn’t stand and there should 

be the ability to revoke, the power to revoke that act. 

 

It moves on as well, that some of the other additional changes 

here is “. . . the power to administer the estate of a deceased 

dependent adult client of the Public Guardian and Trustee, 

pending administration by someone who is not a court-ordered 

personal representative.” And I suspect this has been brought 

forward from individuals with direct experience from across the 

province, from organizations that have had direct experience 

with these sorts of experiences. And certainly I value their 

perspective and look forward to fleshing out from government a 

little bit more to share some of those experiences, some of those 

recommendations that have come from across communities and 

community groups on this matter. And we’ll engage and 

welcome submissions, as I said, from groups and people across 

the province to make sure that this Act is reflective of the 

realities that people and communities are facing. 

 

The bill also updates references to legislation in a number of 

places that adopt the word incapacity, as I said earlier, so it’s a 

modernization of language. And certainly that’s something that 

we fully, fully support. 

 

As I’ve said, dealing with the most vulnerable is an incredible 

responsibility that does fall to government and to society. In 

many ways we are judged by how we deal with the most 

vulnerable within society. And as we’re talking about 

individuals and questions of capacity or incapacity and the 

mental health challenges and pressures that many are facing 

across our province, we need to make sure that our Act, the bills 

that are being brought forward reflect the needs and as well that 

the services and supports within communities are extended and 

in place to support individuals living with challenges of 

capacity and of mental health. Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more 

work to be done on that front. There’s a lot more work to be 

done in breaking down stigmas. There’s a lot more investment 

that’s required to meet the needs of families and of 

communities and to meet the needs of these vulnerable people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But certainly some of the changes that are coming forward in 

this legislation here today seem to be very reasonable. We do 

want to make sure that as this bundle of legislation’s been 

brought forward that the full scope of considerations or the full 

range of possibilities were considered to ensure that we’re 

building legislation that’s as modern and as effective as it can 

be. So we’ll be engaging with community groups, with people, 

with families that have first-hand experience in these areas. 

 

And certainly this, as I say, is a very important piece of 

legislation in the areas that it touches on. And the response of 

government to those with mental health challenges and with 

challenges of capacity is a very important role for government.  

 

With that being said here tonight, we certainly look forward to 

consultation. We look forward to following up with the minister 

and his officials to seek further details and clarity. But at this 

point in time, I would adjourn debate for Bill No. 115, The 

Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 116 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 116 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into this debate tonight on Bill No. 116, An Act 

to amend The Municipalities Act respecting Municipal Status 

and Non-compliance and to make consequential and related 

amendments to other Acts. 

 

And so this is quite a significant piece of legislation before us. 

And obviously this is one that we will have lots of comment on 

and lots of questions on. And I think that it’s going to be very 

interesting when we hear what different folks have to say. 

 

Now the minister has not, I don’t think, referenced any groups 

that he consulted with, but I assume that he has. He seemed to 

imply that he had talked to SARM [Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities] and to SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association]. So you know, I think there were 

others that may want to have some opinions about this. But it 

would be interesting to know, who did they consult with? It’s 

always I think important to start there because it’s important for 

us to know, who did you consult with and what did they say? 

And what parts were incorporated and what parts were not left 

out? And what parts came from this government? And what 

were their intentions? And some of the things are very 

interesting. And some of the changes, I have some questions. 

And of course we will have a lot to say about this in the weeks 

and months ahead about this as this plays out. 

 



4258 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

[20:00] 

 

The minister outlines . . . And I’ll refer to his speech because I 

want to focus on what he has said. He has said that there’s five 

key areas that they want to strengthen the legislation of The 

Municipalities Act, and the first is that: 

 

They will provide better criteria on which to determine 

whether unincorporated communities and areas have 

sufficient capacity for local governance and municipal 

status. Second, they will provide objective criteria for 

action when municipalities are no longer able to function 

to meet their statutory requirements as local governments. 

Third, they will provide more flexibility and choice for 

interested urban and rural municipalities to voluntarily 

restructure to form a new type of municipality known as a 

municipal district. Fourth, they will provide a new means 

for citizens with concerns about the financial or 

operational management of their municipality to have 

these concerns addressed locally. And fifth . . . 

[enhancement of] property owners’ and the minister’s 

ability to ensure municipal compliance with legislation 

and regulations and constrain the potential misuse of local 

property tax tools and tax abatements. 

 

So it’s quite a significant piece that he lays out before us. 

 

So the first one, as he said, is the criteria for the unincorporated 

community as an organized hamlet. And currently there’s no 

criteria, so it’s based on whether they have sufficient capacity to 

meet the requirements of an organized hamlet. And it goes 

through that and how it can be essentially a training ground. So 

I assume that makes some sense, and that will be interesting as 

we see how that plays out.  

 

Of course some of the challenges that some of these groups 

have as they work together . . . And it will be interesting 

because it’s not quite as simple as it once was. There was the 

issue of particularly services, and I’m thinking particularly 

around water, that when you have a group who decide to 

organize as a hamlet or a village, I suppose the delivery of 

services can be a bit of an issue because people do expect a 

level of quality and of service and that means the quality of 

drinking water. And I know that this can be a challenge. So they 

have to have the capacity to deliver.  

 

And then they talk about that “. . . minimum dwellings or 

business premises . . . taxable assessment to ensure available tax 

base is sufficient to support service delivery.” So that’s a hugely 

important area because it’s not just as simple as saying, we’re 

going to get together and we’re going to be able to get some 

things. You have to deliver a certain suite of things. And 

whether that be roads, some level of protection, I assume, but 

water is the main one, but also garbage, dealing with solid 

waste, that type of thing. 

 

The other thing that’s very interesting is provide for criteria to 

incorporate new villages and resort villages will be now set in 

regulation. The current criteria for villages and resort villages 

are 100 persons, 50 separate dwellings or business premises, 

and minimum taxable assessment of 15 million. And it’s been 

in place since 1930. 

 

Now I’m not sure whether that has been in the . . . I think that’s 

been in the legislation. This is something we can get clarified in 

committee. But why we’re moving it into regulation, again it 

does something to . . . You know, in terms of transparency and 

accountability, when it moves into regulation, something like 

that should be pretty solid. It hasn’t been changed for something 

like over 80 years, and maybe it’s been a problem for the last 10 

or 20 years, but generally I assume it’s worked well. It’d be 

interesting to know why that is a problem. 

 

You know, I grew up in a village. And I mean, lots of my 

family still live in that village, the village of Mortlach. And you 

know, in fact he was the mayor of Mortlach for several years. 

And I don’t know if they have a real problem with that 

particular issue, but maybe this is a new thing. I don’t know. It 

would be interesting to know why this is a pressing concern that 

must be changed. I don’t know. 

 

He says, “. . . struggle to operate independently and generate 

sufficient own source revenue . . .” That would be interesting to 

know more about. And so I think that we’ll have questions 

about the whole issue around villages and hamlets, and we’ll be 

talking to the minister about that in committee, and the role 

thereof. I think that will be interesting.  

 

And I think this does go to talk a bit about the issue of the third 

area of proposed amendments, and that is around the other . . . 

He talks about another solution, and that will be “. . . for urban 

and rural municipalities to voluntarily agree to join to form a 

new type of municipality called the municipal district . . .” Now 

he wants to say, and he goes to some length to say, that this is 

not a forced amalgamation. He wants “. . . to be clear that a 

municipal district will only be established upon the agreement 

of the municipalities involved and resolutions from each 

council.” 

 

Now it is interesting that they do talk about, further on when he 

talks about the fourth area, and I’ll go on to that. But “. . . the 

fourth area of amendments will provide citizens with the ability 

to petition their council to conduct and make public the results 

of financial or management audit.” And this is “. . . a means for 

citizens to address their concerns locally. Currently the 

legislation provides for annual audits of the municipality’s 

financial statements . . .” and that the main purpose is to “. . . 

confirm whether these are prepared in accordance with 

generally accepted . . . principles.” 

 

And he talks about how his ministry and his office receives 

letters, and I think we all receive letters and concerns from 

citizens and asking for provincial intervention. And so he sets 

out a process here, that it has been agreed: 

 

After consultation in the municipal sector, it has been 

agreed to set this efficiency at the number of voters equal 

to one-third of the municipality’s population. This is 

equivalent to the . . . voter turnout in urban and rural 

municipalities in recent local elections. These amendments 

are in the interest of ensuring councils remain transparent 

and accountable to their residents and ratepayers. 

 

I have just a question about that, Mr. Speaker, and maybe we’ll 

get an answer in committee. Why is it the number of voters 

equal to one-third of the municipality’s population? We’ve seen 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4259 

the provincial government just talk about changing the whole 

idea of how constituencies are based on the adult population, 

everybody over the age of 18. So I would wonder why here you 

would want to include youth as part of the formula. It’s not 

consistent. And I think that where municipalities, you know, 

when you’re determining the voting population, it’s because of 

age. But they don’t have the same kind of requirement that we 

do in the sense of we have now three more MLAs, we’re at 61, 

and we’ve divided the population, actually divided the 

population, the southern part, by 59. So why is it that they’re 

including the whole municipality’s population and not just the 

adult?  

 

If you’re talking about number of voters, at one-third, you’re 

probably saying one-third of the number of voters turn out. Not 

one-third of the population. That’s an interesting stat because 

the stat would be based on the percentage of voters turning out. 

Like if they have a 29 per cent turn out in Mortlach and 45 per 

cent turn out in Caronport and then they average that out, 

they’re not taking into account the younger folk, I don’t think. 

That will be interesting to know why it’s the total 

municipality’s population. 

 

And then that brings me back up to the one about the forced 

amalgamation that the minister had talked about and the 

question I would have there that it can be, that how it’s going to 

happen is you have essentially resolutions from each council. 

So two resolutions, one from each council, saying that they 

want to do this, and then you’ve got an amalgamation. 

 

And this can be quite a surprise to the residents of the village or 

hamlet and the RM [rural municipality]. All of sudden you’re 

joined together. There wasn’t a plebiscite. There may not have 

been even a requirement of notice that this is a discussion we’re 

having. You can just have a resolution. Somebody didn’t come 

to the meeting. Have two meetings. I mean this could be . . . So 

this is going to be kind of interesting about how they can do this 

so quickly but then to ask for a simple audit. You have to have a 

petition of one-third of the municipality’s population. And I 

would say one’s much more significant than the other. Well one 

is so much more rigorous. 

 

So I’m not sure if that’s consistent with good democratic 

processes. I can understand that maybe that is a good solution, a 

fair solution. But just to say you have two resolutions and all of 

a sudden, bam, you are now the municipal district of 

Wheatlands — and Mortlach now is gone — I think that would 

be quite a surprise. And then how do you disentangle yourself 

from that municipal district if it was so easy to get into? 

 

You know again, this is about consultation and talking about 

what are good processes and how would this happen and again 

disentangle it. I’m not sure this government has thought this 

completely through. And this is what I would think that often 

our job is all about, and that is to talk about the intentional 

consequences and the unintentional consequences. It’s sober 

second thought. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We’re the senate. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes. Unfortunately we don’t have a senate. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we think about this 

because this could be a big issue. And again, you know, we 

have had those letters from rural Saskatchewan saying, can’t the 

province step up and help us out in this RM or this village? 

Things seem to be going off the rails. And the government is 

very reluctant to get involved because they say, really it’s not 

for one level of government to, you know, to act as big brother 

to another level of government. 

 

But in this case, when you’re setting out these kind of rules, this 

is for a long time. And we’ve just talked about how the levels of 

population in villages and hamlets were the same for 80-some 

years and they seem to have worked, and now they’re changing 

them. This kind of section, this kind of legislation could be in 

place for a very, very long time, and rural Saskatchewan really 

will have to live with it. So we do have a lot of questions with 

that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that we’ll have lots more to 

say about this and lots more as we think this through, and I 

wonder if it has been thoroughly shopped around and people 

have had their two cents put into it. I don’t know. Because as I 

pointed out that I just feel that one area is very weak and can be 

problematic. You know, if you have two councils that seem 

intent in solving some problems, really in a very speedy way, it 

can be done, and people have to live with those consequences. 

 

So with that, I know other members will want to join in and 

speak on this, and we have a lot of work left to do tonight, so 

I’m ready to move adjournment on Bill 116, An Act to amend 

The Municipalities Act respecting Municipal Status and 

Non-compliance and to make consequential and related 

amendments to other Acts. I do so adjourn. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 117 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 117 — The 

Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 

2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

a bill to make consequential amendment to The Non-profit 

Corporations Act, 1995 resulting from the enactment of The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). And it’s a 

relatively short Act, and really essentially what it sounds like 

it’s doing is adding the word municipal district after rural 

municipality, and so really the two go hand in glove. And while 

I could repeat my comments from the previous discussion about 

the concerns we have about municipal districts, that it’s a 

potential solution, but has it been thought completely through? 

We will have these two tied together because . . . as they are. 



4260 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of 

Bill No. 117, An Act to make a consequential amendment to The 

Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 resulting from the enactment 

of The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). I do so 

adjourn. 

 

[20:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill 117, The Municipalities Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 118 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 118 — The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it is 

as always my pleasure to rise in the adjourned debates, in this 

case on Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. 

 

This is a very interesting and curious bit of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and I find there is some very interesting aspects to this. 

I want to start off with the minister’s comments right off the 

hop when he introduced the bill on November 25th or gave 

second reading to the bill on November 25th. And what he said 

in his first paragraph is he’s pleased to rise to move second 

reading of The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act, Bill 118. And 

then he goes on to say, “This new Act marks a milestone in the 

history of the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology . . .” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is not really a new Act. In fact when I 

read through it carefully, there’s a few changes to the former 

Act, but in fact it is the SIAST Act, The Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology Act, with a few minor 

amendments. 

 

So I think it was somewhat misleading and perhaps artful for 

the minister to suggest that this is a new Act because really, Mr. 

Speaker, it isn’t. It is just a few changes to the SIAST Act, and 

a lot of it is just nomenclature. And in fact in two notable 

instances that’s all it is is a change of name of the institute, and 

instead of calling the CEO [chief executive officer] the CEO, 

we’re now calling him the president. So you know, this is not 

exactly earth-shattering, and I certainly wouldn’t consider it to 

be new. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m somewhat disappointed that there 

aren’t explanatory notes provided with this bill, as there is in 

other instances, which indicate that there are really very few 

changes being made to the SIAST Act. So I think it’s a bit artful 

for the ministers to suggest this is a new Act. This is not a new 

Act. This is just a few minor amendments to the SIAST Act. 

Housekeeping, basically housekeeping changes. 

 

Now the minister made a great fanfare about the name 

polytechnic, so it got me thinking, well what is a polytechnic 

instead of an institute of applied science and technology? And 

really if you go on the Internet, which is my go-to tool these 

days, there isn’t really a lot of difference between an institute of 

applied science and technology and a polytechnic. And as you 

explore a little bit further, Mr. Speaker, we find that even the 

lines are blurring somewhat now between polytechnics or 

institutes of applied science and technology and universities 

because in many cases these polytechnics are being given the 

ability to grant degrees — which is not a good or bad thing; it is 

what it is. And I think as higher education moves forward and 

evolves, these are just the types of trends that we see across the 

world, as a matter of fact. 

 

So I did want to share with the Assembly and with the people of 

Saskatchewan some of the comments that I found. First of all 

there’s a web page in New Zealand, and it’s from the Bay of 

Plenty Polytechnic in Tauranga, New Zealand. And the 

question there that’s being posed, and I’m going to read this as 

a quote: 

 

What is the difference between universities and 

polytechnics and institutes of technology? 

 

Historically the main difference was that universities 

focussed on academic programmes and polytechnics 

focussed on practical vocational training. Over recent 

years both types of institutions have expanded their range 

of programmes and now there is significant overlap 

between universities and polytechnics with many 

polytechnic programmes pathwaying directly to degree 

programmes. 

 

Over recent years many polytechnics have added a number 

of degree programmes to their course offerings. A number 

of polytechnics have also merged together and have 

changed their names from polytechnics to institutes of 

technology to better reflect their focus. Cross-credits for 

diploma courses completed at a polytechnic can be 

credited to ongoing university study in many instances. 

 

So we see, Mr. Speaker, in New Zealand they’re actually going 

the other way. They’re changing their name from a polytechnic 

to an institute of applied science and technology. So I think 

what we’re talking about here really is merely semantics, and 

despite the great fanfare and excitement with which the minister 

announced this new brave new world of the polytechnic in 

Saskatoon, I think it’s just a word. And I don’t think that a 

whole lot of attention needs to be paid to that. 

 

Certainly what is important in the changes from the SIAST Act 

to The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act are some other clauses 

that are being changed, and I want to refer specifically to those 

because I think that’s the important part of what we’re seeing in 

not this new Act but really the amendment of the SIAST Act. 

It’s not a new Act at all. 

 

So first of all clause 3(3) is something that the minister referred 

to, and that’s where no one is allowed to use the word 

polytechnic because it’s such a special word. 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4261 

. . . or any derivation or abbreviation of that word in the 

name of an educational institution or in any advertising 

relating to an educational institution, without the prior 

approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

So we see a change here where the word polytechnic is now 

exclusively reserved to SIAST, and if that’s what the minister 

wants, that’s fine. Again I think it’s more important what 

happens inside the institution, and obviously the learning that 

takes place there is the important part. But we now know that 

the word polytechnic is preserved exclusively and, unless the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council approves a change, only this 

institution will have the opportunity to do that. Interesting. 

 

The second thing . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . We don’t 

know what happens if we want to change the name of a political 

party to the polytechnic party, but I think it wouldn’t be allowed 

under this Act. It would be prohibited. So just pay attention, all 

those who are thinking of using the word for any reason 

whatsoever. 

 

The other change in the mandate, we see clause 4 of SIAST’s 

Act or . . . Yes, clause 4 in the SIAST Act is continued, and the 

mandate is almost identical under this new Act except for one 

small subclause. And I think this points to the direction that the 

minister is really talking about, and it’s the new clause (h) 

which says, the mandate of SIAST, now polytechnic, it includes 

“services to encourage and support scholarly activity related to 

programs of study provided by the polytechnic.” 

 

So here we see sort of the transition and the morphing into more 

university-type activity, where there’s a scholarly study in 

addition to applied science and applied technology and 

research. So there’s a blurring of the lines that’s happening 

here, Mr. Speaker. I’m merely observing it and commenting on 

it. I don’t have any particular view one way or the other. 

 

But I think back in the day when I was a kid growing up in 

Lafleche, there was STI [Saskatchewan Technical Institute] in 

Moose Jaw. And my colleague from Saskatoon Centre will 

remember STI, which became the Moose Jaw campus of 

SIAST, and that was Palliser, as it’s referred to now. So there 

was STI or university. That was sort of the two choices that we 

had when I graduated from school in 1979. 

 

Nowadays I think with extensive developments in applied 

technology and research, and certainly universities also moving 

their research into more the applied areas, and certainly with a 

lot of the finances that are being provided by corporations and 

private institutions, we see that there’s a lot of pressure on 

universities to actually have more of the applied science rather 

than the pure or basic science that they were traditionally 

known for. So I think the trend that we see that this minister 

seems to be following along, and certainly one that’s reflected 

in other areas, is a real evolving of the role of colleges, of 

institutes of applied science and research, and of universities. 

And there is, I would suggest, a blurring of lines that’s taking 

place. So it’s quite interesting to see it being reflected in the, 

what the minister calls the new Act, although again I raise that 

it’s not a new Act at all. It’s just a few changes to the SIAST 

Act. 

 

Another clause I think that’s an important change that I was 

able to find without any explanatory notes was in clause 14. 

And this is something that the minister referred to in his 

comments. There’s a new subsection which allows the 

polytechnic to “receive gifts of real and personal property, 

including moneys, for the purposes of the polytechnic.” And 

that’s 14(b). That didn’t exist in the SIAST Act. The other two 

reasons were there, but they’ve inserted a new one under 14(b), 

and that’s one he referred to when we see a private institution 

like Husky providing a new gift of, he said, very significant 

dollars. And certainly that’s important to the work of SIAST or 

what will be Saskatchewan Polytechnic with the name change. 

 

And we see more and more of these types of institutions relying 

on support from private companies and I think, you know, 

where maybe governments have stepped into or stepped away 

from some of their responsibilities in terms of assuring that 

these institutions are properly funded. So we see that change in 

terms of your ability to fundraise for property, as the minister 

referred to it. And it’s really allowing them to receive gifts of 

real and personal property, including money. So it just makes it 

clear that SIAST can accept gifts such as the one that Husky is 

providing as an opportunity. 

 

The one clause again that I pointed out earlier that is also just a 

change in name is found in section 10(1). And back in SIAST 

time, the head of the organization used to be the chief executive 

officer. Pretty common term. He’s now going to be the 

president. So rather than having a CEO, we’re switching it to 

president. 

 

And what’s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is I had the 

opportunity to speak to Bill 100 earlier today. And in that Act, 

what used to be the executive — no, I forget the original term 

— anyway, they’re now changing it to CEO. So in Bill 100 

we’re going from the executive officer to the CEO, and now in 

this bill we’re going from the CEO to the president. So I think it 

really is just words and semantics and something that’s 

attractive. 

 

So I don’t again offer any opinion one way or the other. It’s just 

an observation that words are being used in different ways. And 

I think my colleague from Saskatoon Centre pointed it out in his 

comments previously as well that it sort of flips and flops 

depending on what bill this government is involved in. So, 

interesting, whether it’s earth-shattering, I would say not. 

 

But certainly something I think that, for whatever reason, this 

minister seems to suggest that it’s a new Act. But really, I 

mean, if you put them side by side, and normally what’s 

happened in my experience when we do adjourned debates is 

that when a bill is being mildly altered or a few clauses are 

being altered, typically it’s an amendment to the previous Act. 

But this minister for whatever reason calls it the new Act. 

 

So I’m a bit disappointed now because I think it’s a bit 

deceiving to suggest that it’s new when really it isn’t new at all. 

So I would be interested in knowing why the minister wanted to 

present it that way. But certainly something for us to talk about 

in our comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s basically it. I mean we see a change to the name. It’s 

no longer SIAST; it’s a polytechnic. Although as I pointed out, 

in New Zealand they’re going the other way. So I find that kind 



4262 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

of interesting. We see the change from CEO to president, which 

is what it is. We see the ability to grant degrees, and I think 

that’s probably . . . I don’t know if I read those through, but I 

want to take a double look at that. That’s clause 16, where 

there’s two new changes in clause 16, and I just want to make 

sure I’ve referenced those as well. Oh yes, and I haven’t 

mentioned them yet. 

 

So clause 16 in the SIAST Act is the clause that gives the 

powers for the institute, in this case now the polytechnic. And 

there’s some powers they have that have been added. And I 

think probably I should have mentioned this right off the hop. 

This is the most substantive change. We can now, under (g): 

 

(g) provide for the granting of honorary diplomas relating 

to programs provided by the polytechnic. 

 

And under: 

 

(h) provide for the granting of degrees in accordance with 

The Degree Authorization Act. 

 

So those are pretty substantive changes when you think back to 

what applied technical institutes and applied science institutes, 

they used to provide diplomas or certificates, but now they’re 

allowed to grant degrees. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And the final thing of interest, and again I find this very 

curious. I’m not sure exactly what it means, Mr. Speaker, is 

clause (n) or subclause (n) of clause 16 which says the 

polytechnic can “enter into any agreements for the purpose of 

performing applied research.” 

 

So we don’t know what those agreements are or why it was 

necessary to include this in their powers and why it wasn’t part 

of SIAST. And certainly the minister, because he didn’t 

compare the two Acts, has not given us any indication why this 

new power has been provided under the proposed new Act to 

the polytechnic. But I think it would relate to some of the larger 

gifts that we’re seeing from private institutions who are looking 

for applied science and research to apply to their particular 

projects or areas where they want to commercialize the research 

that’s going on. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, just one other little piece I wanted to 

share with the Assembly is another . . . I just tried to find out 

what the difference is between a polytechnic and university, and 

here’s two bullets I found in a webpage, it’s called “Entrance 

Exams 2013 Education and Career in India.” And what they 

said here, the key differences between a polytechnic and a 

university . . . and the webpage is entrance-exam.net. So here’s 

a quote: 

 

Universities are broader in approach, where the courses 

are completed in longer time duration. Polytechnics on the 

other hand offer centralized programs, which can be 

completed within a shorter time period. 

 

Polytechnics offer technical degree programs and are 

much practical in approach. Universities on the other hand 

offer equal emphasis to theoretical and practical sessions. 

So again that’s another type of description that I think is . . . you 

will find a wide range of descriptions. I’m not sure that any one 

of them is correct, and certainly I think this is an evolving area. 

 

So we’re glad to see the government enter into the discussion 

on these terms of art, but I think most importantly is the ability 

now of SIAST or polytechnic, Saskatchewan Polytechnic to 

grant degrees and to raise money and fundraise and accept large 

gifts. So at this point, Mr. Speaker, that will be the extent of my 

comments on Bill 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act, and 

I would like to move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 119 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 119 — The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise once again and to speak to the Bill No. 119, The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 

2013. And as usual when we’re looking at consequential 

amendments, there aren’t a lot of comments that should be 

provided. 

 

I think the most entertaining part about this particular 

consequential amendments Act is the minister’s comments as 

he led into this bill. And it’s actually quite entertaining. And 

even more entertaining was the response of my colleague from 

Athabasca, because the minister took it upon himself not only to 

comment on the bill, but to pontificate quite at length about 

some of the viewpoints expressed by our party in relation to the 

polytechnic Act. And it really was out of character, and 

certainly nothing I’ve ever seen before. But I do appreciate the 

comments of my colleague, who said, “I’ve been in the 

Assembly,” this is a quote: 

 

. . . I’ve been in the Assembly a long time, and this is the 

first time I’ve ever heard a minister in his introduction of 

his bill begin to debate statements made by the opposition. 

That’s highly unusual, Mr. Speaker, because obviously the 

point of introducing your bill is to make sure you read out 

the bill and you read out the intention of the bill. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when you start beginning to spur debate, when 

you start getting debate in the introduction of their bills, 

you begin to wonder, what is this government up to? 

 

And so that’s the close of the quote there from my colleague 

from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s probably the 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4263 

most notable comment I can make on this particular 

consequential amendments Act, and so at that point I’d like to 

move that we adjourn debate on the bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 119, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 120 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 120 — The 

Lobbyists Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana.  

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 

the debate about Bill 120, The Lobbyists Act. As the opposition, 

we both welcome and support this bill and have been calling on 

the government since the tabling of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice had wrapped up their 

report. I believe it was in May of a year and a half ago, Mr. 

Speaker. So we are pleased to see this Act finally before the 

House. 

 

I have to start by saying too that there’s absolutely nothing with 

lobbying, Mr. Speaker. I think at the very base, a very simple 

definition would come from The Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 

and it’s basically to conduct activities aimed at influencing 

public officials and especially members of a legislative body on 

legislation. Obviously in The Lobbyists Act, page 3 . . . I won’t 

read the definition into Hansard. It is a considerably lengthier 

definition than the very basic definition that I gave, but if 

anyone’s interested, the definition of lobby and what’s involved 

in it is on page 3 of the Act. 

 

But again as I said, there is nothing wrong — especially, 

especially when you’re reflecting a collective view or a group 

position highlighting many people’s perspectives — there’s 

nothing wrong with bringing policies and ideas forward to 

government, but it’s absolutely imperative that that is 

transparent. 

 

Guy Giorno, who knows far more about lobbying than I do, Mr. 

Speaker, has written about it. He is the Prime Minister’s former 

chief of staff. And I think I read somewhere that he equates 

good lobbying legislation as being more of a flashlight than a 

hammer. 

 

So lobbying is something that happens every day in the 

legislature. When a group comes before us at the end of the day 

to share with us their ideas or their concerns, that is lobbying. It 

can occur in many forms, Mr. Speaker. So lobbying in itself is a 

good thing, but it needs to be transparent. 

 

I know when the committee did their work and looked at best 

practices and reviewed what might possibly work here in 

Saskatchewan, my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, who is 

the opposition representative on that committee, put forward a 

minority opinion. And in that opinion, one of the 

recommendations, that the requirement for registration and 

reporting be as simple and easy as possible so that lobbyists 

who are included in the definition of lobbyists . . . so it is not 

onerous. 

 

But part of the minority opinion also was that those who lobby 

for less than 100 hours should still . . . or lobbying for . . . I’m 

just going to read this directly here, Mr. Speaker. That might be 

much more clearer: “. . . the threshold, which was originally 

discussed to be 100 hours, including preparation and travel 

time, is now being reduced to 100 hours including travel time.” 

So it was good to see the minister in his comments reflect that 

the threshold won’t just be 100 hours.  

 

But he has assured the people of Saskatchewan in his second 

reading speech that . . . I’m going to read this. He says here that 

he’ll “. . . provide in the regulations that in calculating whether 

the 100- hour threshold for lobbyist registration has been met, 

travel time and preparation time as well as time spent 

communicating will be included . . . ” Because if you just 

included communication time in the lobbying effort, I think 

you’d be hard pressed for many people to reach that 100-hour 

threshold, and you wouldn’t capture anybody in that lobbying 

registry. So being able to include travel time and preparation 

time as well as communication time is absolutely of utmost 

importance. 

 

And I know it’s not yet in the regulations, but we will take the 

minister at his word on this that he’s said it will be included. 

And on the chance that he forgets, we will be sure to remind 

him of that, Mr. Speaker. And actually that was one of the 

weaknesses that Guy Giorno had pointed out, that he felt that 

the 100 hours was not a proper threshold. He feels that it should 

have been lower. 

 

I think another gap that both my colleague from Saskatoon 

Nutana pointed out in her minority opinion as well as Guy 

Giorno is that interest groups, lobby organizations, and other 

not-for-profit entities except those that represent business or 

management, union, or professional interests shouldn’t be 

exempted. And in fact in this legislation they are. It was very 

clear. The member from Nutana had argued I think very 

effectively that charities shouldn’t be excluded from this 

legislation. If you make it simple and you make it easy for 

people to register . . . Again there is nothing wrong with 

lobbying. And there’s nothing wrong with trying to get your 

collective view heard by government, but it is all about shining 

that flashlight so that the general public knows who is meeting 

with our decision makers, Mr. Speaker. So that is a problem. 

 

Obviously we have exclusions. We have SUMA, SARM, the 

University of Saskatchewan, and the School Boards 

Association, along with not-for-profit organizations excluded. 

And I think that that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. Again the process 

doesn’t have to be onerous to register. And nobody is saying 

there is anything wrong with lobbying, but it’s about 

transparency, making sure that citizens of Saskatchewan know 

with whom their government is meeting. And that is the gist of 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 



4264 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

I think that one of the omissions that Mr. Giorno also talks 

about is a code of conduct for lobbyists. I would agree that . . . 

Well he points out that the federal, Quebec, and Newfoundland 

and Labrador all have specific ethical rules that lobbyists must 

follow. And our government at this point, or this government at 

this point has declined to include that code of conduct. I think, 

belonging to a professional association myself, Mr. Speaker, I 

am a social worker, and I know we have a code of ethics that 

we must abide by. I think that every professional organization 

has a code of conduct by which they need to live. And I think 

that this would have enhanced the legislation as well. So that’s 

a shame that that wasn’t included. I know the government has 

said that they will think about it or continue to review that 

possibility, but the minister has not explained why they 

wouldn’t put that in there in the first place. So we would have 

liked to have seen that as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I know up until this legislation has been introduced and 

passed, we’re one of the largest provinces that lack, according 

to Mr. Giorno, a lobbying transparency law. So it’ll be good 

once this law gets passed, but there are some big gaps in it. 

Again, having the threshold of 100 hours doesn’t capture some 

people, but I will say that it’s a good thing that the government 

has included the preparation, communication, and travel time in 

that 100 hours, although that 100 hours could be less. And 

excluding the interest groups, lobby organizations, and 

not-for-profit organizations is also a problem.  

 

But as this process goes on, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 

ask questions, and I know I’ve got colleagues who will be 

weighing into the debate on Bill 120 as we carry on here in this 

legislature. So with that I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:44.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4249 

 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4250 

 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4251 

 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4251 

 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4253 

 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4254 

 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4255 

 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4256 

 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4257 

 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4259 

 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4260 

 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4262 

 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4263 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


