




















































Hansard: May 08, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 60A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 8, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3477 

 May 8, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to colleagues in the legislature, it’s my 

pleasure today to introduce some of Saskatchewan’s best 

authors who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A couple of Saturdays ago, we celebrated literature and 

publishing in our province with the Saskatchewan Book 

Awards hosted here in the city of Regina. I had the opportunity 

to represent the government and the people of Saskatchewan at 

those book awards, Mr. Speaker, in bringing greetings and also 

presenting an award from the Ministry of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. There were a number of awards given out that evening, 

Mr. Speaker, to both authors and publishers. 

 

And we are joined here today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, by 

Candace Savage, who was a multiple winner that particular 

evening. We’re joined by Felix Hoehn, Blair Stonechild, 

amongst others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know they did a reading in the Legislative Library over the 

noon hour. Unfortunately I couldn’t attend as I was in a cabinet 

meeting, but I want to welcome all of them. Oh, I see Joanne 

Skidmore is there as well, the Chair of the Book Awards. It’s 

our pleasure to welcome them here, Mr. Speaker, to their 

Legislative Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the writers who read to assembled 

members from the Legislative Building but also from the 

community, from their award-winning books. 

 

And it’s always interesting to hear a new story or a new 

perspective on issues that are important to Saskatchewan. And I 

would have to say that the three readings we listened to today at 

lunch provided that perspective by looking at the constitutional 

issues around the treaties and the fact that we’re on Treaty 4 

territory, from Felix Hoehn. And Candace Savage looks at what 

it is to be part of the land, part of the prairie here, from a 

perspective developed down in Eastend of the Cypress Hills. 

And Blair Stonechild tells the story of one of our famous 

people, Buffy Sainte-Marie, and how where she’s from affected 

her life. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all three of those people need to be thanked, 

as well as all of the other speakers. And a special thanks to 

Melissa Bennett, our librarian, who has organized this for us. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, a very important group of people in our province, is 

members of the Saskatchewan Roughriders coaching staff here 

today. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — We’re not done yet. But I’d like to 

introduce them individually, if that’s all right. Jeremy O’Day’s 

the assistant general manager. If you could just give a wave 

when I say your name. The head coach, Corey Chamblin; 

quality control is Chad Hudson; Bob Dyce is the special teams 

coordinator; Richie Hall is the defensive coordinator; Richard 

Kent is the secondary coach; and Jason Tucker is receiver 

coach; Khari Jones, quarterback coach; Doug Malone, he 

coaches offensive line — most important position — and 

George Cortez is the offensive coordinator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s less than a month away from Rider training 

camp in Saskatoon. It goes without saying I think all members 

wish them the best this season. We wish them wisdom in 

calling the right plays at the right times and motivating their 

players. So in order . . . that I think we’d all enjoy having them 

— of course the Grey Cup is here November 24th — if we 

could have them as well as all the players back a few days later 

when we celebrate a Grey Cup championship via the 

Roughriders, we’d love to all have them back. So all members 

please join me in welcoming them today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the member from Regina Dewdney to 

welcome the coaching staff and Coach Chamblin of the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders here today. It’s a true pleasure, an 

honour to have you in the Assembly. I knew there was a reason, 

Mr. Speaker, that the member for Regina Dewdney had his tie 

done up just properly here today, that his former coaching staff 

was going to be here keeping an eye on him here today. 

 

It is that very special time of the year in Saskatchewan. You 

have spring seeding that’s soon to start. You have the warmer 

weather that’s coming around, and you have a time where 

football is on the minds of many. 

 

And here in Saskatchewan, we take our football pretty 

seriously. And I know as training camp comes around in the 

next month, there will be all sorts, many thousands of 

Saskatchewan people that will be tracking spring camp, the new 

players that have come from all over North America to play, 

and many new Saskatchewan products that come out. And 

they’ll be joining at training camp as well and tracking the 

plays. I think that the one job that might be tougher than 

Premier in this province is that of Coach Chamblin’s in 

Saskatchewan because of the scrutiny and pride we take in that 

team. 

 

I’d like to thank this coaching staff for the leadership they 

provide to our team, the leadership they provide to our 

province. I think of all those young players that are soon hitting 



3478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

the fields in small-town Saskatchewan and urban 

Saskatchewan. Whether it’s six-man football, nine-man 

football, or 12-man football, they’re inspired by the role models 

before us and certainly the players that you put on the field. It’s 

better to have Khari Jones on the coaching staff than playing 

against us, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to have him here today. 

I’d simply like to welcome our Saskatchewan Roughriders, 

wishing them well for the season, and sharing the Rider pride 

with all Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 

briefly I’d like to introduce two very important people who 

make the Swift Current constituency office work very well, in 

the case of Nola Smith, the constituency assistant that is of 

great help to me and to the constituents, and to Hayley Chalk 

who will be joining us for some time over the summer, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re all very appreciative of the work that 

constituency assistants do, and it’s an honour for me to be able 

to welcome them here to their Legislative Assembly, and thank 

them very formally for all their work on behalf of Swift Current 

constituents. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I can join with the 

member for Dewdney and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition 

in welcoming the Rider coaching staff. We had a brief chance 

to visit with them in the Premier’s office. I told them that I call 

it the Premier’s office. It’s not mine. I said, I’m just the current 

tenant and every four years the landlords can evict me. Coach 

Chamblin made the point that, he said, really? You get four 

years? 

 

Here’s the good news: I think this coaching staff’s going to get 

a lot more than four years, Mr. Speaker. Pretty exciting 

off-season, and again we thank them for their good work. And 

to Jason and Khari, you know the members are right: we really 

didn’t cheer for you before, but we sure do now. Welcome to 

this Legislative Assembly, your Legislative Assembly. And 

thank you for what you’re about to do this season. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to welcome a group of public servants that are seated in your 

gallery. I’d like to begin by thanking them on behalf of the 

government for all that they do. I know that if you speak to any 

minister here, and to the Premier, we can’t do our job without 

you doing yours. And you do it so very well, so thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the folks here are participating in the 

parliamentary program for the public service. There’s a number 

of ministries that are represented here today: Economy, 

Education, Environment, Finance, Health, Highways, Justice, 

Provincial Capital Commission, and Social Services. They’ll be 

spending time in the building doing a tour, I believe, meeting 

with you later today as well. 

 

I wish them a very good day. I hope that it’s educational and 

you get to see a little bit about what we do. And again, thank 

you and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 

with the minister in welcoming the civil servants here today to 

your Legislative Assembly. As you know, Saskatchewan has a 

long, proud history of a professional civil service dating back to 

the 1940s, where we exported our processes and our civil 

servants to other parts of Canada. So a long and proud service 

of which you’re a part of. 

 

I look forward to the opportunity, I have the chance to sit down 

and chat with you for about 20 minutes later this afternoon and 

tell you a little bit about what it’s like to be on the opposition 

and from our perspective here. So thank you for all that you do 

to ensure that things run smoothly, and welcome to your 

legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I’d like to take the opportunity to introduce two 

special guests seated in your gallery. And I’ll ask them to give 

us a wave when I say their names. Mr. Speaker, we’re joined by 

Anne Chase and Marilyn Williams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these two guests are here on behalf of ovarian 

cancer support and survivor groups, representing both Regina 

and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. But much more than that, they 

themselves are survivors of ovarian cancer and proudly 

represent all women who have battled this form of cancer in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, shortly from another member, we’re going to hear 

a member’s statement on ovarian cancer, and, Mr. Speaker, in 

the meantime I would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming these representatives who are 

working very hard on a very, very difficult cancer. And we 

appreciate that the work that they’ve done, but we also 

remember many of their friends who are no longer with us who 

worked very hard on this issue as well. And so thank you very 

much for coming to the legislature and making sure this 

particular issue is on the agenda. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the Minister of Health and the 

member for Regina Lakeview in welcoming the guests, but I’d 

especially like to welcome Anne Chase. Anne Chase’s 

daughter, Deb Clark, works for the Ministry of Finance within 

communications. And I know that Debbie is very, very proud of 

her mother. 

 

But I also know that in the last number of years, Deb, her 

husband and children and other family members have 

participated in many Relays for Life. And I want to commend 

Anne for all of her hard work and also her family, and 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3479 

especially Deb who works in the Ministry of Finance. I’d ask 

all members to welcome this fine individual to her legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to welcome the Saskatchewan Roughrider coaching staff. 

And it’s a special welcome from northern Saskatchewan 

because I live seven and a half hours north of here, and Rider 

Pride is very much alive in the North. 

 

I know that Ile-a-la-Crosse, which is my home community, 

have a lot of Roughrider fans and a lot of people are glued to 

their TV sets. So as you embark on your new season, rest 

assured that there’s a lot of people in northern Saskatchewan — 

the non-Aboriginal, the First Nations, the Métis — it knows no 

bounds, that Roughrider Pride is alive and well and very strong 

in northern Saskatchewan. And we’re even, we’re even starting 

to like Geroy Simon. For a while there, there was a lot of folks 

that didn’t like Mr. Simon when he played with BC [British 

Columbia]. But now that he’s joined the winning team, I think 

we’re starting to like him. 

 

So congratulations on your good start this year in terms of 

preparation, and good luck for your season. And Rider Pride 

from the northern part of Saskatchewan is alive and well, and 

we wish you the very best in the upcoming season. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my honour today to introduce a constituent of mine, Louise 

Schweitzer who’s from Archerwill. She’s also the executive 

director of the North East Outreach and Support Services in 

Melfort. I want to publicly thank Louise for her leading voice 

on advocating for the transition house in Melfort. And I know 

that members have . . . her voice was heard through her MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and to the cabinet 

ministers and the caucus here because we have the very first 

transition home opening since 1989. So thank you for that. 

 

I also want to tell you that she’s here today to talk about another 

one of her passions, and that’s ending violence against women. 

And some of you may have seen some of my male colleagues 

walking around this morning in red shoes. So I want to thank 

Louise for all of her work and welcome her to her Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 

with the minister in welcoming Louise to her Legislative 

Assembly here this afternoon. I had the pleasure of meeting 

with Louise a couple of years ago, actually almost three 

summers ago, and learned about the work that she was doing to 

try to get a shelter in Melfort. And I want to commend her for 

her work and her diligence, and the government on seeing that 

this was the right thing to do. So I welcome Louise to your 

legislature, and your hard work sure pays off. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to all members in the 

Assembly today, 13 grade 8 and 9 students from the 

MacDonald School in Stockholm, Saskatchewan. If they could 

give us a wave. Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied today by 

Laurie Johanson, Nicole Therrien, and chaperone, Patty Chern. 

 

And I’ll have the opportunity to meet with them shortly after 

question period, and I look forward to that. So I ask all 

members to welcome them to their legislature today. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome one of my constituents to the Assembly today, 

Candace Savage. I can’t see you, Candace, behind the clock, 

but I know you’re there. 

 

And I just wanted to say, Candace is an incredible writer and 

author, but she’s much more than that. She’s an ardent 

supporter of the grasslands in Saskatchewan and also is starting 

a brand new festival in Saskatoon at the end of May. So she’s 

hard at work organizing in Saskatoon a nature festival. 

 

She’s also a great accordion player and one of the members of 

the Saskatoon Fiddle Orchestra. And we really missed her last 

week when we had our concert because she was at the Book 

Awards, so she couldn’t be at our concert this year. So we 

missed you, Candace. But I would like to especially welcome 

you to your Legislative Assembly. So welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce in 

the west gallery eight students from the Swanson Christian 

School. Give us a wave, if you would please. And they’re 

accompanied by their teacher, Myra Hiebert, and chaperones, 

Merle Hiebert and Darc Loewen. And I look forward to an 

opportunity to chat with them a little bit after question period. 

I’d ask all members to please give them a warm welcome to 

their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to all 

members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 51 grade 5 

and 6 students in the west gallery from St. Anne School. 

They’re here with their teachers, Patrick Brennan and Deb 

Johnson. They’re also accompanied by their chaperones, 

Heather Langlois, Ione Langlois, and Patti McCullough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, St. Anne School opened its doors in 1976. The 

school was named St. Anne who was the mother of Virgin 

Mary. She is often considered the patron saint for mothers and 

grandmothers. 



3480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, all of my daughters attended and completed 

elementary school at St. Anne’s. Mr. Speaker, I invite all 

members to welcome these students to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

would be remiss if I didn’t introduce a young lady that just 

snuck in the west gallery, my CA [constituency assistant] 

Heather Howell-Shiplack. She does a fantastic job for us up in 

Walsh Acres, and she does a lot of work for us when all the 

MLAs are in session. I think all of us agree that they do a great 

job in keeping us on task, and some of those have a bigger task 

than others. And I thank her very much for the hard work she 

does. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, a young man named 

Kris Cherewyk is seated beside her. He’s a fantastic supporter 

of ours and he’s walked a lot of miles for us on the doorsteps. I 

just want to say hi to him, and welcome to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand today to present a petition on cellphone 

coverage for northwestern Saskatchewan. And the prayers reads 

as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations along with their neighbouring 

community of Turnor Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are all the 

neighbouring communities in these particular areas and have 

signed the petition from all throughout Saskatchewan — a great 

show of support. And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed 

this particular petition are from Canoe Narrows. And I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better care for our seniors here in 

Saskatchewan: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 

including creating more spaces and more choices for 

seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 

facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 

appropriate staffing levels in senior care facilities; and 

providing more support to help seniors remain 

independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to the 

Legislative Assembly from a number of Saskatchewan citizens. 

Northern Saskatchewan is being targeted by the Nuclear Waste 

Management Organization to become a storage site for millions 

of used irradiated nuclear fuel bundles. These radioactive 

nuclear bundles would be shipped on provincial highways. 

Some provinces have already banned the storage or transport of 

used nuclear bundles. I’d like to read the petition: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly pass legislation to 

permanently ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

of nuclear waste into, out of, and through Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is signed by many citizens from Saskatoon, Birch 

Hills, Prince Albert, and Prud’homme, Saskatchewan. I so 

present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition asking for the repaving, repair, and maintenance of the 

north road, Highway 102 from La Ronge to Sucker River. This 

road is a major highway used by buses transporting our students 

to schools, tourists for camping and fishing, and by the mining 

and forest industry. Mr. Speaker, people are very concerned for 

their safety. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the repairs and 

maintenance on the La Ronge road, Highway 102, is 

important to northern residents and must be undertaken 

immediately. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people in La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship Recipient 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I had 

the privilege and pleasure of speaking on behalf of the Minister 

of Agriculture at Sheldon Moellenbeck’s graduation at Lake 

Lenore High School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sheldon Moellenbeck was a recipient of the 

Saskatchewan Agriculture Student scholarship, which will help 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3481 

pay for his studies at the University of Saskatchewan this fall. 

He was selected as one of 10 students from across 

Saskatchewan to receive the $1,000 scholarship. As part of his 

application, Sheldon submitted an essay on why agriculture, 

now more than ever, is a vibrant, diverse industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have read his exceptional submission, and I 

believe he can expect a bright future in agriculture. Agriculture 

is not only farming and ranching but is a modern, diverse, 

technologically advanced industry. This growing province is 

Canada’s top agrifood exporter. For the second year in a row, 

we’re leading the way in innovations for bioscience. That is 

why I know Sheldon will have a promising future in agriculture 

in this great province. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

Sheldon and wishing him all the best at the University of 

Saskatchewan this fall. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Exceptional Attendance at Community School 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to stand in 

the House today to speak about the success of the grade 3/4 

class at St. Catherine Community School, taught by Mr. 

Markus Rubrecht. This class has achieved 76 full houses this 

year. A full house is a day where every student has made it to 

school. If that wasn’t enough to celebrate, they’ve had an 

additional 53 days with only one student absent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the successes that we love to celebrate as 

educators, as parents. We often romanticize the experience of 

childhood and forget about the real challenges many children 

face. In these situations, schools can be a sanctuary and a great 

equalizer. 

 

Mr. Rubrecht shared with me by email, I quote: 

 

I wanted to share this with you because this is the kind of 

success that can never be acknowledged on a standardized 

test. Our students live complicated and difficult lives and 

the fact that they all made it in on 76 occasions shows 

their resilience and character. 

 

I couldn’t agree more. Mr. Rubrecht’s approach and care 

demonstrates the best of education. Mr. Rubrecht, the parents, 

and the community, and students must be commended. Their 

demonstrated qualities of care, determination, and courage are 

essential to real learning and to building bright, strong futures 

for these students and their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to join with me in 

commending Mr. Rubrecht’s grade 3 and 4 class. Their success 

is touching, inspiring, and reflective of what is truly successful 

about our education system — the ability to encourage all to 

fulfill their full potential. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Celebrating Armoury Building’s 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this week the 

community of Moose Jaw is celebrating the 100th anniversary 

of the D.V. Currie Armoury building. The celebration started 

last Saturday with an open house to the public. I, along with the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, toured this historic 

building. 

 

It was named in honour of David Vivian Currie, a 

Saskatchewan soldier who was awarded the Victoria Cross 

following the Second World War. The armoury has been home 

to a variety of military units and was also used as a temporary 

morgue following the 1954 plane collision over Moose Jaw. It 

has been used as a headquarters for past floods and also used as 

a temporary hospital during an influenza outbreak. 

 

The armoury is home to the Saskatchewan Dragoons, a primary 

reserve armed regiment of the Canadian Forces. 

 

This Saturday afternoon the Saskatchewan Dragoons will 

exercise the freedom of the city by marching from the 

armouries, down Main Street, to city hall. The unit will retrace 

the route taken by the 46th Battalion as they marched to the 

train station to begin their journey to the World War I 

battlefield. The centennial celebration will conclude with the 

Lieutenant Governor being the special guest at a black-tie gala 

dinner full of military tradition and the music of the Royal 

Winnipeg Rifles band. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask members to recognize the armoury’s 100th 

anniversary and the important role it played in the community, 

as well as serving as a training depot for hundreds of soldiers 

who served our country over the past 100 years. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Youth Hockey Championships 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, as many members know, there 

are limited activities in the North for youth. This is a factor in 

many of the social problems that our youth are faced with. 

Hockey provides healthy, meaningful activity during the winter 

months. Many of our communities are blessed with having 

community rinks and regular, organized team games and 

tournaments. 

 

The Jonas Roberts Memorial Community Centre from Lac La 

Ronge Indian Band acted as the host for the recent FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Youth Hockey 

Championships that took place in Saskatoon. This event was 

attended by 85 teams from across the province.  

 

This type of event is so successful because of the volunteer 

activities of coaches, chaperones, bus drivers, mentors, and the 

financial support of local band councils and corporate sponsors. 

This year the Jonas Roberts Memorial Community Centre sent 

teams to compete in all divisions of the championship and made 

a clean sweep, winning in all the male divisions — novice, 

atoms, peewees, bantams, and midgets. The single female 

division was won by a team from Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 

All of the JRMCC [Jonas Roberts Memorial Community 



3482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

Centre] division teams are known as the La Ronge ’89ers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to especially congratulate the young Lac 

La Ronge Indian Band area athletes for their incredible 

accomplishment. And they make us so proud. I also want to 

acknowledge and thank Kevin Roberts, Rory Irving, and the 

staff of JRMCC for hosting, organizing, and coordinating this 

year’s FSIN youth hockey tournament. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Estevan Rotary Club’s 90th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday, along with the Lieutenant Governor, I was happy to 

attend the 90th anniversary celebration of the Rotary Club of 

Estevan. Mr. Speaker, March 4th, 1923, the Rotary Club of 

Estevan was officially organized, and today it is a mainstay of 

our community. 

 

Over the past 90 years, the Rotary Club has contributed to so 

many causes in our community, I couldn’t possibly list them all 

today. Nevertheless I would like to mention the more recent 

contributions, including $20,000 for the helipad to be used by 

STARS, $100,000 to the new Estevan regional nursing home 

committee, $50,000 to Spectra Place, and $40,000 to Frehlick 

Hall, and that is just naming a very few. 

 

Many exchange students, both incoming and outgoing, have 

also benefitted from the exchange program that is held every 

year by this local club. As we can see, Mr. Speaker, the Rotary 

Club’s commitment to Estevan is deep and unwavering. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

Rotary Club of Estevan’s 90th anniversary and all of the 

fabulous work they have done for the community of Estevan 

over the past 90 years. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

International Men’s March 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

the House today to speak of a unique fundraising and awareness 

project by the North East Outreach And Support Services. This 

project will be held tomorrow evening on Main Street in 

Melfort. And there will be some 140 participants in a walk, the 

majority of whom will be male. The kick is, Mr. Speaker, that 

the males walking in this project will be wearing 4-inch heels. 

This project is part of the International Men’s March to stop 

rape, sexual assault, and gender violence. The horrific news 

story of the three Ohio women held against their will is a 

chilling reminder of the distance we have to go in the fight 

against violence. 

 

The fundraising from this project will go to the new transition 

house announced in this year’s budget. And I am very pleased 

and proud to say that I will be walking in 4-inch heels and will 

be joined by the Ministers of Justice, Social Services, Crown 

Investments, as well as the member from Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to have Louise Schweitzer, 

executive director of the North East Outreach, with us this 

afternoon. Louise and her crew have done a tremendous amount 

of good work on the transition house project and on the walk a 

mile project. 

 

As I said, I am proud to be a part of this with so many of my 

colleagues, and yes, Mr. Speaker, like the rest, I am more than a 

little nervous to be walking in 4-inch heels. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

World Ovarian Cancer Day 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 8th has been 

proclaimed World Ovarian Cancer Day. Cancer is a terrible 

disease in all of its forms. There is at this time no reliable early 

detection test for ovarian cancer. It is often described as the 

disease that whispers because its symptoms are not obvious and 

they can easily be missed by the women they affect. 

 

When ovarian cancer is diagnosed early, there is a 90 per cent 

five-year survival rate. I was also encouraged to learn that the 

five-year survival rates are on the rise. To build on this positive 

trend and to prevent more of our mothers, grandmothers, 

sisters, and daughters from dying of ovarian cancer, it’s so 

important to make people more aware of the symptoms and the 

factors that increase a woman’s risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to learn more about ovarian 

cancer. Know the risk factors. Know the warning signs. Talk to 

a doctor. Access some of the comprehensive and readily 

available resources from advocacy groups like the Canadian 

Cancer Society, Ovarian Cancer Canada, and Ovarian Cancer 

Awareness & Treatment in Saskatchewan, also known as 

OCATS. If ovarian cancer is the disease that whispers, let’s arm 

ourselves with the knowledge that will allow us to hear it 

coming and stop it in its tracks. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for People with Disabilities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government has taken some good steps in terms of programs 

and services for people with disabilities. We recognize that and 

we support that. But we also know, Mr. Speaker, despite a 

whole lot of Sask Party fanfare and spin, there are still many 

people with disabilities whose needs are not being met. 

 

Trina Mackie has chronic muscular dystrophy. She lives in a 

Saskatoon Housing Authority building in an upper-floor 

apartment. Trina has to drag herself up and down the stairs. Her 

apartment is not accessible for people with mobility issues. As a 

result, Mr. Speaker, she has broken bones and she has suffered 

several concussions. The stairs in the building, Mr. Speaker, 

mean that in order for Trina to safely exit her building, her 

mother must come to the building in order to help her get out. 

 

To the Premier: does he think it’s acceptable that a woman with 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3483 

muscular dystrophy who desperately needs accessible housing 

is stuck in an apartment with stairs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Leader 

of the Opposition for the question. The Leader of the 

Opposition noted in his preamble that we have been working 

hard as a government to deal with a great backlog that was 

there not very many years ago in terms of people who wanted 

the dignity of a home, and a home that was appropriate in the 

event that they were facing the challenges of certain disabilities, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the short answer to the question of the hon. member is, no 

we would not want that circumstance happening for this 

individual. And so, Mr. Speaker, I will undertake to look, 

together with the Minister of Social Services, to look into the 

case that’s been raised today in the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This case has been 

brought to the attention of the minister. It was last month that 

the member from Saskatoon Riversdale wrote to the Minister of 

Social Services about Trina’s situation. And the response from 

the Minister of Social Services in a letter dated April 24th did 

not provide a solution for Trina. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, the letter proudly proclaimed that the 

government had provided a ramp to make Trina’s home 

accessible. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, that information is not 

accurate. The truth is that Trina and her family paid out of 

pocket in order for a carpenter to build a ramp to make the 

building a little bit more accessible for Trina. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he think it’s acceptable for his 

Minister of Social Services to try to take credit for building a 

ramp, when in fact she had nothing to do with it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, our office will also look into 

the details that have just been raised by the Leader of the 

Opposition. I think the Minister of Social Services will do the 

same, may well answer subsequent questions that come up. 

 

We wouldn’t want Trina or anyone else having to undertake 

these kinds of improvements facing the problems of access that 

someone with a disability would have, as is obviously the case 

here, Mr. Speaker, given the facts that have been presented by 

the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I hope there is some, I hope there is some positive in the fact 

that the government has placed a priority on these issues. We 

know there is work to be done. Even with respect to the 

wait-list that’s been eliminated, we know that others are on it, 

others who have not perhaps intellectual disabilities but 

physical disabilities. We want to take these matters very, very 

seriously and we’ll look into the details of the case that the 

Leader of the Opposition has raised. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Trina’s doctors and 

physiotherapists have written letters urging the government to 

help Trina move into a safe home immediately. Trina’s MLA, 

the member for Riversdale, has been a strong advocate. But the 

Sask Party government has been stubbornly dismissive of the 

concerns that were brought forward in Trina’s case. Instead of 

recognizing the urgent need for accessible housing, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister took credit for building a ramp when in 

fact she didn’t have anything to do with it. Trina needs action 

from the government, Mr. Speaker, not self-congratulatory 

news releases. 

 

Even though Trina is on the priority wait-list for accessible 

housing, Trina was told that the wait would be at least a year. 

That’s not acceptable, Mr. Speaker, because any wait risks 

injury to Trina, a single mother with muscular dystrophy in 

Saskatoon. 

 

My question to the Premier: when our economy is doing so 

well, why is it that even the priority wait-list for accessible 

housing is so long? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite 

and to everyone in the Assembly, I think the members know 

that whenever we have somebody with a disability and there is 

an issue, I would like to look into it and so would all of my 

colleagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to do in this area and I will 

look into this case right away and make sure that we can find 

out what is happening. I understand that there is a wait-list for 

priority cases and I also know that there are people that come 

forward and need help right away, and there’s others that are 

saying, okay this can wait a little time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s always more work to be done. We 

understand that when we became government, that there was a 

list of individuals that needed support. We continue to look at 

that list. We continue to move people forward that require more 

immediate help. And I assure you I’ll be looking into this case 

right now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, looking into the case is a good 

thing to do but I wish, Mr. Speaker, the minister had looked 

into the case when the member from Riversdale wrote a letter 

on April 18th and then the minister replied to the member on 

April 24th, not addressing the urgent need and the risks posed 

to Trina by staying in a second floor building with stairs when 

she has muscular dystrophy and cannot get up and down the 

stairs. Because of the situation, Mr. Speaker, Trina has broken 

bones. She has suffered several concussions because she is 

unable to safely exit the building. 

 

People can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, when the economy is 

doing well, why people like Trina are placed in this situation. 

They also can’t understand when someone — Trina’s on the 

SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program — 

when someone like Trina has to pay for her own modifications 

to her Sask Housing unit in order to be safe, things like raising 



3484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

a toilet seat, installing grab bars, putting a pole beside the bed 

so she can safely get in and out of bed, building a ramp which 

the minister took credit for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why is it, when the economy is doing well, that someone on 

SAID who is in a building that is not suitable for them is forced 

to pay for these expenses out of her own pocket when she is in 

such great need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am aware that there are 

individuals that require more help all the time. And I was aware 

of that when we became government when there was 440 

people that at that time the members opposite didn’t seem to 

think were a priority at all. I also know that there are 215 more 

people who are receiving services that were not receiving 

services five years ago because it wasn’t a priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have spent money on programs like SAID. 

We’ve spent $62 million on programs for people with 

disabilities because the members opposite didn’t think it was 

important. We’ve spent money on the rental housing disabilities 

supplement. We’ve spent money on wait-lists. We’ve spent 

money on approved private service homes. I’m ensuring that 

there’s more money for recruitment and retention of staff. 

We’ve spent money through Advanced Education on making 

sure that there’s workforce development programs. Mr. 

Speaker, the strategy that was announced on Monday by our 

government to ensure that we’d be doing . . . taking more steps 

is something that we’re all committed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have work to do; I will admit it. But I’m not 

going to take very many lessons from the people opposite who 

were willing to put 440 people on a list and ignore them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government has 

got money to spend when it comes to boastful billboards and 

spin and PR [public relations], but when it comes to funding 

post-secondary institutions, it’s a different story. 

 

With this year’s budget, the Sask Party handed off tough 

decisions to be made throughout the post-secondary education 

sector. At the University of Saskatchewan, the budget shortfall 

to date has meant tuition increases, layoffs, the closure of 

Kenderdine Campus, and they even have to hock their flock of 

sheep. 

 

We received word yesterday afternoon that the University of 

Regina will need to raise tuition 4.4 per cent for undergraduate 

students and 10 per cent for most graduate students. Mr. 

Speaker, the universities are struggling to balance their books, 

but the hard truth is that many of the costs are being put on to 

the shoulders of students and their families. 

 

How can the Sask Party government put up boastful billboards 

about advanced education funding when the reality is that 

programs are being ended, layoffs are ongoing, and tuition is 

going up yet again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the member opposite specifically raised the issue of closure of 

Kenderdine Campus. In November of last year, the university 

announced that they were suspending services there effective 

until 2016 so that they could assess what can be done with this 

property that was built in the 1930s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, in May 6th scrum, he said 

this: “We keep having these hard decisions being made by the 

university administration, be it the decision to eliminate and sell 

off the Kenderdine Campus, which has been a jewel in the 

University of Saskatchewan’s holdings . . .” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you and I want to tell the public 

that there was no decision made to close the Kenderdine 

Campus permanently or sell it off. The member opposite is 

absolutely wrong and has taken something totally out of context 

and ought not do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I welcome the clarification from the minister, 

and we’ll be interested to see how this works out after the 

three-year temporary closure concludes, Mr. Speaker. But the 

fact is, as pointed out by Stats Canada back in the fall, students 

in Saskatchewan pay more for tuition than most Canadians. 

Province-wide, the average cost of tuition was over $6,000. 

And that was last year, Mr. Speaker, before these increases. In 

2007, students paid around $4,500 a year in tuition at the 

University of Regina. Now, under the Sask Party, the average 

tuition at the U of R [University of Regina] is $5,788, and 

rising a further 4.4 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s an increase of $1,400 per year for a 

four-year degree. That’s over $5,000 more for an average 

four-year degree now than in 2007. I’m sure we’ll hear more 

from the minister about what they’re doing around student 

supports, but maybe he could also answer how it is that when 

the Sask Party government gives a student a grant on the one 

hand, why do they take it back with tuition increases on the 

other? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for recognizing the fact that we are doing something 

significant for students in our province. We’ve included the 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, which provides $2,000 

for high school graduates. Mr. Speaker, in the 2011 NDP [New 

Democratic Party] platform, they called for a tuition freeze that 

would have cost some $60 million. Mr. Speaker, we are being 

realistic, we are being practical, and we are doing things 

properly in our province. 

 

Between 1994 and 2007, tuition was increased very 

substantially under the NDP government. At the University of 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3485 

Saskatchewan during that period of time, tuition increased 99.2 

per cent; the University of Regina, 88.6 per cent; SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], a 

sad figure of 263 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll work hard to ensure that education in our 

province stays affordable and practical and, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

proud of the educational institutions in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, no end of boast and 

blame over on the other side, but when the U of R [University 

of Regina] finds itself in this position mainly because the Sask 

Party government is shortchanging post-secondary education 

. . . The university itself says so in the budget documents. “A 

2013-14 operating grant increase in the order of 2 per cent will 

significantly impair the U of R’s ability to maintain the quality 

of programs and to promote growth and employment in 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

They go on to say further, Mr. Speaker, “Post-secondary 

education in Saskatchewan suffers from significant 

underfunding and an educational deficit.” That’s on page 22, 

Mr. Speaker. The university further points out that 

Saskatchewan is now eighth — eighth, Mr. Speaker — in the 

country when it comes to funding post-secondary education as a 

share of the budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why do we see the Sask Party government 

bragging and boasting around advanced education funding 

when the reality is that programs are being ended, layoffs are 

ongoing, and tuition is going up yet again? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the University of Regina 

has received an increase in funding in operating since ’07-08 of 

some 36 per cent — $105.3 million. Since that period of time, 

so since we formed government, $59.6 million in additional 

capital. Fifty-nine per cent of University of Regina funding 

comes from the province, and it is roughly equivalent to every 

other province across Western Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, this year we have provided $10 

million for a student residence. The last time a student 

residence was built in the University of Regina, it was done 

entirely with borrowed money during when the members 

opposite were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you how the members opposite treated the 

University of Regina. This is what they did: in ’93-94, they 

reduced funding by 1.3 per cent; ’94-95, minus 4 per cent; 

’95-96 was zero per cent; ’97-98, minus point six . . . 

[inaudible] . . . That’s their commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Appointments to Boards and Agencies 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over a year ago, the 

Premier tasked the member for Saskatoon Fairview with 

finding qualified women to appoint to various boards in the 

province. We didn’t hear much about the results of this work 

until the Premier mentioned in passing during question period 

one day that the member from Fairview had provided him with 

names of women, and appointments had been made. Not much 

else was reported — no news release, no press conference, 

nothing. 

 

But in answers to written questions, the government finally 

revealed the member for Fairview didn’t actually come up with 

a report. Instead, after a year of work, she provided a list of 61 

names of women that she believed were qualified, and that only 

eight of those women have since been appointed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are more than 1 million people in 

Saskatchewan and at least half of them are women. Does the 

Premier really believe there are only 61 women who are 

qualified to serve on government boards and agencies? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

the question. The truth is the member for Saskatoon Fairview 

did present a comprehensive list of great, qualified candidates, 

women to serve on boards and agencies of the government, 

Crown corporation boards, Mr. Speaker. And we have been, as 

vacancies come open, we have been moving to appoint more 

and more. In fact we did one this morning at cabinet with 

respect to SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We expect to continue to make significantly more progress in 

this regard because there is an imbalance. We see it even in this 

legislature. Political parties frankly need to do a much better job 

of ensuring that more and more women are running and serving 

here in this Legislative Assembly so that it is also more 

reflective of the province. Mr. Speaker, we take the matter 

seriously. 

 

No the member for Fairview didn’t prepare a report. We asked 

her to go out and do the work, and she did. She did a great job. 

She presented a list to the government, and we are working to 

implement that list to make those appointments, to the great 

benefit, frankly, of the agencies and boards of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member for 

Fairview wasn’t given a written mandate but instead was told to 

only look for lawyers, academics, women in business, or 

entrepreneurs. And events where the member from Fairview 

talked to women about their interests seemed limited to $225 

afternoon discussions and $55-a-plate breakfasts. 

 

The government didn’t look at other sectors where we see 

strong women providing leadership, who many would argue are 

also more than capable of serving on boards — CBO 

[community-based organization] sector, the not-for-profit 

sector, labour unions, municipal governments, or First Nations. 



3486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

If the Sask Party government was serious about appointing 

women to boards, they would have included all of the areas of 

our province where women are providing leadership. 

 

Why did the Sask Party place such strict limitations on the 

kinds of women that made it on to the list of 61 qualified 

individuals? How can a woman find out if she’s on the list? 

And if she’s not, what does she need to do to get a fair chance 

by this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if anyone is interested 

in serving on boards and agencies in the province, they should 

certainly come forward, talk to their MLA on either side of the 

aisle, and express that interest — both women and men. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since we have been working on this particular 

initiative, it’s important to point out that women on public 

sector boards in the province has increased from 30 to 35 per 

cent just over the last year. Mr. Speaker, women on CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] boards, on 

CIC boards — these are the Crown corporations of the province 

— have increased from 19 per cent to 30 per cent just in the last 

few months. 

 

We do take the issue seriously. There is more work to be done, 

Mr. Speaker. I have just had a brief chat with the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview while listening to the preamble of the 

member opposite, and she confirms that the engagement, the 

contact with women interested in serving on boards, far 

surpassed the very limited scope that the member just presented 

in her preamble, Mr. Speaker. The task was taken very 

seriously, Mr. Speaker. Not only that, but the results of the task 

are being implemented today in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a broad 

range of women providing strong and capable leadership across 

the province and they should have the opportunity to add their 

skills and experience to the government’s many boards and 

agencies. In fact that’s what we thought would be the result of 

the work of the member for Fairview. Instead she produced a 

list with 61 names. 

 

This government likes to talk about setting targets but when 

asked if the government has set a target to increase the number 

of women on boards and agencies, the minister simply 

answered no. Mr. Speaker, that answer’s very telling because 

the top Crown and agencies still have a low level of women 

serving on their boards. Of 254 positions on major Crown and 

agency boards, only 27 per cent are filled by women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party government set no targets 

for improving the gender balance of its boards and agencies? 

What concrete strategy is in place to diversify our province’s 

ministry boards and Crown agencies? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are parts, Mr. Speaker, 

there are parts of the preamble that are simply not true, Mr. 

Speaker. Since this initiative was implemented by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, we have seen an increase in the 

number of women serving on public sector boards from 30 to 

35 per cent. Still not good enough, but we’re making progress, 

Mr. Speaker. And again, women serving on CIC boards is up 

from 19 per cent to 30 per cent just in the last few months. 

Moreover the Status of Women office is providing funding to 

Equal Voice Saskatchewan and that goal, as the member knows 

there, is to increase the number of women running for public 

office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We made an important appointment just today in cabinet. We 

take the issue very, very seriously. Mr. Speaker, what I don’t 

think is helpful is if that hon. member minimizes the work of 

the member for Fairview who took the task very seriously. And 

yes she presented the names of 61 individuals. Not everyone 

she contacted was willing to serve or had time to serve or an 

interest to serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only that. It’s not a limited list. We invite 

anyone to step forward who wants to serve in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We have great boards and agencies, great Crowns that 

could use the input of Saskatchewan people and specifically of 

Saskatchewan women. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Forest Fire Monitoring 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government is 

struggling to explain why they are eliminating the tower 

watchers who protect our province’s forests in 42 towers, and 

replacing them with video cameras. They allege that there are 

occupational health and safety concerns, but they’ve not tabled 

any concrete documentation justifying the slashing of these 42 

positions. 

 

We know that the tower crews are fully trained and are outfitted 

with a climbing harness which is fastened to the tower, and the 

ladders they climb up are fully enclosed. And to lose these 

watchers means even more danger for the ground crews who 

rely on the towers for communications when they lose touch 

with the base. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the minister suggest that the risks are so 

great that they justify eliminating 42 positions and put the 

firefighters on the ground at even greater risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. We’ve answered these questions on the floor of the 

House before. Just to remind hon. members on both sides of the 

House, occupational health and safety approached the Ministry 

of Environment and talked about concerns that they had for 

individuals that climb towers that are 80 to 90 feet high, and 

they did so on their own. Should something happen, of course 

there would be a concern. 

 

It’s something that jurisdictions across North America are 

looking at and are facing and are looking at trying to solve. The 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3487 

idea of having two individuals go up is one that has been put 

forward, but the cost implications of that would be excessive. 

 

What we are doing is employing technology, a technology that 

has been tried and tested in Oregon. It was a pilot that was done 

in Oregon. It was expanded throughout the whole state. We are 

doing so in a consultative way. I had a chance to talk to the 

mayors of 21 northern communities last Friday, along with the 

Minister of Government Relations. We had a good discussion 

about it. They understand where our goals are. 

 

Yes there will be some challenges going forward and we’ll be 

looking at re-employing those people wherever possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has cited a program 

in Oregon but did not give the Assembly an accurate picture of 

that pilot project. He said that the technology has been 

operationally proven in North America. Mr. Speaker, we spoke 

with the Oregon forestry department. Dr. Dennis Lee, a 

protection unit forester, told us that Oregon continues to use 

tower observers for the majority of their forests. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, only in a small test area in the southwest 

coastal forest region does Oregon use the video cameras as a 

state pilot project. In fact, at only one unit is there a completely 

automated system. In the others, the cameras merely assist the 

human observation to provide the best forest fire prevention 

system. Instead of rushing the replacement, they have been 

planning this implementation for over six years. 

 

Why would the Sask Party use video cameras to replace forest 

fire workers when there aren’t jurisdictions in North America 

doing the same? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this technology has been operationally proven 

across North America. Certainly I’ve cited Oregon as a place 

that has done some early work. As the member opposite herself 

states, that is something that has been ongoing for many, many 

years. Other jurisdictions in Canada are looking at it. Alberta, 

Ontario, and others are certainly looking at it. 

 

It’s a situation, when you’re sitting in the chair of the Minister 

of Environment and occupational health and safety comes and 

expresses the concern, it’s something that has to be taken very 

serious. As I mentioned earlier, we had a discussion with the 

mayors and council members of 21 northern communities last 

Friday and we had a good discussion back and forth. We talked 

about the towers. We talked about the physical fitness 

requirements as well are a concern. 

 

But it’s something we take very serious. We’re looking across 

North America for best practices, and we’re implementing 

those today in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Acting Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report 

that it has considered certain estimates . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — . . . and to present its third report. I move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the member for Athabasca wishing to enter 

into the debate? It hasn’t started yet. And perhaps the Minister 

of Highways wants to have the same comments. 

 

It has been moved by the Chair of the Economy Committee: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[14:30] 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 50, 

The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be heard in Committee of 

the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 



3488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 50, 

The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 and that it now 

be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 78, 

The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 78, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 and that the 

bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I move that this bill now be read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Social 

Services that Bill No. 78, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 

2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its third report. I 

move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Crown 

and Central Agencies Committee: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman of the 

Crown and Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

69, The Information Services Corporation Act without 

amendment. 

 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3489 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Highways 

and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now read a third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 69, The Information Services Corporation 

Act and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure that Bill No. 69, The Information 

Services Corporation Act be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

45, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Highways 

and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 and 

that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I move, Mr. Speaker, that this bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure that Bill No. 45, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table 

the answers to questions 556 through 557. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government Whip has tabled 

responses to questions 556 through 557 inclusive. 

 

Committee of Finance. I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Subvote (EX01) 

 

The Chair: — The business before the committee of estimates 

is the . . . I’ll call the committee to order and we’ll get started. 

The business before the committee is the estimates for 



3490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

Executive Council. The first item of business is the main 

estimates for Executive Council, vote 10, found on page 65 of 

the Estimates book. 

 

Before we start, I’ll make a couple of comments. We are in 

Committee of Finance. The rules are somewhat different from 

the standing committees. One of the most notable differences 

that people watching and our members will notice is that the 

members participating in the estimates today and in the 

discussions stand at their desks. And one of the major 

differences in this committee versus the standing committees is 

that only members can participate in the discussions. And the 

officials . . . Certainly the Premier has officials here with him 

here to help him with the answers and so on, but it will be the 

Premier that will be asking. And all members of the legislature 

are members of this committee. 

 

So with that, I would ask the Premier to introduce his officials, 

and after he has introduced his officials I will call the executive 

subvote 1 and then the Premier can make his opening statement. 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. It’s a 

pleasure for me to be able to introduce the officials that have 

joined me today as we prepare for a few hours of estimates. On 

my immediate left is the deputy minister to the Premier, Doug 

Moen. The associate deputy minister of Intergovernmental 

Affairs is on his left, Wes Jickling. Bonita Cairns, also with 

Executive Council, to help us with some of the corporate 

services questions and finance questions that may arise. Beside 

her is Graham Stewart who handles House business and 

Executive Council. Also Reg Downs, one of my senior 

advisors. And I don’t think I introduced James Saunders, and I 

will do that now. Notwithstanding his poor taste in football 

teams, he is the associate deputy minister of cabinet planning. 

Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — Thank you, Premier. The business before the 

committee, as I stated, is Executive Council vote 10, subvote 

(EX01), central management and services. I call upon the 

Premier to make an opening statement if he so wishes. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. We look forward to this 

afternoon and the exchange that’s about to take place. We are, 

Mr. Chair, here to answer the questions from the Leader of the 

Opposition and, if he so decides, from other members of the 

opposition. We will undertake to provide those answers here 

today and may take a pause as a result of that to consult with 

officials to make sure the answers are accurate and fulsome. If 

we cannot provide an answer immediately, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Chairman, we will undertake to provide the information to the 

Leader of the Opposition and members opposite at the earliest 

possible opportunity. 

 

By way of introduction, Mr. Chair, let me just say that I have 

had the honour of serving in the role that the current Leader of 

the Opposition has. I congratulate him again on his win of the 

NDP leadership campaign. Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say 

that there are really two roles when you are the Leader of the 

Opposition, or two parts to the role, should I say that perhaps? 

The first is that you do hold the government accountable. And 

certainly the new Leader of the Opposition has been working at 

that, doing a good job of asking questions of the government on 

specific cases, on policy, holding the government accountable 

in question period. We know that will also happen today, this 

afternoon. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there’s another role for the Leader of the 

Opposition as I recall it, and that is also to propose. There is a 

. . . The opposition leader does oppose, but I think it’s 

important too that the Leader of the Opposition, that the 

opposition party itself, indeed, Mr. Chairman, is proposing 

things as well. 

 

It’s interesting. I think the Leader of the Opposition agrees with 

that supposition by the way, Mr. Chair, because I’ve read the 

materials that he had put forward when he was campaigning for 

the leadership position. There are issues, by the way, that 

probably need clarification early on with respect to energy 

policy and some of the other NDP’s election platform that’s no 

longer on their website, as well as the questions that he has. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I note that on his leadership campaign 

website, and I’m quoting now, it says: “Cam’s vision includes 

more meaningful debate in the legislature.” It goes on to say, 

“We can facilitate . . .” and this is about the Leader of the 

Opposition and about what’s about to happen: 

 

We can facilitate a richer debate by restructuring the rules 

of the Legislative Assembly including to allow questions 

to be asked of MLAs after they deliver each speech in the 

legislature, meaning [the quote continues] that they are 

held accountable for their words and called upon to 

expand on their thoughts and ideas.  

 

I think that is a very wise statement for a leadership candidate 

to make. And it also I think, Mr. Chairman, should inform all of 

us, both sides — myself and the Leader of the Opposition — as 

we engage in this exchange that we look forward to this 

afternoon. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, for your 

explanation at the beginning of . . . your opening remarks about 

how the afternoon will flow, and the format and the structure 

and the role of members. Thank you also to the Premier for his 

opening remarks. And welcome to the officials as well who are 

joining us today that help facilitate this process, recognizing on 

both sides there are a lot of people involved in making this 

legislature work well and effectively in allowing political 

parties to work well. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to 

recognize the contributions that staff people make on both sides 

of the House. 

 

In listening to the Premier’s opening remarks, I do think it is 

important to emphasize the importance of this type of format to 

democracy and what occurs here in the Assembly. For people 

that often watch, we know that the committee process in 

estimates is a hugely important time to ask questions, to shine a 

light on areas where there perhaps needs to be a bit more light 

shone where we need to ask important questions and figure out 

exactly what the government is thinking on certain items and 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3491 

why they’ve taken certain positions and why they have taken 

certain actions. 

 

And this format here, Mr. Speaker, is in fact one of the very 

important venues where this occurs, where the Leader of the 

Opposition — this is my first Premier’s estimates as the Leader 

of the Opposition — where I can interact with the Premier in 

asking questions that build on things that we’ve been talking 

about through question period and things that we haven’t had a 

chance to address at the same time. 

 

The Premier’s opening remarks, Mr. Speaker, about the idea of 

holding a government to account as well as putting forward 

good ideas, that’s most certainly the role of opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. And I welcome that debate and that process that will 

unfold between now and the next election. Today, Mr. Speaker, 

is an opportunity to ask questions to the Premier and to 

understand why in fact they have taken a certain course of 

action. 

 

I’d like to start off the discussion, Mr. Speaker, with something 

that we’ve been talking about in question periods and in 

committee as well, and that’s the issue of seniors’ care, 

something that’s hugely important to Saskatchewan families, 

because it’s not just about a system; it’s about the level and the 

type and the quality of care that is provided to our loved ones. 

Depending on which generation we belong to, sometimes that’s 

a partner, sometimes that’s a parent, and sometimes that is a 

grandparent. And we know, Mr. Speaker, from a number of 

people who have come to the legislature through this session, 

we think of Carrie Klassen and we think of Lynne Seaborne 

who have come forward with situations based on the 

experiences they’ve had in their families where they’ve voiced 

some real concerns about the quality and the level of care 

provided to their loved ones. 

 

Central to the issues that have been brought forward by the 

Saskatchewan people, it has to do with the issue of chronic 

understaffing in many facilities, Mr. Speaker, and how this is 

having an effect on the quality of care that’s provided, having 

an effect on call buttons, whether they’re answered in a prompt 

way, whether someone is left unattended on a toilet for too 

many hours, whether someone missed a regularly scheduled 

bath that they most certainly deserve for dignity, Mr. Speaker. 

These are the things that concern families, when we see 

individuals falling through cracks and the level of care not 

being provided. And when the economy’s doing well, Mr. 

Speaker, people expect — and rightfully so — expect the right 

level of care provided to their loved ones. 

 

So my first question to the Premier is, does he have any 

concerns about staffing levels in our province’s care facilities? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I thank the Leader of 

the Opposition for the question. This has been the source of 

some debate in question period, as it should be. Cases have 

been brought forward, as they should be. And then it’s up to the 

government to look into them and determine, Mr. Speaker, just 

the extent of the challenges that’s being presented by the 

Leader of the Opposition and also the extent of the problem that 

exists. 

The Leader of the Opposition, in his preamble, used the words 

chronic shortages or something to that effect. I’m not sure 

exactly the word. Mr. Chairman, we know that in certain 

circumstances there are issues around the staffing level. But 

again I think we risk sacrificing fact and then what follows 

from fact, improving the situation, we risk sacrificing that for 

hyperbole and we’ll lose the chance to make progress if we’re 

not, you know, if we’re not true to the circumstances that exist 

in terms of how we depict them. 

 

Because, Mr. Chairman, we know that in the province of 

Saskatchewan under the Saskatchewan Party government there 

has been a great increase in the number of health care 

professionals, both that are unionized, that are non-unionized. 

This is true, Mr. Chairman, of LPNs [licensed practical nurse]. 

It’s true of RNs [registered nurse] — 1,000 more RNs 

practising. It’s true of doctors, though the doctor shortage still 

exists in Saskatchewan. But there are 200-plus more doctors 

practising than when we took office. 

 

Mr. Chair, we know that some of these health care 

professionals are working in long-term care. Just by definition, 

they’re absolutely involved in providing long-term care. What 

the minister has highlighted as the plan for the government, as 

members of this committee will know, is to task the CEOs 

[chief executive officer] and the senior teams of the regions to 

get on to the floor of the long-term care facilities across the 

province to engage in the front-line staff, to review, for 

example, things like assessment. We are using an assessment 

tool to determine the kind of care, the level of care that ought to 

be accorded to seniors. We’re using an assessment that dates 

back to the NDP administration of the 1990s. Times were 

different then. Facilities themselves have changed, Mr. 

Chairman. We don’t see the same configurations now in terms 

of long-term care facilities. So we’ve also indicated it’s time to 

review that assessment. It’s time perhaps to modernize the 

assessment, not just for the fact that we have different 

complements of health care providers, but different 

configurations of long-term care facilities. 

 

Mr. Chair, it is important to note that when we took office — 

and it’s not that long ago; it might seem longer for some in the 

Assembly, but it is not that long ago — we took over a situation 

where there were huge deficits in terms of the number of health 

care workers in the province, huge deficits. The Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses said very plainly to the then NDP government 

. . . And the member would know that. He was working with 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association. I think he was in health 

care research. I’m sure he would have followed closely to the 

debate. They said to the then government, we’re 1,000 nurses 

short in the province. The doctors came forward. There was 

doctor shortages as well, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And so with respect to the human resource deficit that existed 

in health care, we moved to act on it. We struck a partnership 

with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. It was an historic 

partnership. We have now hired . . . We now see over 1,000 

nurses practising only five years later, more than were there 

when members opposite were the government. We do see more 

doctors practising. There are more LPNs. There are more 

people providing health care on the front lines in this province. 

Is there enough yet? Well no. There’s examples brought 

forward by the Leader of the Opposition that might indicate we 



3492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

need to focus on staff complements and are doing just that to 

improve the situation. 

 

There was another deficit that existed as well, Mr. Chair, that I 

think it’s important for . . . If the Leader of the Opposition is 

going to raise the issues, as he should, but if he was going to 

raise them and maximize their credibility, I think it would be a 

good chance for him to admit about that deficit that the NDP 

government left to the people of Saskatchewan when they left 

office, not just in terms of human resources but also in terms of 

beds. Because under the New Democratic Party — and he just 

needs to turn around and talk to his Health critic who was a 

Health minister — we saw the closure of long-term care beds, 

the closure of over 1,000 long-term care beds in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And moreover, Mr. Chair, we saw the 

government fail to build any more capacity into the system. Mr. 

Chairman, that catches up to you, year after year after year, 

exacerbated by the closure of 52 health care facilities. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I just want to say that this is a very 

important issue. We want to make sure our seniors are well 

taken care of. We want to make sure our front-line staff feel 

that they actually have the resources to get the job done. The 

minister has laid out a plan to achieve that. 

 

I understand, by the way, in a scrum recently, I think this week, 

the Leader of the Opposition has finally indicated that his 

position I think, and maybe he’ll correct it if I’m wrong, is to 

have a ratio I think for staffing complement. The experts in the 

system tell us this is not a political decision, tell us that might 

not be the way to go because it doesn’t recognize the different 

levels of care required by residents. It doesn’t recognize the 

kinds of institutions we’re talking about, facilities, in terms of 

their configuration. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, rather than a ratio, an arbitrary number — 

and I don’t know if he said the number yet, just that we needed 

a ratio — we’ve said that we want our health region engaged, 

analyzing each facility for the right complement, and moreover, 

Mr. Chair, that we would look at the assessment tool to make 

sure that seniors are getting the care that they so richly deserve 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The individuals that 

have come to the legislature like Carrie and Lynne have told 

their stories and have said because of the understaffing in 

facilities, because the ratios are not adequate, they have seen 

too many instances of seniors falling through the cracks. 

 

My question to the Premier: will his government support the 

establishment of ratios for specific levels of care in order to 

ensure that Saskatchewan people do not fall through the cracks? 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Chairman, we don’t believe the 

ratio will serve the health care needs of the province of 

Saskatchewan, will serve the needs of long-term care patients. 

And again this is not a decision that the government’s come to 

from a political standpoint. It’s a decision we’ve come to 

inform by those who are on the front lines and those who are in 

the business of providing health care right across the province. 

 

For example, Mr. Chairman, I invite the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition to consider the kinds of facilities that exist around 

the province. They’re very different as you go around 

Saskatchewan. They’re different in urban Saskatchewan than 

they are in rural Saskatchewan. The mix of what used to be 

known . . . The member will know, nominally, the level of care 

was described as 1, 2, 3, and 4 for seniors. It’s not really used 

now — level 3 and 4 to some extent — but really we’ve moved 

away from that kind of characterization. But, Mr. Speaker, on 

that spectrum for the sake of this debate, Mr. Chair, level 1 was 

obviously the lightest level of care required for a senior — 2, 3, 

4 — and 4 is the most intensive. You can have a situation in 

rural Saskatchewan with relatively few beds but a very large 

number, a higher number of, proportionately, of level 4 

patients, people who need maximum care. Mr. Chair, that kind 

of institution’s going to need to have a much more flexible 

approach to the complement of staff than a ratio would provide. 

 

One of the examples that was raised by the Leader of the 

Opposition was Sunset Extendicare in one of the particular 

cases. Mr. Chair, I think it’s interesting to note that the facility 

administrator, in conjunction with RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region], looked at this very issue with respect to the 

amount of staffing that was there. Staffing issues were a high 

priority at a meeting that happened earlier this year, and there’s 

a target set to hire 30 additional continuing care assistants 

within eight months. Those targets were set in August. The 

target has been met. They’ve also hired 17 professional staff in 

that time as well. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, the point is we see continued progress on 

this issue, with more work needed to be done. But, Mr. 

Chairman, it’s worth repeating: we are digging ourselves, in 

health care and especially in long-term care, out of a big hole 

that was left by a previous administration that closed long-term 

care beds, did not train the proper complement of health care 

workers because they also stopped funding seats at the medical 

school, to the extent we needed them, I should say, and 

especially in the nursing program. All of these decisions made 

. . . And members opposite may tire of hearing about what 

happened under their administration. The bottom line though, 

Mr. Chairman, is the seed for the deficits we’re dealing with 

were sown then by decisions taken around training the proper 

complement of medical people in this province and closing 

long-term care beds instead of opening. 

 

Dare I also say, Mr. Chairman, that the ideological approach of 

the government —that really if it couldn’t be a government 

institution, it wasn’t going to happen — also I think restricted 

the innovation, the creativity of Saskatchewan non-government 

agencies, some faith-based organizations, to participate in 

building and opening actually beds in the province, as we’ve 

seen with Amicus and as we may see in the future in other 

projects around the province. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, in the day-to-day 

operations of a care facility caring for seniors in the province, 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3493 

the Premier and the government are unwilling to establish 

levels of care ratio, ratios of staff to residents. But during 

essential services, Mr. Speaker, when essential services 

legislation would be in place, they’re more than happy to set 

and determine what the standards are for appropriate levels of 

care. So the argument there doesn’t quite hold water. 

 

My question to the Premier is, does he think it’s ever acceptable 

for seniors in care facilities to miss their baths for weeks at a 

time? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As referenced in the 

Premier’s remarks earlier on in this question, something we’ve 

discussed in question period has been the Health minister’s 

approach and the government’s approach in dealing with issues 

of care for seniors in long-term care facilities. And the response 

that we’ve seen from members opposite is to dispatch CEOs, 

senior executives into facilities on a more frequent basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think visits by senior executives and CEOs are 

fine in themselves and should occur most certainly. But, Mr. 

Speaker, unless those CEOs are providing the additional care 

that seniors need and deserve in care facilities, it’s not a real 

solution and it’s not really addressing the problem. It’s not 

addressing the concerns that people like Carrie and Lynne have 

brought forward. 

 

So my question to the Premier: does he really think that more 

CEO tours of care facilities is the answer for better seniors’ care 

in this province? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important to 

point out that under the previous administration there were no 

ratios. If this was the ticket, this was the silver bullet to deal 

with this challenge, I would have assumed that the New 

Democratic Party would have implemented it when in office. 

The bottom line is they were very hesitant, and remain so today, 

very hesitant to set any targets at all. We’ve heard the member 

call for ratios but not indicating what those ratios might be or 

that he’s prepared to look at it more carefully and weigh in on 

that particular subject. 

 

But the fact that there are not any ratios of front-line staff to 

patients, he equates that with level of care, Mr. Chairman. I 

think that’s particularly misguided. I don’t think we want to use 

a ratio of front-line workers to patients, to long-term care 

patients as the sole determinant of the level of care they’re 

going to receive. 

 

We’re going to rely on front-line staff. And when they say there 

is a shortage, and we’ve been hearing those concerns as well, 

we need to respond to that, Mr. Chairman. We do have the 

previous structure of level 1, 2, 3, 4 that in its current 

application helps us determine — and health care workers — 

helps them to determine the level of care that is needed. 

You know, I note in the Weyburn Review when the Leader of 

the Opposition was there for the NDP spring banquet, he was 

very dismissive, as he is now, of CEOs. He said, “CEOs won’t 

make a difference.” 

 

Mr. Chairman, I don’t agree. I don’t agree. We have some 

excellent health care managers in this province. We have very 

good CEOs in the regions. One of the former CEOs is now the 

deputy minister of Health, Mr. Chairman, widely regarded in 

this country as perhaps the finest deputy minister you’ll find in 

the country with respect to health. 

 

I would be very comfortable if CEOs of that calibre, and even 

the deputy minister of Health, is tasked by the Minister of 

Health to go to these long-term care facilities, meet with the 

staff, look at what possibly can be achieved in terms of more 

resources. Perhaps it’s a reallocation of sources. Perhaps it’s 

leaning out, even, configurations of facilities. We’ve actually 

seen that in health care facilities around the province where a 

new approach to design has literally saved the time of, frankly, 

just walking through a facility and provided more opportunity 

for health care workers to bring care to patients. 

 

It’s maybe a good question period clip or a media clip to say, 

well we need a ratio. But, Mr. Chairman, what is lost in that 

kind of analysis is all of the other elements that can go into 

improving care. Do I think CEOs visiting the regions, tasked by 

the ministers to do it immediately, to talk to the front-line 

workers, to see what’s happening with patients first-hand . . . 

These are the CEOs by the way who allocate the budget. So to 

be dismissive of what good they can bring to this, I don’t think 

it’s fair, frankly, Mr. Chairman, and I also think it’s a 

wrong-headed approach. 

 

We absolutely want them in those facilities. We want the report 

back very, very quickly. And, Mr. Chairman, we want to look 

at the assessment, the intake assessment for patients, for 

residents of long-term care to see if that should be updated and 

improved and to see if that might help alleviate some of the 

issues that the Leader of the Opposition has raised. 

 

Mr. Chairman, also important to this whole discussion is 

notwithstanding the fact that there are certainly issues and cases 

of seniors — and as the member references, grandmas and 

grandpas — that we want to be very serious about, there is also 

a great track record of health care workers and facilities in this 

province, government and non-government, who have 

responded very well to the lean initiative, responded very well, 

frankly, to some of the decisions that CEOs have made, that the 

deputy has made, that ministers have directed, that are seeing 

. . . that are getting great care in Saskatchewan. And of course 

that’s very much due to those front-line health care workers that 

are doing that. 

 

There is improvements that are possible, and we’ve laid out a 

plan to achieve them. We don’t believe setting a ratio is going 

to do that, Mr. Chairman. We think we need to look very 

carefully, quickly at the issues at the long-term care facilities, 

some of the ones that the member has raised, and have those 

recommendations come back to the region and then to the 

minister about how we can move very quickly to improve care 

for seniors in the province. 

 



3494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Premier’s 

remarks when he talked about what needs to occur and he 

talked about listening to front-line health care workers, and 

most certainly that is a very big part of what needs to occur in 

order to ensure that the concerns that have been brought 

forward by Saskatchewan people like Carrie and Lynne are 

actually addressed in order to ensure that our grandparents 

actually have the level of care that they deserve. 

 

In the Premier’s earlier response when asked if it was 

acceptable for a senior to miss a weekly bath in a care facility, 

the Premier said, no. So my question to the Premier: if it is not 

acceptable — we know that situations like this occur, based on 

what front-line health care workers have told us and based on 

what some families have told us — if it is not acceptable, does 

he believe that the CEO tours is the fix for that solution? 

Especially given the fact that when we talk with health care 

front-line workers, Mr. Speaker, what they tell us is that they 

are very often, very often running short-staffed — that the 

number of people that should be on the shift in order to provide 

the right level of care to seniors, in order to ensure that people 

receive their meals, in order to ensure that seniors receive their 

baths, in order that seniors receive the attention when a call 

button is hit, Mr. Speaker — my question to the Premier: does 

he think more CEO tours is the solution to that problem? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well to say that 

when a case like that’s raised either on the floor of the 

Assembly or maybe the government receives a letter from a 

constituent or an MLA raises a case like that — certainly MLAs 

on our side of the House do that — they don’t wait for a CEO 

tour. Again it’s a very simplistic sort of analysis or view of the 

exchange and meant, I think, to maximum some political 

benefit. 

 

I would just say this to my honourable friend. When we hear of 

a case like this, we want to check into it as quickly as possible. 

Health ministry officials monitor question period for example. I 

think CEOs do as well, and they want to be able to be in contact 

with facilities if they’re raised to see what’s happened in terms 

of the case that’s been raised. 

 

You know sometimes, Mr. Chairman, there are other facts to a 

story around why baths are not provided. Sometimes it has to 

do with their medical care. Sometimes it has to do with 

proximity to surgery they’ve had, and so we want to be able to 

check into those things very, very quickly. When that member 

raises a case in the Legislative Assembly, or any member in this 

House, we want to take them seriously. We want to move. The 

CEOs tour is about finding the long-term solution for this, 

reporting back to the regions and the government about what 

might be possible. 

 

I’ll tell you what we will not do, Mr. Chairman. We’ll not take 

the approach of the New Democratic Party when they were in 

office and we brought forward these cases, as the member quite 

rightly is doing now in this session. We will not say, as the 

current Health critic said — the then Health minister — when 

he was asked about these cases coming forward in this building, 

some of them long-term care, his Health critic said, and I quote, 

“Clearly Mr. Wall hasn’t been getting enough press time, and 

so practically he’s coming back with the patient of the day.” I 

can’t imagine anything more dismissive than that. And while 

we need to be doing better on our side and while we will 

continue to earnestly look at the cases that are raised, Mr. 

Chairman, what we will not say, what we will not do is be as 

dismissive as members opposite, as his Health critic was when 

they sat on these benches. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what’s dismissive is when a 

Saskatchewan citizen comes forward with a concern about their 

family, such as the case that we had with respect to Jennifer and 

her brother Devon, Mr. Speaker, and to have the Minister of 

Crown Investments go out in the rotunda and blatantly try to 

discredit the citizen. I think that is the ultimate form of 

disrespect to someone bringing forward a concern. 

 

The Provincial Auditor has also spoken, Mr. Speaker, about the 

serious concerns about the quality of care that seniors face in 

many facilities. There was a report issued — I believe it was in 

December, Mr. Speaker — where there were concerns about 

absence of hand soap, water that was too hot that could burn 

people, blocked fire exits. And this all had to do with, Mr. 

Speaker, what the auditor identified as the improper oversight 

by the Ministry of Health when it comes to processes to 

regulate personal care homes in accordance with The Personal 

Care Homes Act. 

 

My question to the Premier: can he please report how the 

government has followed up on these concerns that were raised 

by the auditor? 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, in the member’s preamble 

he referenced a case with respect to a case that he brought 

forward in the legislature and comments from the Minister of 

Crown Investments Corporation. She was a backup then to the 

Minister of Social Services. Mr. Chairman, it wasn’t a case of 

trying to discredit anyone. It was a case of trying to present the 

facts because the case had been presented by that member — 

and we’ll get into the Bayliss situation if he wants to — that 

were not quite the whole picture. I’ll just leave it at that, that 

programs had been offered, not quite right, and we respect the 

parent’s right to reject them. And they stay on the list, and we 

continue to work with them. 

 

In the case of the family from Swift Current, what he had failed 

to do was find out all of the facts, which included this important 

fact: that the son of the Bayliss’s was offered a permanent 

group home space last spring that they held for six months, they 

kept open for six months until Southwest Homes — which is a 

fantastic non-government agency that does great work — until 

they could wait no longer and had to fill the space. 

 

Mr. Chairman, with respect to that particular issue, I can report 

to this Assembly that when we took over as government, I 

noted, as the MLA for Swift Current, that there were 25 people 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3495 

waiting for a group home space in Swift Current. I can also 

report to the House, I can also report to the House that within 

about three years, the list was zero. Now some have moved to 

town. Others have put a request in for more space. And as the 

Minister of Social Services has said, we’re going to deal with it 

on an ongoing basis. We’ll not let them build up. So, Mr. 

Chairman, I think it’s important to note what the Minister of 

Crown Investment Corporation and what I did earlier this week 

is to present the rest of the story, which I think is germane and 

important if we’re going to have the kind of fulsome debate that 

I would hope the member wishes to have. 

 

Mr. Chairman, with respect to the auditor’s recommendations 

around some of the facilities, members of the House will know. 

They’ll have read the auditor’s report. They’ll understand that 

in the cases of certain facilities, there are concerns around exits 

for example, around configuration and plans. And so we take 

those very seriously. In order for the government to provide a 

full disclosure for example at licensing, a full disclosure to the 

public about these issues — around exits, around the safety of 

the particular facilities that we’re talking about, long-term care 

facilities — in order to provide that transparent report back to 

the people, we will need the legislative change. And I’m 

informed by the Minister of Health, they’re working on that 

legislation now to respond very directly to the questions from 

the auditor. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had concerns 

raised on the issue of home care that’s provided here in the 

province as well, specifically in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region, the situation of hundreds of people in the region being 

informed that their home care services were being eliminated 

and that they should turn to the yellow pages. 

 

The case that we talked about in question period, Mr. Speaker, 

was the situation of Michael Lilley, who has COPD [chronic 

obstructive pulmonary disease]. And the absence of home care 

often would put him into a state where he could require hospital 

attention, which would be more costly and most importantly 

could harm Michael’s health. 

 

To the Premier: will he admit that the scope of home care is 

declining under his watch? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. The 

answer is no, that’s not the case. There are more people in the 

Regina Health Region, for example, receiving home care now 

than there was a year ago. It is true, Mr. Chairman, that the 

region is trying to assess the home care needs and focus home 

care, to the extent possible, on the medical side directly to the 

health care, knowing that sometimes the two are linked. 

 

I would note, Mr. Chairman, that on this account, it seems that 

his Health critic in this last month agreed with the minister. In 

fact there’s a quote from the Leader-Post that says, “Nilson and 

Duncan agreed there are better ways to use well-trained 

health-care professionals than doing laundry . . .” Mr. 

Chairman, I think that what’s referenced here is the fact that 

there are actually more people getting home care now in this 

particular region in Regina than there was before. That answers 

the member’s question. And that, Mr. Chairman, also then I 

think leads us to a discussion of the focus of the home care 

itself which I think the region is looking at. 

 

The particular case in question is being reviewed, by the way. 

There’s an interesting extrapolation that the hon. member is 

making in all of these cases. He’ll present an individual case or 

maybe even a few individual cases and make an extrapolation 

about the whole system. He’s just tried to do that at home care. 

He’s incorrect, Mr. Speaker, as we see home care expanding. 

 

And also in the budget, we see a $2 million new home care 

pilot here in this particular region. This will be focused very 

much on some emergent needs that occur from time to time for 

seniors who can still avoid a hospital stay if there’s a very 

focused and acute home care provided at that particular 

moment. Notionally, that’s what that pilot’s going to be all 

about. 

 

The bottom line is this: our government believes that we need 

more home care, not less. And more than just talking about it, 

we’ve acted. We’re moving on the pilot, and there are more 

home care recipients now for example in the region he’s 

referenced than there were previously. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to hear that Mr. 

Lilley’s situation is being reviewed. But this is the problem. In 

situations where people aren’t receiving the care that they need, 

what we’re finding increasingly, unless their issue is brought to 

the Assembly and the government is forced to look at it and not 

just dismiss the issue, Mr. Speaker, individuals fall through the 

cracks. And while this may work for Mr. Lilley that there may 

be some review of his situation and the services provided to 

him, one must wonder how many individuals who have not 

come forward in a public way, Mr. Speaker, are in a similar 

situation and whose result of being in that situation, Mr. 

Speaker, will have consequences for the health care system in 

terms of the down-the-road costs for those individuals but most 

importantly will have consequences for the health and quality 

of life that they are experiencing. 

 

Another issue on the issue of seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker, that 

inevitably faces all of us and faces all families here in 

Saskatchewan and something that doesn’t receive nearly the 

amount of attention and discussion that it deserves is also the 

issue of end-of-life care. And while, Mr. Speaker, it can be a 

difficult topic to discuss, for families who go through the 

process of losing a loved one and wrestling with the care and 

coming to terms with that stage of life, it’s so important to have 

the right types of end-of-life care in place for people in the 

province so that families can make the best of a very difficult 

situation. 

 

My question to the Premier: one thing that could most certainly 

help with families going through the process of losing a loved 

one — and we see this example in many other jurisdictions — 

is the establishment of hospices, residential hospices where 

people can go to receive the dignity and the care they need in 

their final stages of life. And complementing that is the issue of 

palliative care and better palliative care here in the province. 



3496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

My question to the Premier: does he support the establishment 

of residential hospices here in the province? And if so, Mr. 

Speaker, what is the plan to bring those into being, and what are 

the dollars that will be attached to those projects? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Just to again get some 

clarification from the hon. member, I hope he’s not suggesting 

that unless he raises a case in the Legislative Assembly, there’s 

no chance for someone to have their situation addressed if 

they’re not getting the care they need. Because I just want him 

to know that MLAs on this side of the House on a regular basis 

— and it’s not just in health care; it’s along the files of 

government — raise issues with ministers. And specifically in 

health care, that’s the case. And then those issues are looked 

into and where possible they’re addressed. So I think that’s 

pretty important for my hon. friend to realize. 

 

Mr. Chair, in terms of end-of-life care, of course we have 

palliative services that happen across the province today in 

facilities. In a very general way we hope that an increased 

complement of nurses, more LPNs, more registered nurses, 

more doctors, helps alleviate pressures right across the system, 

whether it’s end-of-life care, acute care, or what have you, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

With respect to the specific question, the Health minister 

reports that some communities are working on proposals now 

that the Health ministry’s looking at, including one currently 

from Estevan for a hospice there. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly do 

recognize that there are many avenues that individuals who 

have problems can access when they have not received a 

government service in a way that they should be. Sometimes 

it’s the Ombudsman. Sometimes it’s through an MLA office. 

Sometimes it’s through the minister’s office. Sometimes it’s 

through the opposition. Sometimes it’s through the media. 

There are many different approaches that can occur, Mr. 

Speaker, and those are avenues that opposition members often 

facilitate and work along with. I think it was just a few days ago 

I was speaking to a ministerial assistant from the Minister of 

Immigration’s office working on some casework to do with 

immigration for a constituent. 

 

Most certainly these things can be done in that way, and those 

are the avenues that we pursue. We saw today in question 

period the member from Riversdale, who’d written to the Social 

Services minister about Trina’s situation, had written a letter, 

had received a reply. But the reply did not address the very real 

concern that Trina had for her own safety in where she was 

living. 

 

So I appreciate the Premier’s remarks on avenues to help solve 

problems. And our approach as MLAs is to most certainly be 

constructive in that way. And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, that 

means raising an issue that matters to Saskatchewan families 

through question period in the Assembly. 

 

Transitioning to another topic, Mr. Speaker, in the area of 

education. And this is something that touches every family who 

has children, and whether that’s our own kids or whether that’s 

our grandkids. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that we need to 

ensure we’re making the right investments when it comes to 

education so we’re setting ourselves up well for the long run. 

When we look at the previous, the most recent budget on the 

area of education, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen some real concerns. 

And these are concerns that it’s not just the opposition bringing 

forward but from educators, from people in the community, 

from many people we hear concerns about how the budget 

really did miss the mark when it comes to providing the 

resources needed for children here in the province. 

 

And we’ve all heard the stories, Mr. Speaker — and seen them 

and dealt with families — of classroom sizes that are far too 

large with too many students, of makeshift classrooms in some 

circumstances in a storage closet or on the stage of a gym, of 

some school divisions not having the heat on as much as they 

need to and telling students to wear jackets in order to save 

some resources, reduction of educational assistants 

system-wide, Mr. Speaker, which affects the ability of 

educators to do what they need to do. 

 

My question to the Premier: would he consider supporting a cap 

on classroom sizes and if not, why not? 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’re on to 

education. We appreciate that. We welcome it. Maybe we’ll 

come back to health care. I hope so because I think a very 

important issue in health care for Saskatchewan people is the 

amount of time they’re waiting for surgery. And we know that 

while that time’s still too long, it’s down significantly. We 

know that part of the reason it’s down is because we’ve been 

able to deploy private clinics in a public system. And I think 

people tuning in to this debate will also want to hear . . . Again 

I go back to the member’s own words. He never said in his 

leadership campaign, wait for three years until they campaign 

for me to tell you what I’ll do. He said it’s important for 

members to be accountable now, for them to present their ideas. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition has been I believe on the 

record saying he opposes private clinics. So I assume if he was 

sitting on this side of the House, he would eliminate the private 

clinics operating in a public system that are helping to reduce 

wait times in the province. I think that’s an important debate for 

estimates — his first chance as leader to get engaged in a very 

important debate about how we’re going to continue to reduce 

surgical wait times in the province. If he no longer believes, if 

it’s no longer his position to oppose private clinics within the 

public system, we need to hear that. If he does think we should 

not have any private clinics in the public system, we know that 

wait times will go up, unless he can find a money tree and build 

a bunch of new public clinics to take care of the challenge. 

 

Mr. Chairman, he also moved off health care without any 

discussion or debate about health care efficiencies. He 

campaigned for the leadership of his party very clearly 

advocating for leadership or health care efficiencies, quoting no 

less than Tommy Douglas, who he said in his leadership 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3497 

material, said that the second phase of medicare would “be the 

much more difficult one that was to alter our delivery system to 

reduce costs and put an emphasis on preventative medicine.” 

He’s quoting Tommy Douglas for leadership. By the way, his 

leadership website is completely down. You won’t find his tree 

book he wrote for Mr. Lingenfelter. It’s down. You won’t find 

their $5 billion platform from the election. It’s down. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What the heck’s a tree book? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the tree booklet the member for 

Athabasca asked — and I appreciate the question — is the book 

that the Leader of the Opposition wrote for Mr. Lingenfelter. 

And other than copies we have in our files — there is one right 

there; the Minister of the Environment has one — you won’t 

see one online. 

 

I’m not sure why, but I again invite the member, the Leader of 

the Opposition — we’ll deal with education — but come back 

to it. Let’s discuss private clinics within a public system. Let’s 

discuss wait times. I’d like to know, and I think the people of 

the province deserve to know, what he would do if he got his 

wish and was sitting over on these benches. 

 

With respect to education and a cap, Mr. Chair, it’s our position 

that caps, student classroom caps, will not serve the system 

very well. What caps don’t accommodate is the composition 

issue in classrooms. Mr. Chairman, I haven’t made a lot of 

noise about it. We haven’t talked about it publicly, but for the 

last two months or so, we’ve been travelling the province and 

meeting with small groups of teachers. We’ve done five, I’ve 

done five of them now: one in Assiniboia, and Swift Current, 

and a good meeting in Prince Albert just this week, and in 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

And we see growth right across the province. But especially in 

the Leader of the Opposition’s hometown in Saskatoon, and in 

Regina, we’re seeing massive changes in the composition of 

classrooms, as the member will know. We have many, many 

newcomers that we’re welcoming to the province. And a cap on 

the classroom size simply does not accommodate the new 

reality here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We know the most recent provincial data says that there is 

about an average of 20 students per classroom and an average 

of 17.9 students in kindergarten classes. We know there are 

larger classes, to be sure. Mr. Chairman, there was one teacher 

from Saskatoon who shared with me that in his middle school 

math class, he’s got 34 kids. Eleven of them need EAL [English 

as an additional language] support. Eleven look back at him 

every morning and he’s hoping but not sure that they’re 

understanding everything. And he certainly made a very strong 

case, as did many other teachers, for increased EAL. By the 

way, that’s why you’ll find it in the budget, an overall increase 

of 14 per cent in EAL supports in this particular budget, with 

the recognition that there might need to be more. 

 

So we want to focus on delivering the right kind of support 

services to classrooms whose compositions are changing. It 

appears that the Leader of the Opposition likes the sort of the 

simplistic solutions — caps in the classroom, ratios in 

long-term care. He should check with his counterparts across 

the country. Adrian Dix, who might well be the premier of 

British Columbia just after Monday, was asked about this very 

issue. Adrian Dix, the leader of the BC NDP, had this to say 

about capping class size. He said, and I quote, “The key issue is 

composition. When I talk to teachers and parents, I hear 

composition more than class size.” 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Premier’s 

remarks there’s a divide between the questions and the answers, 

and I wish he would put as much attention to the answers as he 

would to providing the questions, Mr. Speaker. It would seem 

as though he’s almost pining for his opposition days in terms of 

that role. 

 

Caps most certainly, Mr. Speaker, can have a constructive role 

in ensuring that the level of education and the quality of 

education that’s delivered by teachers is in fact there. I think of 

my own backyard in my constituency with Dundonald School 

and St. Peter School, hearing stories from families, and many 

other places in the province where caps do in fact, could have 

an important role in improving the situation in the classroom. 

 

In the budget, Mr. Speaker, one thing that educators, parents, 

and people were not calling for was the issue of standardized 

testing and the preference that we see from the Sask Party 

government in having an increased focus on testing instead of 

teaching, especially, Mr. Speaker, when we see millions of 

dollars put into a computer system for standardized testing. The 

results of these tests, Mr. Speaker, which would inevitably say 

we ought to put better resources into the classroom so that our 

kids can receive the type of education that they need and that 

they deserve. My question to the Premier: what are the total 

implementation costs for standardized testing? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for the questions. You know, when he expresses 

some frustration that I’m asking questions, I’m only asking 

questions of him because he said that’s the kind of legislative 

debate we should have. I said it off the top of this estimates. I’m 

simply using his words. He ran for the leadership of the New 

Democratic Party and had on his leadership campaign, he says: 

 

Cam’s vision includes more meaningful debate in the 

legislature. [He says] We can facilitate a richer debate by 

restructuring the rules of the Legislative Assembly 

including to allow questions to be asked of MLAs after 

they deliver each speech in the legislature, meaning that 

they are held accountable for their words and called upon 

to expand their thoughts and ideas. 

 

These are not my words; this is what his aspirations are for this 

Assembly. Estimates is a perfect venue for him to actually not 

just talk about it when he’s campaigning for the leadership, like 

he apparently did on health care efficiencies and a number of 

issues we’ll get into, but actually do it. 

 

So you know, I understand that he might be frustrated. Fact of 

the matter is he said this is the kind of . . . Well in addition to 

camera angles. He wanted more, I think he wanted some more 

camera angles. But he also said this. He said he wanted this 



3498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

kind of debate. He wanted questions of those who’ve just gotten 

up and spoke, a more robust debate in the legislature. We’re 

giving him a chance to do that. So will he do it on private 

clinics? Will he do it on health care efficiencies? I think these 

are just very reasonable questions of him and expectations, 

frankly, of the people that might be tuning in, or the people of 

the province. 

 

He is applying for the job. It’s a three-year application, but he’s 

applying for this job, and I think it’s incumbent on him to do 

what he said he would do in the leadership campaign and 

provide a few answers. 

 

With respect to the student achievement initiative of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, we became 

aware . . . Well more than aware, Mr. Chairman. We were 

certainly supporting, as a government, a number of pilots 

around student achievement in the province of Saskatchewan 

that are bearing great results. 

 

And I’m very aware of one in my own constituency called the 

balanced literacy program. Balanced literacy actually uses 

standard . . . Well we’re calling them standards-based testing, 

standardized testing, to evaluate some young students with 

respect to their reading levels. 

 

Four years ago when teachers, by the way, crafted this plan 

with the division, the division found their own resources in the 

case to support it. We found, Mr. Chairman, something quite 

hopeful. We found that while, four years ago, students who 

were involved in the balanced literacy were reading at about a 

63 per cent of grade level, in four years the change has been 

fully 20 per cent with over 80 per cent of those kids reading at a 

grade level. That’s standards-based testing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there’s a number of other pilots around the 

province that have worked well. In Melfort, for example, 

they’re seeing good results. At Albert School here in Regina, 

Mr. Chairman, they’re using an early years evaluation program. 

It’s a standards-based approach, and the results here again are 

very, very hopeful. They start very early. They start in grade 1. 

They focus on literacy. And for that first cohort who’s now 

moved to, that first group of kids who’ve now moved into grade 

2, they’re reading at grade level. Mr. Chairman, if you talk to 

the teachers about it, and I have, they will say this is exactly 

what we need to be doing. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition and his Education critic like to 

characterize this as something other than it is. This is not 

high-stakes standardized testing. This is not no child left 

behind. This is a process that will be informed by what’s 

already happening in the province. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition will know, I hope . . . Well I 

think the Education critic does know. He asked a lot of 

questions of the minister in estimates. And I even think at the 

end he was finding out some new facts and said, well you 

should better communicate it. He’s probably right. I think 

we’ve done a bad job of communicating what this is and what it 

isn’t. So I hope now that we’re all getting the facts, we can 

understand what it is and that it will be good for students in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So the early years evaluation is being rolled out. It’s actually 

not a pilot. It’s part of this initiative. It requires resources. I 

think that’s about a $600,000 investment for that particular 

program — to the hon. member’s question — for the early 

years evaluation. There is another initiative called Tell Them 

From Me, which is being rolled out as well around the 

province, about 70,000 students involved already. And I think 

the amount for that is very similar to the amount for the first 

investment. We’re going to continue to make progress with this, 

roll them out in a staged way and watch the results. Mr. 

Chairman, so far the results are very encouraging. 

 

And I hope the Leader of the Opposition . . . I know he’ll have 

an ideological bent against any standardized testing, but he 

needs to understand we’re not talking about the US [United 

States] approach. We’re not talking about high-stakes 

standardized testing. We’re not talking about an approach 

where the results of the test will somehow determine funding or 

somehow evaluate teachers. It’s meant to be a tool for teachers 

to address literacy, numeracy, the issues that we all want for 

excellence in those areas that we want for our kids. 

 

So again those are roughly the amounts for that rollout. I will 

say this. As a result of my meetings with teachers, I will say, 

Mr. Chairman, that we have thrown a lot of change at teachers 

in a fairly short order by a number of measures, some taken by 

the government. Some have happened because of growth. Some 

have happened because we have larger classes in the centres. 

Some have happened because composition changes have 

occurred. And, Mr. Chairman, while we want to proceed with 

the student achievement initiative as I have described it, and 

maybe not as the opposition will depict it, I do think we are 

going to have a broad discussion on the government side. 

 

We welcome input from members opposite. We may formalize 

what I’ve been doing informally with teachers around the 

province for the last month and a half or so and engage with all 

of the stakeholders in education, engage to a greater extent with 

teachers who are facing a lot of change, on whom expectations 

have increased on the part of the system, on the part of a 

growing economy, engage with parents, engage, Mr. Chairman, 

with the school boards, with the trustees. I’ll just say this very 

candidly, we certainly could have . . . I think we could have 

done a better job, and especially when it comes to teachers, on 

some of these issues. We intend to make those improvements. 

 

We know that teachers, by the way, who have helped design 

and develop . . . for example balanced literacy in the Chinook 

School Division. As the director of the school division says, it 

would be very difficult for me to take that program away from 

those teachers because they see the results for kids. They see 

the results in terms of grade level improvements in reading.  

 

That’s what we want for this program. That’s what we think we 

can achieve. And I think we’re going to be working hard to 

engage not just teachers but all the stakeholders as we move 

forward on what I think is a very exciting initiative around 

student achievement aimed at the classroom, not aimed at some 

sort of an ideological approach to standardized testing that 

members may be thinking of in terms of the US experience. 

 

[15:45] 

 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3499 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Premier’s 

wide-ranging remarks there, he talked about a number of things. 

He started off the discussion about the way that we operate in 

this legislature and the way that things could be done better, the 

types of improvements that we could discuss, that we could 

look at. 

 

Now I’ve been here, Mr. Speaker, since ’07 and, you know, 

I’ve seen the legislature, Mr. Speaker, at its best. And I actually 

think both sides would agree, perhaps, Howard’s law is one 

example where we were able to come together from a private 

member’s bill, support something that’s good for all people. 

That’s something at its best. 

 

Each of us probably can also think of situations where we’ve 

not been at our best as an Assembly and how we could do a 

better job. Now I think we could also . . . It was earlier today, 

Mr. Chair, that I received the photo from Mr. Speaker that I 

assume some other members in the Assembly received. And the 

photo, Mr. Speaker, was an aerial almost of . . . The 

photographer was standing up on the clock in the Speaker’s 

gallery looking down on the Assembly. And anyone looking at 

the photo, this is a reality that we’re aware of in the opposition, 

but there’s a few more members on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s not a surprise to anyone who comes to the 

Assembly. 

 

But looking at that photo, Mr. Speaker, it struck me that we 

could do things better in this Assembly. You know, we could 

have a better role at times for some of the backbenchers there to 

have a meaningful role, to contribute to debate, to do something 

other than reading a member’s statement prepared by caucus 

office or heckling during Premier’s estimates, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s better ways that we could operate. And that’s a 

discussion that we should have, that both parties should have in 

a formal structure, talking about what possible changes should 

occur or could occur, Mr. Speaker. But it needs to be done in a 

holistic way. It needs to be done in a structured way, down on 

paper, so that it is thoughtful. It is building on changes that 

have been done in the past, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not done in an 

ad hoc or a piecemeal manner. 

 

When thinking of the issue of standardized testing, one 

conversation stands out in my mind. And that was a 

conversation I had with a young mom, and her child is in about 

grade 1 or 2. And this discussion actually was outside of 

standardized testing, though it morphed into that, and what she 

said to me was . . . She was actually giving a huge amount of 

praise to her son’s teacher. And she said, you know, I’m so 

impressed by the work that this teacher is doing with my son, 

especially the report card or the reporting mechanism that I’m 

getting back from this teacher clearly stating where my son is 

doing really well and meeting or exceeding expectations, 

identifying some areas where we could do better, and then 

talking about ways that I could help my son to reach those 

goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, educators that are trained, that are working in the 

province, who have been called to the profession of education 

because they love kids, they want to see the best for children. 

They’re in it for the right reasons, Mr. Speaker. And we ought 

to respect that, and we ought to approach educators with that 

type of mindset respecting the contribution that they make. 

 

So my question . . . The issue of standardized testing, we’ve 

talked about it quite a bit in question period. We’ve talked 

about it in estimates through our critic, and we’ll continue to 

talk about it because it’s important based on the feedback that 

we’re receiving from teachers and from families and from 

school divisions as well. So the Premier ought to be able to give 

us a succinct definition or a succinct listing of what will be the 

total implementation costs for standardized testing, a clear 

number, and what will the annual cost be for standardized 

testing. Can you please provide those two figures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the 

Opposition opened up with a discussion about the legislature 

and how it could be used better. There’s no change required in 

the legislature for him to highlight for the people of the 

province what his positions are or even things that he’s still 

against. It’s not just . . . We’re not only asking him to say what 

you’re for — I expect his answer to be, oh you’ll find out at 

election time — he’s not even telling the people of this 

province what he’s still against. 

 

Is he still against private clinics? That would’ve been a simple, 

simple thing to answer here, right here, and explain why. Is he 

still against private liquor stores? As a part owner, maybe he’s 

not. He can simply . . . He doesn’t have to propose everything 

he’s going to do yet. I expect that’ll happen at some point. He 

might want to do a little bit of that, but that’s up to him. But he 

might want to be able to share with the Assembly about things 

he’s still against. 

 

Also you know, if we could . . . I think we’re open to all 

manner of changes in the Assembly. I think our House Leader 

even met with his opponent, Mr. Meili, Dr. Ryan Meili. He 

suggested we all, we stop sitting sort of in the Westminster 

tradition, two sabre lengths apart — though we’re farther than 

that in this House, but that’s certainly the tradition — that we’d 

rather, should sit in a circle. And I think we’re, you know, 

willing to look at that. I know that the House Leader chatted 

with Dr. Meili. Maybe that’s a change. Maybe that’s a change 

that the Leader of the Opposition is in. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think we’re open to a number of . . . In fact I’m 

told by the House leadership team today that we were trying to 

encourage a debate on an issue tomorrow where both sides of 

the House would get a chance to debate a particular issue. We 

would propose a motion but as soon as the agreement for debate 

would happen, we would provide the motion to all members of 

the Assembly. And your party, sir — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman 

— the Leader of the Opposition’s party said, no, we don’t want 

to have a debate. 

 

You really can’t have it both ways on these things. You can’t be 

all earnest and say you want more debate and more chances for 

private members to speak, Mr. Chairman, and then when an 

opportunity avails itself, as of today, to have rejected it through 

your House leadership. I don’t know if he knows that happened, 

but that’s exactly the case. So it’s an interesting, again, it’s an 

interesting comment. 

 

Mr. Chair, it’s about $5.9 million in the budget with respect to 



3500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

standards-based initiatives. We’ve highlighted two in particular 

that are already rolling out, that are already bearing results, 

including the Albert School example I gave, that’s about 

$600,000 each.  

 

We may see, Mr. Chairman, as a result of my comments earlier 

about meetings with teachers and what comes from that and an 

engagement I think we’d like to more formalize, we now may 

see a delay in the implementation or the other expenditures that 

are provided in the budget. That may well be possible because 

we are going to take very seriously the message. I’m going to 

take very seriously the message given by teachers. We’re also 

going to be engaging with all the stakeholders. And so as of 

right now, $1.2 million for these two initiatives, each touching 

about 70,000 students already in the province, bearing results as 

we understand it. We may not be moving aggressively on the 

rest of what’s already approved in the budget. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we all want to engage with all the stakeholders, 

not just on student achievement. But really perhaps the best 

way to put it would be a student-first approach to education. It 

bore results with health care. It was an excellent initiative in 

health care. And there might be some lessons to be learned 

there that we’re going to look very carefully at in the weeks and 

months ahead. Thank you. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Premier’s 

earlier remarks on a previous question with respect to engaging 

with teachers through the topic of standardized testing, the 

Premier remarked on some meetings he’s having throughout the 

province with teachers. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 

important to listen to educators and work with educators, to 

work with teachers because they have been called to the 

profession. They’re in it for the right reasons. They’re trained, 

and they do a good job in educating our children here in the 

province. It’s important, Mr. Speaker, to respect the role that 

they’ve had in the profession. 

 

And we’ve seen, under the Sask Party government, I think a 

very rocky relationship with teachers. We saw an approach in 

the previous round of bargaining that was trying to pit parents 

against teachers, as one example. And there are other examples 

where we’ve seen a lack of proper consultation and discussion 

when there’s been changes to the very real things that affect 

teachers and affect the type of education that our kids receive. 

 

So my question, in the decision to go down this path of 

standardized testing, what discussions occurred with the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation? And these discussions that 

are ongoing that the Premier just alluded to throughout the 

province, is that through the formal structure of the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] or teachers’ associations 

within cities? Or is this something different than that? How is it 

that individuals who are teachers are involved in these meetings 

that they’re having with the Premier with respect to education? 

And I assume the topic of standardized testing would be part of 

that. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank 

the Leader of the Opposition for the question. And there was 

really no magic formula to the meetings. My understanding is 

we approached the divisions and said, we’d like a real 

cross-section in terms of teachers at different grade levels for 

example in the public system and in the separate system as 

well. We wanted to hear from rural teachers, Mr. Chairman. I 

wanted to hear from urban teachers as well as teachers in Prince 

Albert. You know, I contemplated actually continuing more 

meetings, but as of the meeting two days ago in Prince Albert, 

that was at five at least for this round. 

 

I’ve referenced already that we need to better engage with 

teachers. A lot of what was in the hon. member’s preamble, I 

will not disagree with. Some parts perhaps. But I think we are 

always better served if we are engaging with those who are on 

the front line — whether it’s in health care or education — and 

with all the stakeholders. To the extent we have not done that as 

well as we could have, I’m recognizing that. That’s why these 

meetings were held. 

 

There was no special formula. We didn’t say we want the 

following people. We simply said to the divisions, we’d like 

about six or seven teachers. And we’ve had . . . They were 

scheduled for an hour, and none of the meetings lasted an hour. 

They lasted longer than that, and that was fine. 

 

But with respect to the amount of teacher involvement in the 

student achievement initiative — and I think that was also part 

of the Leader of the Opposition’s question — we had a 

stakeholder engagement strategy that included the STF 

certainly, that included the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association], that included Saskatchewan Association 

of School Business Officials. There was a wide-ranging group. 

 

The FSIN . . . By the way, the FSIN, I think the Leader of the 

Opposition might know, is very interested in the promise of 

standards-based assessment because we see what’s happening 

at Whitecap. A great story there in terms of student 

achievement that’s supported on a platform of standards-based 

testing. Chief Bear will tell you that. 

 

There are a number of other examples of First Nations who are 

using standards-based approaches to innovate in education, and 

it’s bearing results. And even as earlier as today, meeting with 

education officials, there again was the report that certainly 

there’s strong support for moving in this direction from First 

Nations. And FSIN’s interest in us moving forward . . . Again, 

we are not. It bears repeating because there’s a lot of 

information out there. And again I think we on this side should 

have done a better job of communicating it frankly, Mr. Chair. 

This is not no child left behind. It’s not high-stakes 

standardized testing. 

 

This is building on successes we see today in the province of 

Saskatchewan when teachers are empowered and school 

divisions have the resources to do a standards measure. Yes 

there’s a standardized test to identify a challenge in literacy, in 

numeracy, what have you, and move to address it. That’s what 

the early years evaluation is. It’s already bearing results, as I’ve 

said, in Albert School. 

 

So we’re going to continue to rely on teacher involvement. I 

think there’s an ongoing panel that involves I think about 13 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3501 

teachers. I may have to correct that number. I’ve also met at the 

start of these meetings with — informal meetings — with 

teachers. We met with the STF as well again on the particular 

issue, and we know that we’re not done with that engagement. 

There needs to be more, especially as we want to roll this thing 

out in the way that it’s intended and to avoid rolling it out in a 

way that it was never intended. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I think it’s good, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, for 

the Premier to be talking with teachers, obviously, because I 

think the track record that the government has with teachers is 

not a good one. I think it’s one that has not been about 

consultation. It has not been about respect, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 

been about forcing decisions without the proper consultation, 

without the proper thought put into them, Mr. Speaker. And 

that is having a negative effect in places here in the province. 

 

The Premier talked about his desire to meet with a cross-section 

of teachers, rural and urban, in different types of settings. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, yes most certainly school divisions would have 

access to that information and would know whether or not a 

student is in or a teacher is in a rural or an urban setting. But I 

would imagine, Mr. Speaker, that the STF would also know 

which teachers are working in urban areas, which teachers are 

in rural areas, and the different environment. And I would 

encourage the Premier, Mr. Speaker, to engage the STF in a 

more meaningful way, in a way that warrants the role that the 

STF has played in the province, the role that teachers have 

played in the province, Mr. Speaker. And I think failing to do 

that is part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, why we see a 

standardized testing approach that is not well thought out, by 

the Premier’s own admission, has not been explained well, and 

is frankly the wrong direction that we need when it comes to 

education here in the province. 

 

Connected to education, Mr. Speaker, is something that . . . It’s 

a question of the future of this province. It’s a question of how 

well we will be as a province in working together and truly 

building a sustainable economy, a society that is cohesive in the 

years to come. And that is the issue, Mr. Speaker, of the 

Aboriginal education funding gap and the disparity that exists 

in many classrooms here across the province. 

 

Back in January the Premier was interviewed regarding the 

underfunding of on-reserve schools. And a story on the CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] website in January 

reported: 

 

Wall, on Tuesday, said it was time for governments to stop 

passing the buck when it came to addressing the issue. 

 

[And the Premier quoted] “The time is over for the federal 

government to say, ‘Go see the province,’ and the 

provincial government to say, ‘Go see the feds,’” Wall 

said. 

 

Wall noted the province is providing adult basic education 

on reserves and more programs could follow. 

 

My question to the Premier: what did he mean by that 

statement? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. I’m not 

sure what the Leader of the Opposition was intimating in his 

preamble that you have to . . . you can’t consult with teachers 

unless you go through the STF. I don’t think that’s what he was 

saying, but he should because we’ve actually done this before. 

We had the current Minister of Education and the member for 

Regina Dewdney, also a teacher although he’s more known for 

other things, went out on a consultation with teachers on the 

new math curriculum. 

 

Again we were hearing from parents and teachers about a 

concern about the new math curriculum. And we wanted to go 

and engage with teachers, and we did that. We didn’t go 

through the STF to do it. I think we certainly informed them of 

it. I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that at the outset of 

these meetings I’ve had with teachers for example we met with 

the STF. They didn’t raise any concerns about us doing this in a 

direct way, neither that they weren’t involved in a formal way. 

We are going to make sure that the STF is involved in 

education development matters, but certainly we reserve the 

right to talk to teachers, to go out in their communities and have 

the division perhaps host a meeting and suggest some teachers 

who represent a wide array of groups. 

 

I think that’s what the member is saying. And sometimes I 

think that perhaps our friends across the way, they get very 

focused on process. You know, we see that time and time again 

on the issues. And they sort of lose sight of the end result over 

the people involved or the objective. Yes, this is a good 

example. It’s good that you’re talking to teachers, but did you 

go through the STF is the question. And it’s a . . . You know, 

we didn’t and I don’t think the STF has a particular problem. In 

fact I think they’re encouraged that we were reaching out to 

them. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we have been saying for some time that in 

certain areas we’re going to move into areas that are federal 

jurisdiction, but not in a complete way. We simply, the 

province unfortunately, simply could not afford it. And so 

we’ve increased adult basic education, Mr. Chairman, and we 

do that on-reserve. It was a practice of the former government 

that we have continued and actually increased in terms of 

support. 

 

We’ve also sympathized, empathized with First Nations who 

have gone to the federal government to see an increase in 

on-reserve education funding. And up until two years ago the 

answer was always the same. In every occasion — well I’d 

better be a bit careful — on most occasions that I meet with the 

Prime Minister of the country, I raise this issue. We certainly 

have talked about it. I’d like to think . . . By the way, other 

premiers do too, certainly. And I’d like to think it’s part of the 

reason why, in the federal budget two years ago, there was a 

$200 million increase for on-reserve First Nations education. 

 

Now we were also aware of the relative speed or lack thereof 

with which this money was moving on to First Nations, and I 

don’t have that many favourable reports of the manifestation of 



3502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

those dollars. It’s something we’re monitoring. It’s something 

we’re also raising with the federal government. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’ve said pretty clearly that we take this issue 

of closing the gap between Aboriginal students and Aboriginal 

education and non-Aboriginal students and education very, very 

seriously. We’ve seen an additional 1.5 million in this budget 

committed to ABE, that’s adult basic education, on the reserve; 

point five million added to support skills training; an additional 

1.5 million for northern career quest, a great program; point six 

million to add 15 new pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spots; an 

additional 1 million provided for capital enhancements; 

$500,000 to continue funding the literacy camps that members 

from the North have certainly raised effectively in this 

particular legislature; and the list goes on. There is the $3.8 

million in supports for the First Nations and Métis Education 

Achievement Fund. And then of course there’s a joint task force 

and its other specific recommendations that we’re going to be 

moving on. 

 

We’ve been very clear — and we hope we have the Leader of 

the Opposition’s support in this — that what we want to move 

away from in terms of engagement with First Nations and Métis 

and trying to close the gaps that exist, not just in education but 

in employment as well, and what we’re going to move away 

from is funding meetings and funding processes and funding 

round tables. Mr. Chairman, we have had these things in an 

interminable way it would seem for as long as Canada’s been 

around, and they’ve borne little fruit for First Nations. The 

same could be said for our economy obviously because our 

economy is, when that gap exists, is deprived of a great 

resource of First Nations and Métis youth and others that would 

love to play a bigger role in the economy. 

 

What we are going to fund are initiatives that are focused on 

education. In the economic development we’re going to move 

away from mileage and meetings and round tables, and we hope 

we have the Leader of the Opposition’s support in that respect. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know this is an important 

issue. Economist Eric Howe talks about the missed opportunity 

and the consequences for the province by not solving this issue, 

a $90 billion value that it has for the province, Mr. Speaker. 

This is not something that should be taken lightly, and this is 

not something that should be glossed over. 

 

My question to the Premier: he commented on a number of 

topics there, but I feel he still hasn’t explained what he meant in 

this quote that goes back to the CBC story: 

 

“The time is over for the federal government to say, ‘Go 

see the province,’ and the provincial government to say, 

‘Go see the feds,’” Wall said. 

 

What did he mean by that quote? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, what we mean by that quote 

is we want the federal government to do their part to fund 

education for on-reserve First Nations as we fund it at the same 

level on a per-student basis. We hope that, well we think the 

Leader of the Opposition agrees with that although there’s 

some, there’s a bit . . . You know, we’re a little bit unclear on 

what his position is because he did an interview on the 15th of 

March on MBC [Missinipi Broadcasting Corporation] News 

that . . . Basically the title of that particular interview was 

“Broten is also non-committal as to whether the province 

should fund on-reserve education.” 

 

So you know, Mr. Chairman, I’ve answered the question. We’re 

going to move in strategic areas like ABE. We’re going to 

move in areas where we think we can engage First Nations into 

the economy. We’re not going to accept responsibility, the 

funding responsibility for on-reserve primary or secondary 

education, Mr. Chairman. We’re not going to do that. What’s 

his position? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I just read the quote from the 

Premier, “The time is over for the federal government to say, 

‘Go see the province,’ and the provincial government to say, 

‘Go see the feds,’” with respect to the gap that exists in 

educational funding. And then the Premier said, well I think the 

federal government should fund education better. I agree with 

that, Mr. Speaker, most certainly. 

 

But the thing here, Mr. Speaker, the Premier here contradicts 

what he says in the earlier statement in terms of actually 

providing . . . having a discussion about what is needed in the 

province in order to not miss out on the $90 billion opportunity 

for our economy and for our province. 

 

The joint task force on First Nations and Métis education and 

employment outcomes recommended that the provincial 

government lobby the federal government to provide better 

support for First Nations on-reserve education here in the 

province, something that most certainly needs to occur. In the 

meantime the task force recommended that the provincial 

government provide interim funding to reduce the cost for First 

Nations that send children to off-reserve schools. So this is a 

recommendation coming forth from the task force, a task force 

that was started late in the game by the Sask Party but provided 

recommendations that should most certainly be listened to and 

discussed here in the province. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he intend to follow that 

recommendation to provide interim funding? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s not an 

inconsistent position at all. We don’t want First Nations to have 

to go from province to federal government. We want the federal 

government to step up and do their part. And in the meantime 

we’re going to stop funding the processes, the round tables, the 

discussions. We’re going to focus on initiatives that will bear 

some results. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the question of what are we 

doing with the recommendation from the JTF [joint task force] 

on lobbying the federal government to do the right thing, my 

understanding is that later this month the Minister of Education 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3503 

and the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations have a 

meeting scheduled in Ottawa with the appropriate ministers to 

raise the issue. I think it’s on the 23rd and 24th of this month 

coming up, of May. With respect to the question, no. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Sorry. To clarify, the no is in response to the 

question, does the Premier intend to provide interim funding to 

reduce the cost for First Nations that send children to 

off-reserve schools? Is the answer no to that part of the 

question? Sorry. The no is to the interim funding? Could the 

Premier please say yes or no? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve moved quickly 

with respect to the joint task force. In fact within days of its 

release, we moved on the issue of driver training, which is very 

important in terms of engagement for First Nations youth in the 

economy. And Education with SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] now providing that on-reserve, it’s another example 

of that. 

 

But are we going to accept the recommendation of $1,000 per 

student to on-reserve school? The answer is no. We’re not 

going to be moving on it. What we have seen in successive 

Education budgets is a huge increase in operating over the last 

four or five years for education divisions. 

 

I would also point out to the Leader of the Opposition that in 

the budget, we have specific dollars set aside for a number of 

other recommendations in the joint task force. I would also say 

this, that within the budget — the member will know this — 

within the budget there’s specific allotments, millions of dollars 

allotted in Education to deal with enrolment pressures and 

growth pressures, some of which might be included by a greater 

number of First Nations students attending school on-reserve. 

But that’s actually in the budget today, Mr. Chairman. So 

would there be a specific response, another $1,000 per student? 

The candid answer to the Leader of the Opposition is no. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Let me get this straight. For months, Mr. 

Speaker, for months when we raised the issue of the education 

achievement gap, and we raised the issue of funding shortfalls 

on issues, what is the response that we get from members 

opposite? Oh we’ve established the task force. The task force is 

going to come forward — quality people, great 

recommendations — and this is our path forward for solving 

this issue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, after all of that stalling, after putting all of 

the eggs in that basket of the task force — saying we trust these 

individuals, they have the expertise; we need to listen to their 

plan — what we hear from the Premier today is, well actually I 

don’t like that recommendation and we’re not doing that one. 

We’ll do a couple of the easy ones that don’t cost anything. We 

will take some steps that we’re ready to roll out with, but on the 

real issues, on the issues that are central to the future of this 

province, what do we see in the budget, Mr. Speaker? Three 

million dollars devoted to the implementation of the 

recommendations from the task force. 

 

My question to the Premier: out of the recommendations, 

because I think the task force members would be interested to 

know whether or not their work is actually going to be 

beneficial to the people of the province, out of the 

recommendations that have been provided by the task force, 

how many are going to be adopted, and how many are going to 

be ignored, as the Premier just identified? 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s no need 

to get angry, you know, there really isn’t. There’s not been a 

report commissioned by any government, I think in the history 

of the province, where every recommendation’s been 

implemented. I can think of the Boughen commission on 

property taxes. Actually I can think, I can think of a number of 

commissions that were done by the NDP, a number of reports 

they received. They chose to ignore most commissions’ end 

reports that they had done. 

 

Frankly I would stack our record, in terms of implementing 

ideas that come from third parties, up against our predecessors 

any day. And so the Leader of the Opposition ought not to get 

angry. We can have a debate about the recommendations in the 

report that we’re moving on, Mr. Chairman, around the early 

childhood strategy, Mr. Chairman, around First Nations and 

Métis content, perspectives of their culture into curriculum. 

 

Actually, as you know, our government has moved on that, but 

there’s more work to be done there: the modular high school 

curricula, the one-stop gateway, Mr. Chairman, attendant to — 

by the way, I’m not sure the Leader of the Opposition is going 

to like this part of the answer — but attendant to the report of 

the JTF, by this great panel who did a lot of great work. And 

we’ll be moving on many of the recommendations, but possibly 

not all of them. That’s sort of what happens: possibly not all of 

them. 

 

But attendant to that JTF report were some very specific 

examples of what’s happening today in First Nations education. 

We’ve already talked about Whitecap. We’ve already talked 

about them using, here it comes again, standards-based 

assessment to see a great increase in outcomes for students on 

that particular First Nation. We also see the Saskatoon Catholic 

School Division making a great deal of progress around specific 

approaches they’re taking in schools. We are looking carefully 

at those so that we can expand them. 

 

And he laughs at the $3 million, Mr. Chairman. First of all, in 

and of itself, it’s a significant investment in one budget as we 

see the response to the JTF. But it also, Mr. Speaker, the 

supposition belies the fact that there’s many other initiatives on 

the part of this government in terms of dealing with First 

Nations issues, the engagement in the economy and education 

including, I think, Mr. Chairman, another increase for SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. It’s going to 

be focused on adult basic education, which is very much part of 

what the JTF’s talking about. 

 



3504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, in the case of SIIT, the Saskatchewan Party 

government this side of the House has increased funding to that 

institution since we were elected by 48 per cent, Mr. Chairman. 

The reason we have done that is because the late Randell 

Morris, who was the president, and the board and faculty of that 

particular institution — and a finer technical school you will 

not find anywhere in this country — have come to the 

government with specific ideas. 

 

They’ve said, we want to train aeronautic mechanics. And when 

we do, we’ll find them a job. They’ve said, we want to train 

more apprentices in construction. And when you provide that 

funding, government, we’ll connect them to a job. They’ve 

reached out to the business community in Saskatoon, to the 

construction association. They have a great track record. And 

we have said very clearly to that member and to First Nations 

and to institutions and to industry, bring us those ideas and we 

will fund them. That’s what we’ll do with the JTF. That’s what 

we’ve done in this budget, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a $90 billion missed 

opportunity, as economist Eric Howe points out, Mr. Speaker. 

So the Premier is saying, no it’s not, that Eric Howe, economist 

Eric Howe, was incorrect in his analysis. Even if the Premier 

doesn’t fully agree with the number, certainly he would agree 

it’s in the billions and billions and billions of dollars for the 

impact here in the province. 

 

So yes, we’re going to be concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the 

response from the government when they hype the task force 

for so long, Mr. Speaker, come forward in a budget with only 

$3 million. And then we learn in Premier’s estimates, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’re actually just picking and choosing what’s 

convenient for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another topic that we discussed on the floor of the 

Assembly in the previous weeks was the issue of gay-straight 

alliances. And after becoming leader, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

appointments I made was the MLA for Saskatoon Centre as our 

new critic for diversity, equality, and human rights issues. I did 

this, Mr. Speaker, because I think, under the Sask Party 

government, combatting discrimination and combatting 

homophobia, Mr. Speaker, are efforts that are lacking. And we 

haven’t seen the type of leadership that we need from the Sask 

Party government on these issues that all Saskatchewan people 

need on these issues. 

 

When we talked about this issue in question period, I brought 

forward a very constructive suggestion that why not on the 

ministry website provide some information about the benefits 

of gay-straight alliances, not forcing school divisions to do 

anything through legislation, but a constructive suggestion of 

quoting on the website the benefits of gay-straight alliances, 

how allies and gay students could set them up in their schools, 

and how teachers could work together to support those efforts. 

So some constructive common sense suggestions. The Premier 

rejected that position. There was an unwillingness to put that 

information on the website, something that would not cost 

money and something that could be done very quickly. And I 

was disappointed that he rejected that suggestion. 

 

Days later when we had the debate in the House on 

cyberbullying, following that I believe it was, the Premier did a 

scrum. And in the scrum, as was reported in, I believe it was 

The StarPhoenix and I assume the Leader-Post, the Premier 

said they would be willing to put that information on the 

website. And I’m grateful for him making that decision and for 

adding that information and working on that suggestion. My 

question to the Premier: what changed his mind that it was the 

right approach to do after he had rejected that option here in the 

Assembly? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again the 

Leader of the Opposition’s depiction is incorrect. I didn’t 

change . . . there was no position change. What I said and asked 

was that we were going to not rule anything out. When he first 

raised the issue of gay-straight alliances and information on the 

government website, I indicated to the Leader of the Opposition 

that the member for Saskatoon Fairview was working on the 

issue. And we would preclude nothing. We would leave 

everything on the table, but thought it best to have her complete 

that work. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what happened subsequent to that . . . I think 

everyone is aware of the story of the student, I think in the 

separate system here in Regina, who’s having problems. And so 

we made a decision at that time under the leadership of the 

minister and I’m sure with the council, with the member for 

Fairview that we could provide an updated link for those who 

wanted to find information with respect to these kinds of clubs, 

around respecting differences, including the link that now has 

information on gay-straight alliances. That’s currently on the 

website. And so that’s that particular issue. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the preamble to the member’s question was 

finishing off the First Nations question. In this particular budget 

— it wasn’t heralded a lot, I don’t think, not a lot of attention 

— there was perhaps one of the most important First Nations 

and Métis economic development initiatives over and above the 

$3 million. It’s not quite convenient for the Leader of the 

Opposition to reference it because it doesn’t fit his narrative, 

but it’s true. When the government moves to increase access to 

international markets for our uranium, when we complement 

that, Mr. Chairman, with an initiative to lower royalties, 

uranium royalties in the province so that we’re more 

competitive, this has huge potential for First Nations and Métis 

people who work in that industry. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we know in Cameco we have a national 

champion. This is a company of course that was privatized by 

the Mulroney government and the Devine government. They 

brought together two respective Crowns, created Cameco. And 

ever since then, we have seen it develop and grow into the 

largest uranium mining company on earth headquartered in 

Saskatoon, Canada, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And here’s their track record: 40 to 44 per cent of their 

workforce in the uranium mining industry — high-paying, 

high-skilled jobs — are First Nations and Métis people, are 

northerners, Mr. Chairman. It’s got perhaps as good a track 

record of employing First Nations and Métis people as any 

company that exists in the country today. It’s something I think 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3505 

we’re all proud of. 

 

We’ve been working hard as a government to have the federal 

government raise a nuclear co-operation agreement issue with 

India, a very robust civilian nuclear market, and with China — 

the two most robust civilian nuclear markets because right now 

we can’t sell any uranium into those markets without an 

agreement. 

 

The Prime Minister, to his credit, has taken this as a personal 

initiative. And we now have NCAs [nuclear co-operation 

agreement] with both countries, perhaps $3 billion over 10 

years in additional sales. That’s probably on the low side. But 

our royalties were too high, so the companies would say, well 

now we have increased access but, you know, these other 

countries have lower royalties and it makes it difficult to invest 

here. So we’re lowering them in the budget. 

 

This is an important initiative and it goes right to First Nations 

issues, Mr. Chairman. And here again, in a scrum, in the media, 

the Leader of the Opposition was asked a very simple question 

on this particular part of the budget. When he was asked about 

uranium royalty changes, the new leader of the NDP said, we 

just heard that yesterday, and as a caucus we will be looking 

closely at the details. We haven’t had all the fine print. We’ll be 

discussing that, and I am sure we will be talking about it in the 

days ahead. 

 

The reporter said, so you like it, you don’t like it, or you’re not 

sure yet? 

 

Well, said the Leader of the Opposition, the development of our 

resources in a sustainable and responsible way with a triple 

bottom line is the way we as New Democrats have approached 

resources. So on this particular change, we have to look at the 

details just announced yesterday, and there will be more 

discussion. 

 

Did it catch you off guard, the reporter asked. 

 

We know the development of our resources is important, so 

that’s something often in budget. So we want to look at the 

details, and we will be commenting more later. 

 

So now, fair enough. Fair enough. Honestly, that was like the 

day after the budget. I think it’s completely reasonable for the 

Leader of the Opposition to say, well we want to have a look at 

that, we can comment later. It’s two months later. 

 

This is a very important initiative in northern Saskatchewan for 

excellent high-paying jobs for First Nations and Métis to the 

tune of 40 to 44 per cent for Cameco. Yes or no, this is an 

initiative for First Nations and Métis. Yes or no, does he 

support, first of all, uranium mining; secondly, the lowering of 

royalties that were in the budget for the uranium mining 

industry? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the Premier knows full well that we 

support uranium development and support its growth and 

expansion here in the province. That’s been the long-standing 

NDP record, and that is my record. 

It’s interesting though, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. On a topic 

of gay-straight alliances — thinking back to question period, 

Mr. Speaker, when the Premier had a problem saying gay in the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker — we see in a response to a question 

about why he changed his mind on posting information about 

gay-straight alliances, an unwillingness to talk about it. And 

when it was brought up, Mr. Speaker, when it was brought up 

in the House, the Premier’s first initial reaction, Mr. Speaker, 

was to talk about a debate about religious freedom, something 

that the suggestion of putting some information on a website 

had nothing to do about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he regret, when we were 

talking about gay-straight alliances, automatically taking the 

discussion to one about religious freedom, as opposed to a 

discussion about doing what is best for all students in our 

school systems? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I invite the Leader of 

the Opposition to listen to the answers. The legislature is, 

happily, pretty quiet today. There’s the odd heckle from both 

sides perhaps, but it’s pretty quiet. I think he could hear the 

answer. I think I dealt fully with his question with respect to 

gay-straight alliances and anti-bullying and then moved on to 

the First Nations issue, which had been his previous question. 

Now that’s point number one. 

 

With respect to his direct question, I think it was about the 

fourth question in, that I referenced the fact that in this 

discussion, in this discussion across Canada, there are those that 

have raised the concerns about what the implication is for 

perhaps private schools. The next day after it was raised, we 

had a Muslim school here in Regina, here in the Legislative 

Building, and they have a voice in the discussion around what 

happens in their schools and around the issue of religious 

freedom. So it was well into question period on I think about 

the third or fourth question. The answer is no. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve also been 

having a discussion on the floor of the Assembly here with 

respect to intellectual disability wait-lists. And we’ve touched 

on a number of examples, Mr. Speaker, where the story 

presented by the Sask Party government doesn’t actually match 

up with the realities that are being experienced by some 

families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had a claim from the Sask Party government in the news 

release when they had the fanfare associated with the 

announcement, Mr. Speaker, that they had eliminated the 

wait-lists. Well since then, Mr. Speaker, we have been 

contacted by families who are in fact on the list and have not 

received services. We think of the situation of Jennifer Birns 

who was never offered an actual program spot for her brother. 

We had the minister go out in the rotunda and say that she 

wasn’t telling the truth. And we had Jennifer say that is 

disgusting, the treatment that she experienced. 

 

We have Craig Bayliss — and the Premier referenced this 

situation or this case earlier on — a man from Herbert caring 



3506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

for his intellectually disabled son with mental health challenges 

as well. What Craig has told us, Mr. Speaker, is that he went to 

the Premier’s office on four occasions in Swift Current and did 

not receive assistance. That is what he has told us. If the 

Premier says that’s a different story, he needs to call Craig up 

and talk with him about that because that is the reality and the 

story that Craig is telling us. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And we’ve had different stories in question period, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve had conflicting stories about whether or not 

there is a list. We’ve had one minister say there is no list. We 

have a news release saying there isn’t a list. We have another 

minister saying there is an emergent list. And there is another 

list that some people may be on. The story is very cloudy 

coming from members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: has he managed to get to the 

bottom of the contradictory explanations from his cabinet 

ministers on whether or not there is a new waiting list? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — There’s no contradiction between ministers 

about lists, Mr. Chairman . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No I 

think it’s important for the Leader of the Opposition. I mean 

from time to time he’s going to make mistakes. I make them. I 

think it’s important we admit them. I think he made a mistake 

with respect to a particular case in not verifying what had 

actually happened in the case of Mr. Bayliss. I think you can 

pick up the phone and find out. If you don’t want to call my 

office, fair enough. You can call the Minister of Social 

Services. And had you done that, you would have found out the 

truth of what had been offered to the family, to the Bayliss 

family. 

 

It’s a serious situation. We’re still working to provide care. In 

fact the day before you stood up and asked questions in the 

House, ministry officials were working to provide weekend 

respite care. Months after they had offered a full-time 

permanent space in a Swift Current home, they were still 

working with the group to provide care. 

 

The point of that is, there will be people that’ll come forward 

who will need the attention of the government. We’re not going 

to let them accumulate on a giant list. That’s the difference 

between us and you. You in government were happy to let them 

languish on a list of 440 people. We didn’t make it up. Ministry 

officials brought that forward, I assume the same officials that 

were working when you were the government, when they were 

the government. The same list existed. 

 

The minister of Social Services brought them forward and said 

— if you can believe it, Mr. Chairman, if you can believe it — 

440 people waiting, probably a little bit more or a little bit less, 

who had intellectual disabilities waiting for the dignity of a 

home, waiting for programming services. So the minister of the 

day, who answered some of the questions in the day referenced 

by the Leader of the Opposition, brought forward a plan for 

about $70 million of investment to deal with the list. I think it 

ended up costing around $52 million. In addition to the 440, 

215 others were helped. 

Mr. Chairman, he’s raising the question about whether 

everyone has been helped that needs help. The answer is no. 

But we are a far cry from the dark days of the NDP when it 

seemed that no one who needed help was getting help. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well as I said in question period today, Mr. 

Speaker, I recognize that some good steps have been made and 

we support the good steps that have been made. The issue here 

is the disconnect between the news release saying that the entire 

list has been addressed and then having the reality of families 

coming forward saying that they’re still in need of services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Craig and Marilyn Bayliss dispute the Premier’s 

assertion that they were offered a spot last year and that it was 

held for six months. We talk to them regularly. That is what 

they say. So if there is a different reality, I would encourage 

someone to contact Craig and Marilyn Bayliss and explain that 

they are wrong. 

 

Mr. Chair, another issue that we’ve been talking about in the 

Assembly is two sets of books and the government’s insistence 

on maintaining two sets of books instead of falling in step with 

what the rest of the country does. Now the auditor has 

commented on this and she said, “an incomplete and misleading 

picture.” 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that this calls into question the 

ability to compare what’s going on in the province here with 

other jurisdictions. In her special report, the Provincial Auditor 

says this: 

 

Clear financial budgeting and reporting is very important 

in order to hold a government accountable for its financial 

management. By the Government’s continued focus on 

budgets and financial statements prepared using outdated 

and discredited practices that differ from other 

governments in Canada, both the Legislative Assembly 

and the citizens of Saskatchewan are hindered in their 

ability to hold the Saskatchewan Government of the day 

accountable for its management of public finances. 

 

Also, as steward of the Government’s finances, the 

Government has a duty to present its citizens with a 

complete picture when presenting the Provincial Budget 

and actual results compared to its plans. To present 

incomplete and inaccurate picture to its citizens is 

confusing and poor practice. 

 

So it was just a couple of days ago, Mr. Chair, that we had a 

ceremony, a recognition, down one level, recognizing the role 

of the Ombudsman, an independent officer of the legislature. 

And the Justice minister was there, and a number of members 

were there, talking about the importance of independent 

legislative officers that provide a non-partisan, independent 

opinion of what is in many circumstances the best way forward. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he so stubborn on this 

issue? And why does he dismiss the auditor’s concerns? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3507 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Well again the Leader 

of the Opposition touched briefly on the disability strategy for 

the province, and so I just want to wind things up a little bit. He 

said, he intimated that the press release was wrong. He’s wrong. 

The 440 wait-list has been retired. That means there are still 

others in this province who need services. But those 440 that 

were identified on the list by the ministry have been provided 

services and a place to live. 

 

In fact, Mr. Chairman, here’s the rest of the record. Since 

2007-08, funding has increased by 110 per cent for group 

homes for people with intellectual disabilities. Total group 

home spaces for people with intellectual disabilities in 

Saskatchewan has increased by 25 per cent. Funding has 

increased 81 per cent for day programs for people with 

intellectual disabilities. Funding for supported independent 

living for people with intellectual disabilities has increased 61 

per cent — new, expanded, or enhanced services in 41 

communities right across the province of Saskatchewan 

 

And that’s why on the 7th of May — I guess that’s yesterday’s 

date, I think — we received a letter from SARC [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rehabilitation Centres]. The executive director, 

Amy McNeil . . . And I think she’s been watching question 

period because she references some of the cases that the Leader 

of the Opposition has raised. And she doesn’t want to comment 

on the specific cases, but she has a lot to offer in her letter. She 

says: 

 

In October 2008, SARC was informed of the 

government’s four-year plan to focus efforts on 

investments towards the unmet needs in the disability 

sector. Immediately following the announcement, SARC 

entered into advanced discussions with ministry staff 

regarding the goals set by government, including the 440 

wait-list. Referring back to my notes dated October 27, 

SARC posed the question to ministerial staff as to how the 

440 wait-list was determined. My notes reflect that the 

440 persons was a snapshot at an exact time and in no way 

indicated that the initiative would meet every need of 

every person with an intellectual disability in our 

province. 

 

She goes on to say, “There’s always been an acknowledgment 

from ministry employees that participants’ needs change, and 

that emerging needs will always exist.” 

 

Then she says, “Thanks to your government investment, there 

are now more effective mechanisms and increased capacities to 

meet the needs in a timely and respectful and efficient manner.” 

 

We’re going to continue to work on this file, Mr. Chairman, 

and as we do and as the Leader of the Opposition raises 

questions, as he well should, we are going to remind him and 

the people of the province of this record — though it’s 

imperfect and though we need to do more — and his and his 

party’s record in terms of treating the most vulnerable people in 

the province of Saskatchewan, those who have intellectual 

disabilities. 

 

And that was so good that I have forgotten the last part of the 

question. Ah yes, the two . . . well really the one set of books 

with the subset is how I think I would characterize it, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

You know, there are a number of . . . He makes the case that 

this is outdated and nobody else does this. Well Manitoba 

displays and discusses the components of both the GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] bottom line and the summary bottom 

line. Quebec publishes both summary surplus and deficit, and a 

summary budget balance alternative calculation for the 

purposes of its balanced budget legislation. In Alberta, they’re 

moving to three budgets. They do not have, provide an overall 

budget and comprehensive surplus, deficit, or a summary 

budget. So to say we’re the only ones — and I’ve heard the 

deputy leader and the Finance critic say, well we’re the only 

ones that are doing this — it’s just not true. We see this 

happening in other jurisdictions. 

 

More to the point, the members opposite and the Leader of the 

Opposition recklessly talk about how this doesn’t provide the 

full story. Of course it does, because we report both on the GRF 

and the summary. We budget on both and the people of this 

province and anyone looking from outside our borders in on the 

finances of Saskatchewan will be able to see both the GRF 

budget situation and both the summary financial budget 

situation. And when they do that, Mr. Chairman, if they do that 

right now, they will see balanced on the GRF side, balanced on 

the summary side, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well that’s a two-part answer so perhaps a 

two-part comment, or a comment first and then a question. The 

Premier still hasn’t recognized the different opinions that are 

being given by ministers on his front bench with respect to the 

waiting list for those with intellectual disabilities. 

 

On Human Services Committee, April 22nd, 2013, page 332, 

the member from Riversdale asked the Minister of Social 

Services, “But so is everybody then taken care of? Or do you 

have an additional number of people who are still waiting for 

services? Or a new list?” The minister responded, “No, there 

isn’t a new list.” 

 

Shortly after, Mr. Speaker, on May 2nd, 2013, Hansard, 3431, 

when asked about this in question period, the minister standing 

in, the former minister of Social Services, on page 3431 said, 

“We do not deny that there has been a wait-list that has 

emerged beyond the 440 wait-list. We totally recognize that.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s comments on the auditor, once 

again, it’s dismissing the independent opinion that has been 

given by the auditor on the need to move from two sets of 

books to one in order to provide Saskatchewan people and 

Canadians an accurate picture of the finances. The dismissive 

approach to the auditor’s reports, Mr. Speaker, is concerning 

enough. I think that’s a concern for all Saskatchewan people. It 

certainly ought to be a concern for all legislators. 

 

But the dismissive approach goes beyond the reports. It actually 

also goes to the behaviour and the treatment of the auditor by 

members of the Sask Party government caucus. And we saw 

this very clearly on display in the committee process when 

backbenchers, perhaps with too much time on their hands, Mr. 

Speaker, but also having direction I would imagine from the 



3508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

centre, very much so, were obstructionist and were in no way 

approaching the auditor with the level of respect and 

professionalism that she is owed as an independent officer of 

the legislature. My question to the Premier: does he regret how 

his Sask Party MLAs treated the auditor in committee? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. You know, 

there’s a great focus by the Leader of the Opposition again 

around process and on how you define the list and when does 

the list stop and when did the list begin. I’ve answered the 

question. In fact I’ve read into the record a letter from SARC 

that we received yesterday where they understood entirely what 

the minister, by the way, has been saying, not just the Minister 

of Social Services today but the minister of Social Services 

previously who initiated the program. SARC understood it. 

 

By the way, the non-government agencies who were here for 

that day when we celebrated the end of that 440 list — and it 

was ended — the non-government organizations that came here 

from across the province, they understand what the 

government’s doing. They understand that we know there’s 

more to be done, that the people will present themselves and 

we’re going to deal with them. 

 

Here’s what they also understand though. I would say to the 

Leader of the Opposition that never again in the province, as 

long as we have the chance to sit on this side of the House, will 

there be a list like that again in Saskatchewan, will 440 people, 

the most vulnerable, wait for the dignity of a home or program 

services. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition stopped a little 

short of that quote he read from the Minister of Social Services 

in the Human Services Committee. If he would have read the 

whole quote or if we would have got the whole story — this is 

becoming a bit of a theme — the rest of the story, he would 

have noted that what the minister said at Human Services 

Committee is completely consistent with the government’s 

position with respect to the 440 list. 

 

But we’re happy to talk about it. We’re happy to talk about the 

initiative there. We’re happy to have support from groups like 

SARC [Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres] 

and non-government agencies across this province who are 

quite truly heroes, who take care of our most vulnerable on a 

day-to-day basis. Mr. Chairman, they would tell the Leader of 

the Opposition — I think they would; well they have — things 

are way better today than they were before. That 440 list is 

gone. We’re taking care of people as they emerge on that list. 

We’ve increased salaries for those who actually provide the 

care, for those in CBOs after they waited years and years for 

some sort of an increase, even indexation, and didn’t get it from 

members opposite, Mr. Chairman. That’s a big difference. 

 

We’ve seen in estimates tonight a real difference in terms of the 

Saskatchewan Party government and the NDP under their new 

leader. They’re still sort of the same old NDP. They’re really 

focused on process. They’re very much focused on processes 

and how things are organized and if things are on a list. We’re 

kind of focused on trying our very, very best to get things done, 

knowing it’s going to be imperfect, but knowing that our 

priority is going to be the people, in this case, who are very 

vulnerable and need our help. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’re not being disrespectful of the Provincial 

Auditor. We, like the NDP before us in government, have the 

opinion that when you provide a General Revenue Fund report 

and a summary financial report, you are disclosing the state of 

the finances in the province. Mr. Chairman, it’s not like we are 

saying that here’s the GRF and we’re projecting that as some 

sort of summary financial statement. We’re not. We’re saying, 

here’s the GRF, the operating account of government, and 

here’s the summary financial statements for all of the 

government, including all the Crowns, including all the central 

agencies. So to say that we’re being disrespectful, I just don’t 

agree with the Leader of the Opposition. We are providing 

both. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Chairman, here’s the other important part. Again he’s 

interested in the process. The two sets of books is the principle 

of his question and what the auditor says. You know, I think 

most Saskatchewan people, I would submit to the new leader of 

the NDP, I think they were more interested in the results of the 

budget itself. They’re interested in the bottom line, in the 

investments we make with the budget, and is the budget 

balanced. I think they’re interested in that. Is the summary 

financial budget balanced? I think they’re interested in that. 

How are we doing compared to other provinces? I think they’re 

interested in that. 

 

And frankly, in the last election, an election that he campaigned 

on, he had a great hand in writing the NDP platform, he wrote 

that tree book that formed Mr. Lingenfelter’s platform, it turned 

out to be a $5 billion platform that would have ensured that 

whether you’re budgeting on the general revenue or on the 

summary, it would have ensured that we would today, if they 

would have won, had massive deficits and increased debt. 

 

That’s the interest people have when they compare and contrast 

parties. I think they want to make sure the information’s 

disclosed, and we would argue it is on both counts. Then they 

want to make sure that there’s fiscal responsibility. And I think 

if I can say respectfully, Mr. Chairman, that that’s what we’re 

endeavouring to provide — quite different from what the NDP 

would have provided if they would have won the election with 

$5 billion worth of promises that they couldn’t support with any 

sort of compensating revenue. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The question, Mr. Speaker, was whether . . . 

Mr. Chair, the question was whether or not the Premier was 

proud and supportive of the actions of his Sask Party caucus 

members in relation to how they treated the auditor in 

committee. And on that, Mr. Speaker, we did not hear a 

comment from the Premier. And that is concerning. There are 

times when process matters, and I would say how legislative 

officers in committee are treated is one process that really does 

matter, and one that was disappointing to see the treatment that 

she received. 

 

The issue of debt, the issue of budgets, the issue of 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3509 

accountability and transparency, Mr. Speaker, one concerning 

element was the fact that we saw the Sask Party government 

off-load nearly $100 million of debt onto the University of 

Saskatchewan. This is something that has caused major 

problems on the university’s campus. 

 

The critic and the member from Elphinstone talked about the 

situation on universities’ campuses today, how there’s a 

disconnect between what Sask Party billboards say and what 

the reality is being felt with respect to program cuts, with 

respect to layoffs, with respect to tuition going up, Mr. Speaker. 

And this ties into the issue of $100 million of debt being passed 

on to the university’s books. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he admit that the government 

decided to send nearly $100 million of debt on to the 

university’s books in order to make their own financial picture 

look better? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The Premier said no, Mr. Speaker. And having 

talked on this section, I will now ask and turn the mike over to 

the Deputy Leader for a few questions. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont, 

the deputy leader. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It is my pleasure 

to enter into some of this discussion here this afternoon. I have 

a question for the Premier, a pretty straightforward question. 

Simply when was he first notified of the allegations and issues 

involving IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre 

for geologic storage of CO2] and CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.]? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I don’t remember the exact date. 

And when he says . . . I think he said IPAC affair or words to 

that effect . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, he didn’t. Well 

maybe he can be a little bit more specific in terms of the 

question with respect to what . . . He wants to know the date on 

which I learned something? And the something is pretty 

important, so I’d ask the member perhaps to be more specific. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So to just repeat the question. The direct 

question, straightforward question is, when did the Premier first 

learn of the allegations and concerns as it related to IPAC and 

CVI? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 

allegations that the Deputy Leader of the NDP is talking about, 

it would have been earlier this year. And of course we can get 

into the details of what happened two years ago when ministers 

were informed of what was happening there. 

But actually, Mr. Chairman, we found out today that, especially 

with respect to CVI, it goes a lot further back than two years 

ago. That member of the NDP has been standing on a regular 

basis talking about CVI as a Sask Party created company. 

Because the Sask Party funded the business plan, this is a Sask 

Party created initiative. In and around him, he will have 

members who served on the previous cabinet benches, the 

previous NDP government cabinet benches who would have 

known while he was saying those things that there might be, 

again, the rest of the story. 

 

And so here, Mr. Chairman, is a memo dated October the 1st, 

2007, before the election was called, just before the election 

was called. It’s an internal memo of government officials that 

highlights approved initiatives. It says, “To the best of my 

knowledge, the following is the list of CO2-related funding 

proposals from the U of R this year. Approved initiatives: 

SpringBoard, $3.385 million; Climate Ventures, commercial 

opportunities related to CO2, $100,000.” Approved by the NDP 

government in October of 2007. 

 

He’s been standing, he’s been standing in the legislature, he’s 

been talking about how this was an initiative of the Sask Party 

government, how it was only the Sask Party government that 

created it. And now we know . . . And the Leader of the 

Opposition has just turned in his chair to ask the veteran, the 

former leader of the opposition, what’s going on. Because, Mr. 

Chairman, I think that’s pretty important information in this 

debate. I think it highlights the fact that governments were 

doing what the minister has said. 

 

Governments would fund University of Regina proposals. The 

University of Regina was trying to commercialize technology. 

It’s not then therefore a government entity, but support for a U 

of R initiative. And I know that the deputy leader, the IPAC 

critic, does not necessarily agree with that. Except if he doesn’t 

agree that that’s what this government was doing, then what 

was his government doing in October of 2007? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Chair, it’s sort of interesting that no 

answers come from this government for month after month 

after month and month after month after month. And then 

finally when the Premier thinks he’s got some sort of 

information to turn the table, he jumps up and goes on the 

attack when he’s deflected and dismissed every opportunity to 

be responsible. 

 

At the end of the day, Mr. Chair, the funding for CVI, whatever 

arrangement in history there is to it, let’s open that up. Let’s 

place that into the hands of the Provincial Auditor. But what I 

know for certain, what we all know for certain is that the 

funding flowed over by way of an order in council in cabinet on 

March 6, 2008 and that money flowed when this government 

was in power. From that point forward, what we know is that 

there were significant allegations of waste, conflicts of interest 

that were identified all under the management of this 

government. And that government has a responsibility for the 

stewardship of public dollars. 

 

So my question going back to the Premier: instead of trying to 



3510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

cherry-pick a piece and play political games, will he finally 

support the call? Will he finally support the call that we’ve been 

making, that we open up this whole affair, put all the 

information on the table and provide the Provincial Auditor the 

mandate to do a full review of the IPAC affair, CVI, all related 

entities in question? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Oh, Mr. Chairman, I admire the pluck of 

the deputy leader, the Finance critic for the NDP because he’s, 

when confronted with the fact that it was his government that 

actually started this process with Climate Ventures, that took, as 

he would say in question period, $100,000 of taxpayers’ 

money, quite rightly, and invested it in CVI, Climate Ventures, 

I like, Mr. Chairman, I admire the fact that he’s basically 

saying, let’s not quibble about who actually started this. 

 

But the issue is serious because there are taxpayers’ dollars at 

stake. And so I want to point again for the record of the 

Assembly when government ministers became aware of some 

of the concerns. And I know we have two different files going 

here, IPAC and CVI, two different issues that the member’s 

been raising. But, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important to note 

that a couple of years ago, when information came forward to 

ministers that there was some concerns around sole-sourced 

contracts, there was just general concerns around the 

deployment of taxpayers’ resources, what then did the 

government do, Mr. Chairman? 

 

At that time, at the time of the concerns, who was 

administering, who was spending the money? It was the 

University of Regina. It was the University of Regina, on their 

own, involved in the process. When ministers find out about 

this particular initiative, there is a new board in place. My 

understanding, it is government-designated members of the new 

board to administer the organization that started to identify 

concerns. And so as I understand it, funding was stopped at that 

point from the Government of Saskatchewan because these 

concerns were identified by the government members, said 

we’re going to stop the funding and we’re going to engage in an 

investigation. The Provincial Auditor has been part of that 

review, of the file. To your question about a separate audit, the 

Provincial Auditor is the auditor for the University of Regina. 

Certainly plays a role there. 

 

Moreover, we’ve had a number of different reports including 

this forensic investigation by Meyers Norris Penny, a very 

reputable firm. That concludes, by the way, that nobody 

personally benefited, that what we have here is a sole source 

contract. That’s of a concern, but what we also have is perhaps 

some overpayment for what was finally delivered. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, to try to paint this picture that somehow the 

government didn’t respond in a serious fashion to the news that 

taxpayers’ money may not have been expended appropriately, 

it’s just not true. Ministers did precisely the opposite. Ministers 

engaged on the file. A new board was put in place. 

Government-designated members on the board said, we’ve got 

an issue here. Let’s stop the funding, said the government, said 

the ministers involved, and we got to the bottom of it, Mr. 

Chairman. And that’s the nature of the story. 

 

But again I want to say to the deputy leader who earnestly 

raises these issues, as he should, in question period, he might 

also want to review the history of CVI and understand that it 

was his NDP government that actually started us down this 

particular road, at least as it relates to CVI. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

[17:00] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Chair, I think what we would all 

expect on this file is a full spotlight and transparency on what’s 

occurred and the role for the Provincial Auditor to be involved. 

 

What the Premier puts forward says that the MNP [Meyers 

Norris Penny] report says that no one personally gained. Well it 

doesn’t say that, Mr. Chair. In fact, it makes very clear in that 

report, the MNP report, that they didn’t have access to CVI, the 

very company in question created with taxpayers’ dollars. They 

didn’t have access to that information. When you go and take a 

look at the IT [information technology] audit, that makes it very 

clear that they didn’t have access to all of the information to be 

able to provide a value-for-money analysis. None of those 

answers have been provided, and despite the fact that 

significant allegations of waste and conflicts of interest were 

raised with the board, there was no actions around addressing 

those individuals that were identified with conflicts of interest. 

And the dollars continued to flow. 

 

And so, awfully interesting, Mr. Speaker. It certainly does 

account for millions of dollars. I have a question of how much 

waste and who’s benefited are the questions we need to get to 

the heart of. But the allegations are significant. 

 

My question back to the Premier: he can’t pretend that the 

auditor right now has the support of this Assembly to go out 

and do a broad mandate. He hasn’t provided that. She’s out 

there working on her own independently and in partnership 

with the university. We have a responsibility to the people of 

Saskatchewan on this file. We should be calling on the 

Provincial Auditor by way of this Assembly and providing, or 

executive government, to provide a full mandate from the very 

start-up of these dollars to all the way through its creation, the 

expenditure of those dollars for a full analysis, a full 

investigation as it relates to IPAC, CVI, all related entities and 

individuals in conflict. And we should also be fully engaging 

the authorities, that being the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police], Mr. Chair. 

 

So I look to the Premier once again. What we should be doing 

in this is opening it up to the Provincial Auditor, providing a 

mandate from his office or our Assembly, and we should also 

be turning all information over to authorities. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, thanks very much, Mr. Chair. A 

couple points here. First of all, in terms of the member’s 

question about what happens to the individuals involved, they 

work for the University of Regina. He’s asking about 

accountability for those two folks. Well he didn’t say two, but 

there’s two in particular involved in most of the report. They 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3511 

work for the University of Regina, and it’s really up to the 

University of Regina to take these measures. Well he’s shaking 

his head, so perhaps we’ll find out more about it in subsequent 

questions. 

 

I also want to ask the member this question. If he . . . Meyers 

Norris Penny did a forensic investigation of this whole 

situation, wherein they found no evidence of anyone gaining, 

and wherein they must not have found any evidence of any 

criminal wrongdoing. Conflict of interest of course is not a 

criminal wrongdoing. And so why does the hon. member think 

that a firm, a very prestigious national firm would not, in a 

forensic investigation, if they found some evidence of any kind 

of criminal wrongdoing or questions, does he not think MNP 

would immediately refer that to the authorities? Of course they 

would, Mr. Chairman. Of course they would. 

 

We’ve looked at this file through different ministries. And 

again, we support the conclusions of Meyers Norris and Penny 

when they say, look, there’s . . . no one gained. Here’s some 

problems with this particular thing — sole source, maybe a 

conflict of interest, but nobody gained. There’s no evidence of 

anything. And yet he keeps raising it again because I think it 

fits a bit of a political narrative that doesn’t actually have facts 

to support it. And really it’s not the first time we’ve seen this 

from the Deputy Leader of the NDP, especially on this issue. 

 

Remember, Mr. Chairman, at the start of this discussion of CVI 

and IPAC, I read from a memo under the NDP, October the 1st, 

2007, where Climate Ventures began to receive money for their 

commercial . . . [inaudible] . . . business plan to the . . . related 

to CO2, 100,000 taxpayers’ dollars. Here’s some quotes from 

that member of the minister on this particular issue. 

 

To the minister: 

 

This is from Hansard on 24 April, 2013. 

 

To the minister: why did the Sask Party create CVI with 

taxpayers’ money and then do nothing to clean up the 

mess that they created? 

 

The NDP started it. He’s still nodding his head. I’m going to 

table this memo, Mr. Chairman, so we can show it to the critic 

so he understands, he understands that frankly it was the NDP 

government that initiated this. 

 

Here’s another quote. Here’s another quote: 

 

Strangely that was exactly what the Sask Party intended to 

do with CVI back in 2008, that CVI would be a private IT 

[information technology] contractor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why was the Sask Party’s pet project, CVI 

using . . . 

 

And he goes on to talk about IPAC. That’s also from 24 April. 

 

Twenty-third of April: 

 

Mr. Speaker, why . . . 

 

This is again the words of the member asking the question: 

. . . why did the minister and the government that created 

CVI in the first place with taxpayers’ money not ensure 

full access to its records? 

 

Mr. Chairman, wrong, wrong, wrong again. The NDP took 

$100,000 taxpayers’ dollars in October of 2007. There’s a 

former minister. Right behind you is another minister. There is 

one right over there. Don’t they remember? They started CVI. 

And now will that member change . . . will he alter his line of 

questionings? He could still ask questions about it. It’s a serious 

issue. But will he change the line of questioning so that they 

actually resemble the facts of the matter, started in 2007 by the 

New Democratic Party government? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no comment there about the 

Provincial Auditor quoting from the MNP report. MNP asked if 

Mr. Jaffe, if he would allow a review of his books and records 

to verify his assertion, and Mr. Jaffe refused, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, it’s concerning. Through the question periods, when 

we’ve been talking about this issue, we see a totally dismissive 

attitude that the various ministers have taken, that the front 

bench has certainly taken, Mr. Speaker. Today we see almost 

the Sask Party government making light of the situation by the 

laughs and the smiles, Mr. Speaker, that we see on this issue, 

Mr. Speaker. This deserves a much better scrutiny than what we 

are getting under the Sask Party government. 

 

A topic that we’ve been discussing at length here in the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is the issue of Bill 85. And since my 

time in the Assembly, we’ve talked about a number of pieces of 

labour legislation. Through the discussion on Bill 85 that has 

occurred, Mr. Speaker, through question periods, through 

committee work, through different motions and debates that 

we’ve had, it’s clear that Bill 85 needs much more work. We’ve 

made it clear, Mr. Speaker, that we want to work with the Sask 

Party government to make improvements to the legislation. 

 

So my question to the Premier: will the Premier put Bill 85 on 

hold and work with stakeholders on a better set of labour laws 

that will benefit everyone? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the 

Leader of the Opposition for the questions. You know, again I 

guess there’s some problems with the preamble or the context 

for the questions that he’s asked. And I’m sure he’s got 

problems with my preamble for my answers. And I guess that’s 

fair. That’s what’s going to happen in estimates. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, if we take a look at the history, if we 

canvass the history of labour legislative changes that have been 

made by the Government of Saskatchewan — the government 

elected post-2007 — you will see the NDP basically 

prognosticating very similarly about Bills 5 and 6 that it would 

be apocalyptic in terms of the labour relations environment in 

the province. 

 

You heard the same things during Bill 80, during the legislation 

we introduced to modernize the labour legislative environment 



3512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

around the construction industry. We heard the NDP saying, 

this will be the end of a harmonious construction labour 

environment. I think the former leader of the opposition, not 

Mr. Lingenfelter necessarily but the former interim leader of 

the opposition said those things, stood in his place and said, Bill 

80, if it happens, is going to undo what we have as construction 

labour peace in the province. 

 

I put it to members in the House on both sides and to the Leader 

of the Opposition: how many strikes has there been in the 

construction industry in the province since Bill 80 passed? How 

many concerns? How many issues have been raised? Has there 

been a deleterious impact on that legislation of that Bill 80 that 

they predicted dire consequences for? Has there been some sort 

of deleterious impact on the labour relations environment in the 

province? The answer is no. 

 

What about Bill 5? No. Bill 6? No. Mr. Chairman, with respect 

to Bill 85, we fully expect that to be the case. Ideas that formed 

the basis of Bill 85 were introduced fully, announced publicly 

fully a year ago, more than a year ago in the province. We 

indicated we would take the period of consultation. We have 

done that. We said we would introduce legislation in the fall. 

We did that. Then there would be more time for debate and 

comment. There has been. And now there’s been the chance for 

debate in this session. 

 

I note by the way that the Leader of the Opposition has not 

raised a single question about Bill 85 in question period. I note 

that they only went six hours on debate when they could have 

gone 20. That would have been a . . . You know, if this is the 

burning issue for the New Democrats in terms of their concern 

for this impact on the labour relations environment, truly we 

haven’t sort of seen it in terms of any sense of urgency on their 

part in the House and how they’ve dealt with it in committee. 

You know, Mr. Chairman, they talk about hoisting the bill but 

never have, which is a tool, at least an attempted tool. So 

opposition has a number of tools on the debate. 

 

I want to say, I guess we’ll get into the debate of 85. And I’m 

mindful of the time so I’ll take my seat, but there are just, very 

quickly, on hours of work — which has been a concern we’ve 

heard from working families in this province and from the NDP 

— hundreds of agreements exist already for four 10-hour shifts. 

Five provinces allow four 10-hour workdays in a week without 

a permit: Alberta, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Ontario, and 

PEI [Prince Edward Island]. The NDP used to allow these same 

kinds of workweeks by permit. Our records show that they 

never really rejected a permit. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this is done as an employer and employee sit 

down about their shift. Many employees prefer these shifts. 

This is modernizing the legislation. It’s consistent with two 

Atlantic provinces — sorry, three — Ontario, and Alberta. That 

part of the legislation we can talk about some more, and other 

parts as well I’m sure the member will want to raise. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 85 is important 

to us, and for that reason we’ve been asking questions. We’ve 

been presenting petitions. We’ve been spending a lot of time in 

committee, Mr. Speaker. We have been touring the province 

listening to people because it is important legislation because it 

affects so many people here in the province. And I would 

imagine government members would agree with that opinion as 

well. 

 

What we’ve heard from people, what the public is saying, what 

labour leaders are saying, what is reported by some people who 

watch politics in the province, Mr. Speaker, is that there needs 

to be more discussion on what the consequences of 85 can be. 

There needs to be more communication with the Saskatchewan 

public and the government with respect to what Bill 85 will 

mean for the workplace. And we have to remember, workplaces 

are about families that work in them. They’re about individuals 

who are balancing in busy times everything that they want to 

accomplish by getting ahead in life, doing well but also having 

the quality of life that they need. 

 

The issues of Bill 85 are significant. It is a very broad piece of 

legislation touching on many areas of the workplace. And it’s 

important, Mr. Speaker, when that type of legislation comes 

into place, that it’s done well, that if there are problems, if there 

are questions remaining, that they ought to be addressed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And for this reason, Mr. Chair, we have taken a constructive 

approach in this. We’ve recognized that there may be 

deficiencies in the bill. There are outstanding questions that 

many people in the province have, and for that reason, you 

know, we’re engaging in a process where we want to be 

constructive, where we want to ensure that the legislation is 

well known by the Saskatchewan public. I mean in that vein, 

Mr. Speaker, our Labour critic has constructively engaged with 

the Minister of Labour to talk about some possible approaches 

that we could have in order to ensure that the legislation does 

not have unintended consequences with respect to working 

people here in the province. 

 

One constructive suggestion we have had, Mr. Speaker, is to hit 

pause on the legislation in this spring sitting and to resume in 

the fall, giving the opportunity and the time in order to fully 

understand what the consequences of the bill will be, to work 

on some flawed parts of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, so it can 

be done in a constructive way and so that there can be . . . that it 

is in fact the best legislation for Saskatchewan people. We’ve 

put that olive branch to work constructively and to not take it to 

a ramped-up partisan level but to do what is in the best interest 

of workers and Saskatchewan people. 

 

My question to the Premier: will they consider delaying the 

passage of the bill and not doing it this spring sitting but 

resuming in the fall in order to allow the important work to 

occur? And the opposition is willing to be constructive in that 

process. 

 

The Chair: — Members, the Chair would ask your leave to 

introduce two special guests in the west gallery. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Chair: — Thank you, members. The member seated . . . 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3513 

Did they leave? Oh okay. Sorry. They were seated in the west 

gallery was two very special guests, Mrs. Wendy Bonk and her 

daughter Caralee. And the reason why they’re so special is that 

Mrs. Bonk is the mother of one of our Pages, Sarah Cheshire. 

And too bad we didn’t we get this invitation in quickly before 

they left, but hopefully they’ll come back. But anyway in their 

absentia, I’d ask to recognize their attendance here today. 

Thank you. 

 

[17:15] 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Subvote (EX01) 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. Thank you for granting 

leave. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just back to the point 

of, you know, what we’ve heard in the past from the NDP in 

advance of labour legislation passing, they have, they truly have 

predicted terrible things for the labour environment and the 

economy. And then when the labour legislation is introduced 

and passed and it doesn’t happen . . . 

 

To the credit of the former interim leader of the opposition, he 

did acknowledge it on the 23rd of October. At the start of this 

session, the then leader of the NDP said, “Our economy has 

been moving along quite well with relative labour peace for 

many, many years.” Which kind of proves the point, Mr. 

Chairman, that we’re sensitive to the fact that when labour 

legislation changes are required, we think to modernize or to 

make sure that our economy is competitive while both sides are 

treated fairly. We’re always mindful of the labour legislative 

environment, that we would want it to continue to be 

constructive and peaceful here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the question from the NDP leader is, well will 

you delay this? Will you delay it till fall? Mr. Chairman, the 

discussion paper that led to the debate we’re having today was 

released over a year ago. Four thousand submissions have been 

received as a result. 

 

A lot of items in the discussion paper, the government has 

heard loud and clear not just from business, sometimes from 

labour, that they didn’t support it. They’ve been withdrawn. 

They’re not in the bill. We’ve actually . . . It’s not just been a 

consultation process for the sake of saying we consulted. We 

have earnestly looked at the input from labour and from 

business, and we’ve withdrawn elements of the discussion 

paper so that they do not appear in the bill currently before the 

House. 

 

There is a ministerial advisory committee made up of labour, 

made up of the other side of the equation, of the employers as 

well. They’ve met we think between eight and nine times. Mr. 

Hubich is on that. Mr. Bymoen, business people are on that. 

They meet about six hours at a time. They’ve done it nine 

occasions. Again there’s been 4,000 submissions. 

We then introduced the bill in the fall. More debate, more 

discussion, more time for comment from people until they get 

to the spring, Mr. Chairman. We’re dealing with some concerns 

around the workweek, around some other issues that group said 

needed clarification. We’ve heard that consultation. We’re 

actually dealing with it in committee with amendments, friendly 

amendments that the government has brought in. Mr. Chairman, 

I don’t know of a piece of legislation in the young history of 

our government that has been vetted as much as this from a 

consultative process or just time in the legislature. 

 

So the answer to my honourable friend’s question is no. We’re 

not going to delay. We have done the consultation. We’ve 

withdrawn parts of the bill. We’re amending other parts that 

have been raised by opposition members, by the critic, and by 

others. We’re dealing with those as well, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And now it’s time to move forward with legislation, I might 

add, that will now index the minimum wage for the first time in 

the history of the province of Saskatchewan. Now it’s time to 

move forward with an initiative that will provide unpaid leave 

for people to attend citizenship ceremonies or unpaid leave to 

donate an organ or standardization and reduction of qualifying 

periods for parental, maternity, and adoption leave. Mr. 

Chairman, it’s time to move forward with a very progressive 

piece of legislation that deals I think even-handedly with both 

sides but works to ensure that this economy remains 

competitive, that the workplace is fair, and that the economy 

remains competitive. 

 

Consultation’s happened. Input’s been received. Changes have 

been made, and now the bill will pass. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s disappointing that an offer 

to work together in order to improve legislation and address 

some of the deficiencies in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, is not 

being accepted by the Sask Party government. 

 

In December, the CBC asked the Premier about his 

privatization agenda, and the Premier indicated that this would 

in fact be an election issue. So I think it’s important to be clear 

with Saskatchewan people when it comes to the Crowns that all 

Saskatchewan people own. Will the Premier propose the 

privatization of any Crown corporations in the next election? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yes. I’ll make the Leader of the Opposition 

a deal. If he wants to start talking about some things he might 

actually do in advance of or during the next election, I guess we 

can get into fighting the next election at that point. We’ve given 

him ample time to do it, even on things as simple as, do you 

still support private clinics or do you oppose private clinics? 

And he hasn’t been able to do it. So you know, we’ll have 

plenty of time to get into all of those debates. And honestly if 

he’s going to ask that question about what’s in the platform 

next time around, I think he should probably want to offer some 

glimpses of what might be in his particular platform or even 

ideas that he still holds today. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think it’s also interesting to note with respect 



3514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

to Bill 85 as we wrap that discussion up — or perhaps there’s 

more questions — the NDP provided a submission to the 

government just in advance of the bill. Since then, Mr. 

Chairman, there’s been no submission. Four thousand others 

have come from all over the province. Labour’s been involved. 

Business has been involved. You know, the Leader of the 

Opposition stands and says earnestly, it’s too bad that we won’t 

accept his offer to co-operate. Mr. Chairman, they haven’t 

made an effort to provide information, to provide basic 

elements of the submission that I know this minister would take 

seriously because this minister’s taken seriously the advice and 

recommendations from labour about certain pieces. It’s why, 

Mr. Chairman, it won’t be an NDP government that finally 

indexes minimum wage in Saskatchewan. It will be a 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, when looking at the 

future of our province, it’s clear that we need a long-term, 

sustainable plan for smart growth. And that includes doing our 

part to address climate change that is occurring, Mr. Speaker. 

Several weeks ago the Premier travelled to Washington, 

desperately trying to make the case for our province’s 

environmental record. He talked about the need to “give them 

as much elbow room as possible.” 

 

But following that, Mr. Speaker, when he returned to the 

province and delivered a budget not long after that, we saw cuts 

for funding for environmental assessment and environmental 

protection and to programs to address climate change. And just 

over the last two years, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has cut 

funding for climate change programs by 73 per cent.  

 

So my question to the Premier: why would he cut the funding 

that is designated for environmental protection, environmental 

assessment, funding to address climate change through 

programs, Mr. Speaker, at the same time that he’s desperately 

trying to promote our environmental record abroad? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thanks again, Mr. Chairman. I 

welcome the discussion because it’s a chance, I think, to again 

demonstrate to the people of the province a real difference that 

exists between the NDP and the Sask Party, between perhaps 

the Leader of the Opposition and our own approach. 

 

Because when we took office in 2007, there was a climate 

change office. There were no resources in the office. There 

were monitoring vehicles, as I recall, for northern air quality 

with no budget to actually have anybody drive them. They were 

all sitting in a parking lot. We took over from a government that 

was issuing a lot of press releases about greenhouse gases, 

about climate change, even under their watch, even while 

emissions rose under their watch by 70 per cent. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’re not interested in offices. We’re not 

interested in trucks sitting in a parking lot somewhere in 

Regina. We’re interested in action. And that was my message in 

Washington. It’s this government that’s implemented a $1 

million boreal lake strategy so that we can, for the first time in 

the history of the province, test our northern lakes so we can 

protect our northern lakes. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in the particular budget that we’ve been 

debating here in this Legislative Assembly, there’s $1.2 million 

to offset the multi-material recycling initiative, something that 

has been needed; 500,000 for the boreal woodland caribou 

strategy, $250,000 for that. There’s the south of the divide 

project for $300,000, Mr. Chairman. We’re serious about our 

environment and our habitat. 

 

The other point that I was making in Washington is that on a 

per capita basis — to my knowledge, I stand to be corrected, 

but we’ve canvassed sort of North America — to our 

knowledge, there is not another jurisdiction in North America 

that is investing more public dollars per capita to deal with CO2 
than the province of Saskatchewan under this government.  

 

And a $1.4 billion clean coal project — real, transformative, 

technological change that we are leading — a project that is on 

time and on budget. Words we don’t use often enough in 

government, I would say: on time and on budget. Ninety-six, 

ninety-five per cent capture of CO2. NOx [nitrogen oxides] and 

SOx [sulphur oxides] particulates, captures all of those. The 

sale of the CO2, reused enhanced oil recovery, and then the safe 

geological storage of that CO2 — by the way, technology we 

have because of the previous government’s investment in CO2 

technology, and that included the PTRC [Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre], by the way — and our continued 

increased investment in this particular area. 

 

So you bet I was in Washington talking about that. Because, 

Mr. Chairman, we’ve had members of the New Democratic 

Party go down to Washington, including his federal leader, 

including federal members of Parliament, and badmouth 

Canada in terms of Keystone. 

 

What we need to be doing is going down to the United States 

and saying we should be doing better in Canada in terms of our 

environmental record, America. But by the way, did you know 

this, America, our friends in America? Did you know that we 

have more aggressive coal regulations in Canada than they do? 

Did you know that the first jurisdiction in North America that 

actually put a price on carbon — without that, by the way, this 

is a moot conversation — was not anywhere in the United 

States. It was not in the home state of Al Gore. It was in the 

province of Alberta. 

 

We’re following suit with our own greenhouse gas legislation. 

And the largest clean coal project that, as far as we know, exists 

anywhere in the world — with public investment and 

admittedly some risk, but the risk is worth it if we can 

transform the coal-fire industry, for example, by cleaning it up 

— is right here in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s our 

record. 

 

No, we didn’t continue to fund offices that were empty when 

we found them, or trucks in a parking lot. But, Mr. Chairman, 

we took the issue seriously. We made, I think, a fairly bold 

move, together with the federal government, to fund the world’s 

largest clean coal demonstration project. And it holds great 

hope for us because, you know, coal is going to be used in 

China and in the United States and in India and around the 

world. It’s going to be a transition energy. We need to clean it 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3515 

up for the sake of the planet. And when the technology that 

comes from this particular initiative at Boundary dam affords 

the world to do just that, I hope that all members in the House 

will be very proud of the fact that we’ve done this. And we’d be 

happy to travel to Washington or anywhere else and tell that 

story. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the Premier can have his message 

that he takes to the South, but it needs to be backed up and 

reflected by the decisions that are in the budget. And when you 

go down, Mr. Chair, and promote your environmental record 

and then come home to the province and make a 73 per cent cut 

over two years to environmental assessment, environmental 

protection programs, Mr. Speaker, there is once again a 

disconnect between what the government is saying and what is 

the reality. 

 

Now carbon capture initiatives and research, Mr. Speaker, are 

hugely important. They’re important to the province and they’re 

important to the planet in terms of an overall strategy. But 

they’re part of an overall strategy, Mr. Speaker. And what’s 

missing from the Sask Party government is a long-term plan for 

more renewable power in the province. 

 

So my question to the Premier: if his goal and his intent is to 

promote Saskatchewan’s environmental record, if his goal, if 

they recognize that climate change is an issue — I know that 

the jury’s out on that for a number of members on the opposite 

side, whether they acknowledge that climate change is a reality 

— if that is a priority, if that is a concern, Mr. Speaker, then a 

long-term plan for transitions and expansion of renewable 

power is most certainly needed. Would that not make sense 

when promoting our plan abroad? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, this is a very 

good discussion to have because he represents a party whose 

record was a 70 per cent increase in emissions. And their 

answer was an empty office and vehicles in a parking lot. That 

was their answer. That’s what happened under your watch. 

 

We took office, Mr. Speaker, and we moved to act with respect 

to renewable energies, not just talk about them, but act. And so 

from 2008 to 2013, if the member wants to know, let’s talk 

about low carbon technologies in Saskatchewan, the 

investments made by this government: SaskPower Boundary 

dam 3 clean coal project, 1.24 billion; SaskPower and natural 

gas is a low carbon technology, certainly when you reference 

coal, $1.8 billion; biomass generation at SaskPower, $459 

million. 

 

[17:30] 

 

Mr. Chairman, it’s important for us to note that the biomass, the 

opportunities, the cogen opportunities in the forest sector allow 

us to source green energy, but in the bargain reanimate a pulp 

mill and a forestry asset and create jobs in Prince Albert, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

So it’s this great confluence between the right thing to do 

environmentally — low carbon technology, biomass, which the 

NDP never got around to — and create jobs in the forestry 

industry in Prince Albert, something that our members from 

Prince Albert have been working on. 

 

But the list goes on, Mr. Chairman: centennial wind power 

facility and other wind power sources, there’s been an increase 

in wind in our administration of hundreds of millions of dollars; 

heat recovery projects by SaskPower, $41 million; CCS [carbon 

capture and storage] research and development project at the 

Shand power plant, $60 million; and a partnership, a very 

dynamic partnership with a demonstration plant with Hitachi. 

 

Aquistore, the deep saline aquifer CO2 storage project at 

Boundary dam, $41 million; Weyburn-Midale CO2, and that’s a 

project from the NDP now, to be fair, $35.06 million added; 

other carbon reducing projects, the Go Green Fund, are now 

over $50 million; reforestation, 3.27; Sask biofuels up until 

now with changes coming, but $4.2 million. Mr. Chairman, the 

green energy procurement in government, point six million 

dollars. The low carbon technology training initiative at the 

University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina has 

been another two-plus million dollars. Mr. Chairman the list 

goes on and on. It includes hydro. It includes the Boundary dam 

project. Again the premise of the member’s question is wrong. 

 

The First Nations Power Authority, established by this 

government, where we want to work with First Nations as they 

bring forward ideas around renewable energy so they actually 

can benefit from it in an economic way. Mr. Chairman, the 

reality is this: that under the NDP you got some talk, an empty 

office and trucks in a parking lot. And on this side of the House 

you have $4.8 billion in low technology investment that is 

garnering interest the world over. Mr. Chairman, that’s the 

difference. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe it was last 

Saturday I was up with the member from Cumberland in La 

Ronge. And I was up there to attend the NORTEP [northern 

teacher education program] grad, which is a wonderful program 

that has done so much for the North over the years. 

 

And if we look at how the North has been treated by the Sask 

Party government we see many concerns, Mr. Speaker. We see 

poor treatment of the commercial fishing industry. We see the 

needs of trappers ignored. We also see, Mr. Speaker, the 

neglect of northern roads, whether it’s Wollaston Lake, whether 

it’s on the way to Cumberland House or Ile-a-La-Crosse. We 

see, Mr. Speaker, the North being taken for granted and not 

receiving the attention that it truly deserves. We also see human 

stories coming forward from the North. And we can think of 

Barbara Blyth, Mr. Chair, an individual who needed a care spot 

because of cancer, because of a broken foot — a 

recommendation from her home care worker, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’ve seen a concerning approach in how the Sask Party 

government views the North, specifically around the role of 

what is the best plan, what is the long-term sustainable plan that 

truly seizes the opportunity and recognizes the North as part of 

an asset to the province, as opposed to a liability, and 

recognizes that its people — whether they’re born into the 



3516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

richest family or poorest family in this province, whether 

they’re born in the North or the South — that they have 

opportunity to succeed, they have opportunity to receive a good 

education, they have an opportunity to participate. 

 

The Premier said, with respect to the North, that the only 

program that Aboriginal people needed was Cameco. And now 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, Cameco is a great company. It provides 

jobs. It supports our economy in a big way, and it is an 

important player in the North. And Saskatchewan is home to 

some very good corporate citizens, and we are appreciative of 

their role. And it’s important that they have a strong presence 

here in the province. But the North needs a lot more than 

Cameco, Mr. Speaker, to reach its full potential. The North 

needs a lot more than Cameco so that every child has the 

opportunity that they need and deserve. And it’s also worth 

noting, Mr. Speaker, that Cameco needs good education 

initiatives in the North. Cameco needs good roads in order to 

thrive and in order to provide many of the benefits that our 

economy receives through its activity. 

 

So my question to the Premier: why is there an absence of a 

long-term plan, a view of the North as being a huge asset, as 

opposed to a view of the North as being a liability, and the only 

solution, as the Premier said, is that Cameco is the answer for 

everyone. Why is he neglecting the important role that 

government can have and can play in ensuring that the North is 

successful? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Well it’s been a 

process tonight to make sure we clarify what the Leader of the 

Opposition’s saying and that we get the facts on the record. 

What he’s just said about my remarks with respect to Cameco 

are just wrong. They’re absolutely wrong. There’s a transcript 

of the speech; it’s available to the Leader of the Opposition. 

And I think it’s really incumbent on the Leader of the 

Opposition when he stands on the floor of the Assembly to 

make sure that the appropriate quote is read. 

 

Here’s what I did say, and I’m happy to stand by it. In fact I 

sent a letter to the editor to the Prince Albert newspapers to this 

extent. When you take a look at actually what Cameco has done 

in terms of their employment record, in terms of employing 

between 40 and 44 per cent of Aboriginal people, First Nations 

and Métis people in high-paying, good quality of jobs, when 

you consider what they have done, they’ve actually done more 

than any government program has ever done in this province. 

Period. That is my point. And they’ve done it, by the way, 

without government tax dollars. They’ve done it because it’s 

the right thing to do, because they’ve been able to get great 

professional workers as a result of this. And they are a 

world-leading company. That’s what I said. And I’d invite the 

Leader of the Opposition to review exactly what was said 

before he takes such licence as he unfortunately did just now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we know that northern issues are important for 

the whole province because of the resources that are available 

there for the people of the North, but they benefit everybody in 

Saskatchewan. And because of the special needs that exist with 

a very small population in a very large area, that’s posed 

challenges for this province for some time, long before our 

government came along. 

 

And so, Mr. Chairman, we have been investing in northern 

roads, in northern education, in northern health care. Mr. 

Chairman, in fact when we’ve changed the municipal 

revenue-sharing arrangement, the pools so to speak, we ensured 

that — and by the way revenue sharing, as the Leader of the 

Opposition will know, is way, way up for municipalities — we 

significantly increased revenue sharing for northern 

municipalities. In 2013-14, an increase of 19 per cent or $3.1 

million cash for those municipalities to deal with some of the 

needs that you’ve referenced. 

 

It’s also true in terms of infrastructure. $40 million to build, 

operate, maintain highways, airports, and the Wollaston Lake 

barge in northern Saskatchewan; $11 million in work that began 

last year, Mr. Chairman. As part of the work we need to move 

on a new bridge at Pelican Narrows. There’s the 914 Highway 

that’s very important to the economy and transportation in the 

North. On a per capita basis we invest over double in the North 

than what we invest in the rest of the province in terms of that 

kind of infrastructure. 

 

Some will say, well more needs to be done. I think probably 

they have said that down through the decades. That’s a fair 

comment. It’s a good debate to have. I do think it’s important 

for the government to be held accountable with respect to 

northern investment. And on that count we’re happy to explain 

what the record of the government is. We’re happy to share 

exactly what we’ve done. While we admit more work needs to 

happen, Mr. Chairman, I think the action we took with respect 

to northern revenue sharing, which was an historic increase of 

19 per cent — the first time they’ve ever had an increase like 

that — was undertaken by this side of the House. I hope that’s 

an indication of the priority we place on northern issues. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, I do have concerns with the 

priority placed, and we can go back to the discussion we had 

earlier on in the afternoon with respect to the recommendations 

from the task force. And while the task force recommendations 

are not exclusively addressing northern issues, they certainly 

have a huge influence on the North and a huge relevance to the 

North and the future of the North. So to have the Premier earlier 

on say that the recommendations, many of them will be 

ignored, when we think about the future of the North, with that 

comment I think that is concerning and something that deserves 

examination. 

 

In committee last week, Mr. Chair, the member for Lakeview 

asked about the date of the next election and an official from 

the Ministry of Justice said: 

 

. . . the answer to that isn’t quite as straightforward as it 

could be. As the member is aware, there was a provision 

that was passed that provided that, notwithstanding the 

fixed elections Act, if there was a federal writ period that 

was going to overlap with the provincial writ period, it 

could get pushed to the following April. So essentially 

we’re looking at the first week of November in ’15 or 

pushed over to April in ’16. 

 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3517 

And that’s from the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee on May 1st, 2013. 

 

So my question to the Premier: so since the answer about the 

next election date is not quite as straightforward as the 

legislation would suggest given the remark by the official, 

when will the Premier make it clear when exactly our next 

election will be? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chair, you know, this is 

actually a good debate to have, because under the NDP we 

could never have this debate. We could’ve stood up in the 

opposition benches and said when will . . . the next election 

would be, and they would’ve just laughed because there was no 

set elections. Because way back then in those days, games were 

played with the calling of an election. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think we’ve been very clear and the legislation 

is clear and the reason for the legislation is clear. Our 

preference is the first Monday in November every four years, 

period. But we know that in November of 2015, there will be a 

federal election that will be happening at the same time as a 

provincial election because they also have a set date. And so we 

were quite public about saying — and we didn’t hear any 

objections from the NDP at the time — that if the federal 

government would not move off of their set date, would not 

indicate . . . And by the way I talked to the Prime Minister 

about this and other premiers did as well, because other 

provinces have the same challenge. If the federal government 

wasn’t moving off the date, we can’t have a federal election and 

a provincial election at the same time. And so we set another 

date a few months later. The date is April 4th, 2016. That’s the 

date. That’s the latest possible date. 

 

Now if for whatever reason the federal government, there’s a 

federal election prior to the date, our legislation I believe 

reverts back to the original date. Moreover we revert back to a 

four-year, first Monday in November, after this anomaly of an 

April election potentially in 2016. And I don’t think I can be 

any clearer than that. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 

Premier for the explanation. I wasn’t suggesting that something 

untoward was occurring. It was simply providing, Mr. Speaker, 

information. With a fixed election date, knowing that there is a 

conflict, this is a question that many people have had especially 

as it relates to being open and transparent, Mr. Chair. 

 

This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, we’ve touched on a number of 

topics that are important, that have relevance to Saskatchewan 

families. We’ve looked at the area of seniors’ care, Mr. 

Speaker, talking about instances where individuals have had 

concerns, Mr. Chair, where they have not received the type of 

treatment they need. We think of the situation of Carrie. We 

think of the situation of Lynne. We think of the situation of 

Michael. Individuals who have come forward, Mr. Chair, 

because they have not been treated and they have not received 

services as they need to, that we haven’t made the care for 

seniors in our province the priority that it needs to be. 

We’ve also, Mr. Speaker, spent considerable time on the area of 

pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] education and the 

need to ensure that we are making the best steps, the need to 

ensure that we are thinking long term, that we are respecting 

educators who are in the classroom, and that we’re taking the 

best steps for our kids. We’ve talked about things like capping 

classroom sizes as one option in order to ensure the best 

possible opportunity for our children, and talking about an 

approach with educational professionals in the province that’s 

based on respect and it’s based on co-operation and working 

together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as an opposition we are committed to working 

with the government when it makes sense. And I think of 

Howard’s law as one example, an opportunity where we were 

able to come together, realize there’s some common sense 

legislation that’s in the best interests of all Saskatchewan 

people, and find some agreement on both sides of the House. I 

wish, Mr. Speaker, that same spirit in the olive branch that we 

extend with respect to Bill 85 would also be received by the 

Sask Party on this front. And I’m disappointed, Mr. Speaker. 

Today, by the Premier’s remarks, we see that is not going to 

occur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, we will most certainly shine a light on 

issues that need to be revealed and shown to the Saskatchewan 

people. It is our role as an opposition to hold the government to 

account. When there are times to co-operate, we will. But when 

things are off-track, when things are not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, that’s when we will stand up and we will 

most certainly speak out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my approach and the approach of the official 

opposition is not to change the things that are working well in 

the province. But we must recognize, Mr. Speaker, the areas 

where they are not working well, that we need to do better. The 

Saskatchewan people most certainly deserve to do better. 

 

We need a plan, Mr. Speaker, for sustainable growth. We need 

a long-term vision. We talked about it in the area of education, 

Mr. Speaker, and we talked about it in terms of our view of the 

North and how we should be treating and working with 

northerners, recognizing them as an asset and not a liability, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need a government that listens, a government that consults, 

and a government that works on the basis of common sense. 

And increasingly, Mr. Speaker, individuals in the province are 

having problems with the notion, with the double messages that 

are coming from the Sask Party government. At a time when 

the economy is doing well, people wonder why seniors aren’t 

receiving the care that they need. Families wonder why their 

kids are in a crowded classroom. People involved in our 

university campuses wonder why the billboards boast that times 

have never been better, but then they hear of program cuts. 

They hear of layoffs. They hear of tuition going up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this is the disconnect that we are seeing with respect to the 

message, what the congratulatory news releases say that are 

issued by government, and what Saskatchewan families, what 

Saskatchewan people are actually experiencing and actually 

feeling, Mr. Speaker. And you can absolutely believe, Mr. 



3518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2013 

Speaker, that as an opposition we will continue to come 

forward. We will continue to hold the government to account 

and ensure that the interests of Saskatchewan people are first 

and foremost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the economy is doing well, it’s concerning 

that the Sask Party government is failing on a number of fronts 

with respect to the services that are provided to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We can think of pre-K to 12. We can think of crowded 

classrooms. We can think of the crumbling gym here in Regina. 

We can think of the cases of the seniors, of the situations that 

our grandparents or our parents or our partners find themselves 

in, Mr. Speaker, not receiving the type of care that they need in 

order to have the dignity and the respect that they deserve in 

their golden years. 

 

My question to the Premier: why the increasing disconnect that 

we hear, Mr. Speaker, coming from the Sask Party 

government? We have billboards, we have news releases 

coming from the government saying that things have never 

been better, but the reality that people are experiencing when 

they think about the care for their seniors in a long-term care 

facility, when they think about the learning conditions for their 

child in a classroom, when they think about their activity on a 

university campus, there is a disconnect there. 

 

My question to the Premier: when the economy is doing well, 

why is the Sask Party government failing Saskatchewan people 

on these fronts? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank 

the Leader of the Opposition and the deputy leader for their 

questions tonight. I thank them for their work this session as 

well though I know we have a few days to go. It’s not quite 

over. I want to make sure I thank my officials before I forget to 

do that. I think I’ve done that in the past. I appreciate their 

support as well as the support of ministers who have helped me 

to answer some questions today that the Leader of the 

Opposition and the member for Rosemont have put. 

 

You know, in his summary — I assume that’s the summation 

— in his summation, the Leader of the Opposition talks a little 

bit about what this government does in terms of billboards or 

press releases. Well we’re not the first government to issue 

press releases to herald certain dates or events or 

accomplishments in the life of the province. 

 

I draw the Leader of the Opposition’s attention to a press 

release issued on the 26th of March 2003. It’s obviously 10 

years ago but it was right after some population numbers were 

released. And his party was bragging about what was 

happening with population numbers, except here’s the press 

release. It said, “Out migration at lowest level in four years.” 

 

And in the quote, the Minister of Industry says, “Our economic 

momentum gives us confidence for the future.” Our economic 

momentum. See, you know, you talk about a disconnect. There 

was a real disconnect there. The NDP then and still consider 

falling, momentum. 

In the new Saskatchewan, people call that gravity, and they 

expect better. They really do. They know that this province, 

with all of its resources, should be the leader that it has become 

in the country, not necessarily because of the government, but I 

hope we have helped it along with our policies. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition is asking for a long-term plan. 

It’s exactly what we released this fall, a six-point plan for 

growth that is sustainable in the province with targets around 

the areas where we, Mr. Chairman, want to see the dividends of 

growth applied in education and in health care, Mr. Chairman, 

because we understand on this side of the House that growth for 

the sake of growth isn’t really the point. 

 

But rather we want the economy to grow so the tax base is 

broader and we can eliminate a 440 wait-list, and we can build 

record levels of education infrastructure with more needed. 

That we can invest in health care; that we can hire 1,000 more 

nurses and we can have 200 more doctors working; that we can 

increase the seats at the university in terms of the College of 

Medicine; that we can provide for increases in the highways 

budget and massive increases in revenue sharing for 

municipalities — it’s all really part of the plan for growth that 

we’ve had. And that’s going to be sustained into the long term. 

 

And I don’t agree with the Leader of the Opposition. I think the 

people of Saskatchewan understand that there’s going to be, 

from time to time, people who come forward who have fallen 

through the cracks. And they have a job to raise them, and we 

have a job to raise them. And then we have a job to deal with 

them. I think they understand that. 

 

I think they also though understand that whoever the 

government is, that’s going to happen. And what they truly 

want from a government is a long-term vision worthy of this 

province, a long-term vision that understands that everything 

that member wants to do with public finances — and he’s 

spending a lot in his first month or so as leader — has to come 

from an economy, has to come from a tax base. I think that’s 

where the disconnect is. 

 

The disconnect in this province is between the NDP I think and 

maybe even the new Leader of the Opposition, when all 

through three hours of estimates I think he mentions growth in 

this province once, twice, maybe three times. People in 

Saskatchewan are talking about growth. Some of them are 

referencing the challenges of growth, that we have to deal with 

them. But mostly it’s a good thing. Mostly people understand 

that when we’re growing, when we’re leading in so many 

respects in the country, it at least gives us a better chance to 

deal with all of the social issues, to provide better health care. 

That’s the complete vision. That’s the complete package, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

And we know that we have more work to do in any number of 

areas. We know there’s going to be mistakes from time to time. 

But, Mr. Chairman, we’re not turning back on this vision we 

have for a province that is growing, and more importantly, the 

rest of the sentence: what do we do with dividends of that 

growth? 

 

I think those priorities are on broad display. I think there is a 

connection as a result with the people of this province, one that 



May 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3519 

we’ll never take for granted, one that we’re going to work hard 

to earn that connection, one that we will work hard to earn 

every single day. Mr. Chairman. That will be the priorities. 

That will be the priority of this side of the House. It’s that 

complete vision and one that is worthy of a province. 

 

We’re not the wee province. We are not a have-not province, 

Mr. Chairman. We’re not a province for whom growth at the 

national average is a statistical impossibility. Those were all 

descriptors when those folks sat on this side of the House. 

That’s the disconnect. It was then and it is now, and we’re 

going to work hard to ensure that it doesn’t repeat itself. Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 

Premier for the exchanges that we had this afternoon and thank 

the officials who assisted with responses that we received. And 

thank all members for their encouragement, sometimes across 

the floor and sometimes through a note or something like that. 

So I wish everyone a good evening. Thank you. 

 

The Chair: — Seeing no other members wishing to enter into 

the debate, we will proceed to vote the estimates. Subvote 

(EX01), central management and services in the amount of 

$5,814,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX07), Premier’s office in the 

amount of $590,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX04), cabinet planning in 

the amount of $1,005,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Cabinet secretariat, (EX05) in the amount of 

$538,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Subvote (EX03), communications office in the 

amount of $3,175,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX08), house business and 

research in the amount of $434,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX06), members of executive 

council in the amount of $131,000. That is statutory. No vote is 

required. 

 

Subvote (EX10), intergovernmental affairs in the amount of 

$4,556,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX11), francophone affairs in 

the amount of $901,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Lieutenant Governor’s office, subvote 

(EX12) in the amount of $674,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 

months ending March 31st, 2014, the following sums for 

Executive Council, $17,687,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. There being no further business before 

this committee, I would invite a member to move that the 

committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Okay, now being past the hour 

of 5 o’clock, this House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. — just 

making sure everybody was paying attention — 10 a.m. 

Thursday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:58.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3477 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3477, 3478 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3477 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3477 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3478 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3478 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3478, 3479 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3478 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3478 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3479 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3479 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3479 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3479 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3479 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3479 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3480 

  The Chair  ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3512 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3480 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3480 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3480 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3480 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship Recipient 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3480 

 Exceptional Attendance at Community School 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3481 

 Celebrating Armoury Building’s 100th Anniversary 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3481 

 Youth Hockey Championships 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3481 

 Estevan Rotary Club’s 90th Anniversary 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3482 

 International Men’s March 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3482 

 World Ovarian Cancer Day 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3482 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for People with Disabilities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3482 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3483 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3483 

 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3484 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3484 

 Appointments to Boards and Agencies 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3485 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3485 

 Forest Fire Monitoring 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3486 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3486 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3487 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3487 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3488 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3488 



 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3488 

Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3489 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3489 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3489 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3490 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3490, 3511 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3509 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




