




















































Hansard: November 06, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3869 

 November 6, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Page 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to introduce to the 

Assembly a Page for this session, Keshia Cooper. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I would 

like to introduce some special guests that are seated in your 

gallery: Margaret Knowles, the senior vice-president of 

development for Morguard Investments Ltd.; Nathan Worbets, 

the senior development manager for Morguard; and Dale 

Griesser from Regina here is a president/broker with Avison 

Young. 

 

Margaret, Nathan, and Dale are here today to mark an important 

milestone in the development of the Global Transportation Hub. 

Our new partnership includes facilities that are under 

construction at the hub right now and many more 

developments, we hope, in the future. Margaret, we have more 

land for sale if you’re interested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a great event out at the Global 

Transportation Hub yesterday that my colleague, the member 

for Regina Qu’Appelle will be elaborating a little bit more on in 

a member’s statement. But I would ask all members of the 

legislature to welcome these people to the legislature and 

welcome the investment that they’re making in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to join with 

the minister opposite and welcome the leaders here today with 

Morguard Investments and thank them for the investment that 

they’re making in our province out at the Global Transportation 

Hub. I was tracking some of the announcements as it’s come 

forward, and I followed the reports here yesterday as well. 

 

So thank you for that investment and certainly encouraged by 

the work that you’re conducting. As well, a warm hello to Mr. 

Dale Griesser. Welcome to your legislature. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like 

to introduce a very special young lady in my life. Seated in your 

gallery is my granddaughter, Bailee. 

 

Bailee is a grade 9 student at the Estevan Comprehensive 

school, and today is the day that students get to go to work with 

their parents. Bailee has went other years to work with her 

mother, and this year she asked if she could shadow me. And 

I’m delighted to have her here, and I ask all members to join me 

in welcoming Bailee to her legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s in the same vein that I’d like to recognize a grade 9 

student from Walter Murray in Saskatoon. She’s a member of 

the girls’ senior soccer team. She’s involved in a number of 

activities regarding community service. She does some 

babysitting. She plays the guitar pretty well and getting better. I 

think she took some lessons last night at the concert of Deep 

Dark Woods that she convinced her dad to take her to. And 

most especially I’m very, very pleased to be able to introduce 

Jacqueline Norris to this Assembly. She probably had another 

option today — her mother is supervising comprehensive 

exams, and that was to sit for five or six hours in complete 

silence — and she opted to come and join us in the legislature. 

So I would ask all members to introduce Jacqueline to her 

legislature. 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: — Before we get to petitions, I have a message 

or a note from the Lieutenant Governor that I would read. It 

says: 

 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 

 

Pursuant to section 67 of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007, I hereby inform the 

Assembly of the membership of the Board of Internal 

Economy effective October 10, 2013: 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont, Chair 

Hon. Nancy Heppner (executive council nominee) 

Hon. June Draude (executive council nominee) 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison, MLA (government caucus 

nominee) 

Doreen Eagles, MLA (government caucus nominee) 

David Forbes, MLA (opposition caucus nominee) 

Warren McCall, MLA (opposition caucus nominee) 

 

Yours sincerely, 

 

Vaughn Solomon Schofield 

Lieutenant Governor 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I so table. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for reasonable funding so all 

Saskatchewan students can do well. And we know classes in 



3870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

Saskatchewan schools are growing so fast that many classes 

have well over 30 students in them and many classes are now 

being taught in hallways and boot rooms. Students who need 

support for educational assistants and other resources are not 

getting this support because of chronic underfunding. New 

Canadian students are often not receiving as much support as 

they need for learning English. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the government to immediately 

increase financial support for all Saskatchewan students, 

including resources to limit class sizes, to provide 

resources for students with special needs, to support 

English as an additional language, and to provide more 

support for Aboriginal education. 

 

[Mr. Speaker], as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever 

pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many northern residents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gymnasium at 

Sacred Heart Community School. The petitioners point out that 

the gym at Sacred Heart has played an important role in the 

school’s efforts to become a literacy leader, having served as a 

gathering place for the very successful reading assemblies and 

reading nights. 

 

They point out that Sacred Heart Community School is the 

largest school in North Central with 450-plus students, 75 per 

cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. They point out that 

the enrolment has increased by 100 students over the past four 

years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 

improving. And they also finally point out, Mr. Speaker, that as 

a matter of basic fairness and common sense, Sacred Heart 

Community School needs a gym. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to immediately 

commit to the replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred 

Heart Community School. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens from Canora and Perdue in 

this fine province of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Sisters in Spirit Candlelight Vigil 

 

Mr. Vermette: — On October 4th I was able to partake in a 

spiritual candlelight vigil at the Kihkinahk Friendship Centre. I 

was honoured to give opening comments on behalf of myself 

and my family. The vigil was hosted by the local Native 

Women’s Association. It started with the opening prayer, and 

the New Dawn Drum Group performed a drum song. These 

four girls are from Lac La Ronge Indian Band. 

 

This is an annual event designed to offer support to grieving 

families and friends of missing Aboriginal women and girls. 

The violence experienced by Aboriginal women and girls in 

Canada is a national tragedy and a black eye on our 

international reputation. I support the Sisters in Spirit in calling 

for a national inquiry. 

 

I would like to thank all members of the La Ronge Native 

Women’s Association for organizing the candlelight vigil. I ask 

all members of this Assembly to join me in recognizing this 

important event. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Service of Remembrance 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

wreath was laid this morning at the Saskatchewan War 

Memorial as part of the government’s annual service of 

remembrance for the public service. Today we gather as a 

public service and as a province to remember the deeds of those 

who have given the ultimate sacrifice so we may live in a land 

that knows peace and prosperity. Mr. Speaker, I, along with all 

Canadians, look back in awe at the sacrifices that a generation 

of Canadians made, not only for our country, but for the world. 

 

To mark the 60th anniversary of the armistice of the Korean 

War, this year has been declared the Year of the Korean War 

Veteran. We must never forget that more than 26,000 

Canadians travelled halfway around the world to stand up for 

their rights, nor the 506 Canadians who paid the price of 

freedom with their lives. We remember these brave women and 

men by wearing poppies, attending ceremonies, and visiting 

memorials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to express my deepest appreciation for the 

sacrifices of the women and men that served in the past and 

acknowledge the dedication and bravery of current soldiers 

serving around the world. I, along with all Canadians, owe them 

for all the great quality of life we have here today. Lest we 

forget. 

 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3871 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Walk to Breakfast and Extreme School Makeover 

Challenge 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This September I was 

honoured to take part in the seventh annual Walk to Breakfast 

which took place in my constituency at E.D. Feehan High 

School. E.D. Feehan was chosen as the winner of the Mosaic 

Extreme School Makeover Challenge. 

 

The Extreme School Makeover Challenge encourages 

grassroots initiatives that promote student nutrition and health. 

E.D. Feehan has developed a plan that includes teaching 

cooking skills to grade 9 and 10 students who will be 

responsible for the lunch program in their school. This will 

provide them with the knowledge and skills that they can carry 

forward in both their school and home lives.  

 

“We believe that if our students are well fed they will be more 

successful in school,” said Feehan principal Brandon Stroh. He 

goes on to say, “What makes our program unique is having 

students involved in preparing meals for their peers. They are 

learning valuable skills that could lead to a job and will 

definitely help them make healthier choices.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Walk to Breakfast encourages all schools and 

students to help create awareness in their community on the 

importance of good nutrition and physical activity. Research 

tells us that children who are well nourished perform better in 

school, are more energetic, and have longer attention spans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

E.D. Feehan High School in winning the Mosaic Extreme 

School Makeover Challenge and to the Breakfast for Learning 

program for all their hard work in helping bring good nutrition 

to over 28,000 students in over 300 nutrition programs here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Lieutenant Governor’s Military Service Pin 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had 

the honour of attending the launch of the Lieutenant Governor’s 

Military Service Pin at Government House. The Honourable 

Vaughn Solomon Schofield was accompanied by our Premier 

and Canadian Chief of Defence Staff General Tom Lawson, 

both of whom provided remarks at the ceremony. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor’s Military Service Pin 

symbolizes the gratitude of the Crown and the people of 

Saskatchewan for those who have served with honour and 

valour. The pin is available to current Canadian Armed Forces 

members, both regular and the reserve force; Canadian Armed 

Forces veterans; and current and retired members of Canadian 

police forces who have served in military operations. Several 

inaugural recipients were presented with the Lieutenant 

Governor’s Military Service Pin at the launch event, including 

the member from Wood Mountain who, as members will know, 

is a retired Royal Canadian Air Force lieutenant colonel whose 

service included leading the world-famous Snowbirds team. 

 

Remarks were also given by Lance Sergeant Denis Chisholm, a 

World War II veteran; Lieutenant Colonel Ken Garbutt who 

served in Korea; and Captain Gillian Dulle who recently 

returned from two tours of duty in Afghanistan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe a great debt of thanks to the Lieutenant 

Governor for spearheading this very important and timely 

initiative. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

recognizing the recipients of the Military Service Pin and 

thanking them for their service to our country. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Global Transportation Hub Groundbreaking Ceremony 

 

Ms. Ross: — I rise in the Assembly today to talk about the 

official groundbreaking ceremony held yesterday at the GTH 

[Global Transportation Hub] site to signal the beginning of 

development with Morguard Investments Limited. The GTH 

and Morguard finalized an agreement for Morguard to build and 

lease world-class facilities for the transportation and 

distribution sector. The agreement includes the purchase of 50 

acres of land, another 50 acres in 2014, and an option for 

additional land in future years. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Morguard’s senior vice-president for development, Margaret 

Knowles, remarked on our province’s opportunity by stating 

that “The tremendous growth and prosperity that you folks have 

been generating here has caught the attention of us less 

fortunate in Ontario.” Ms. Knowles further commented on the 

GTH, stating that “The foresight that has gone in here, there’s 

just nothing like it.” 

 

And to mark the beginning of our strong relationship with our 

partners, Morguard, Avison Young, PCL Construction, and the 

Healthcare of Ontario Pension Plan announced that they will be 

donating $10,000 to the Regina Trades and Skills Centre. This 

generous donation will assist several young people in achieving 

their goals in attaining a skilled trade while developing and 

alleviating Saskatchewan's skilled trade worker shortage. 

 

Morguard leads the Trans-Link Logistics Centre project team, 

partnered with PCL Construction Management on construction, 

and Avison Young on leading the leasing. The first two 

buildings of the centre total 142,000 square feet, targeting a 

LEED [leadership in energy and environmental design] silver 

designation delivering for occupancy in spring of 2014. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Investment in Trades and Technology Centre  

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in the Assembly today to share some exciting news from 



3872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

my constituency. Yesterday the Mosaic company announced a 

$1.225 million investment in support of Parkland College’s 

Trades and Technology Centre in Yorkton. I had the pleasure of 

attending and speaking at the event on behalf of the Minister of 

Advanced Education and acknowledging Mosaic for their kind 

contribution. Thanks to Mosaic’s gift, contributions to the 

college’s capital campaign now total 4.79 million. 

 

Following the announcement, Bruce Bodine, vice-president of 

Mosaic’s Esterhazy operations, commented: 

 

Investing in developing a skilled workforce supports 

growth and sustainability. For communities and industry 

alike, long-term success relies on attracting and retaining 

people in the areas where we operate. 

 

Parkland College president, Dr. Fay Myers, graciously thanked 

Mosaic for their generous contribution adding: 

 

Mosaic’s donation is further proof that colleges build 

communities and communities build colleges. It will add 

strength to Saskatchewan and create wonderful new 

opportunities for the people in the Parkland region. 

 

Parkland College’s Trades and Technology Centre is designed 

to bring new programs and services to the Parkland Regional 

College and to help sustain the economic growth of east central 

Saskatchewan. The facility will provide the space to train more 

than 350 skilled graduates per year and upgrade the skills of 

2,000 workers annually. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to help me acknowledge Mosaic 

for their investment in Saskatchewan and its people, and thank 

the Parkland College for their commitment to growing their 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Saskatchewan Family Physician of the Year 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

excited to rise in the House today to recognize a remarkable 

constituent of mine. Dr. Werner Oberholzer, who practises in 

Radville, won Saskatchewan’s Family Physician of the Year 

award from The College of Family Physicians of Canada. Also 

known as the Reg L. Perkin Award, this honour is presented to 

the top family physician in each province. The formal award 

ceremony takes place on Saturday as part of Family Doctor 

Week in Canada celebrations, which runs from November 4th 

to November 9th. 

 

With a motto of “put patients first, always,” Dr. Oberholzer has 

long been known for providing exceptional rural family 

medicine in his hometown. He was honoured as Saskatchewan 

Physician of the Year in 2009, received the Saskatchewan 

Health Care Excellence Award as well as the Dennis Kendel 

Distinguished Service Award. He and his wife, Dr. Nelleke 

Helms, also a family physician, have been practising family 

medicine at the Radville Marian Health Centre since 1999. 

 

In addition to practising, Dr. Oberholzer serves on various 

committees and groups within the medical community and is an 

associate professor at the University of Saskatchewan where he 

mentors students and graduates of family medicine. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Dr. 

Werner Oberholzer on this great honour, and thank him for his 

tremendous service to our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Special Care Standards and Staffing 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government still 

hasn’t given a decent answer as to why it watered down the 

seniors care regulations and completely got rid of minimum 

care standards. They claim, Mr. Speaker, that the standards 

were out of date. Well we agree, Mr. Speaker. That’s not reason 

to get rid of them; that’s reason to strengthen them. They claim, 

Mr. Speaker, that the standards weren’t good enough for levels 

3 and 4 care. Well we agree, Mr. Speaker, but that’s not reason 

to scrap them. That’s reason to make them even better. 

 

My question to the Premier: will this government revisit its 

decision and bring in up-to-date, relevant care standards for 

seniors here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Like 

many . . . Like a number of other provinces in the federation, 

our province is moving to individualized care for residents in 

long-term care facilities in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

take that care very, very seriously. Witness the important 

changes that have been announced by the Minister of Health, 

including a $10 million urgent fund to deal with some pressing 

issues, as well as a longer term vision around greater home care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just finished debating the Speech from the 

Throne where we’re expanding the Home First home care 

program to two other communities beyond Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. I would also note that the new house calls program, 

which is new in the province, is going to be especially 

important for seniors, Mr. Speaker. We take the issue very 

seriously, and we back up words with actions. 

 

And with respect to standard of care, our expectation is that that 

individualized care designed by the front-line health care 

workers is and will be the very, very best possible care for 

seniors in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when we look at the actions the 

government has taken, even the CEO [chief executive officer] 

of the Saskatoon Health Region says the steps that this 

government has taken to address seniors’ care doesn’t get to the 

root of the problem that seniors face. 

 

The Premier brought up the issue of individualized care. And 

that’s another reason that he’s provided on why this government 

would make the decision to remove minimum standards — 

because of individualized care. Mr. Speaker, that’s a completely 

bizarre rationale. By that logic, a minimum wage would prevent 

anyone from making more money. But that’s not how 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3873 

minimums work, Mr. Speaker. Minimums act as a floor. 

Minimum care standards do not limit individualized care. What 

they do guarantee, Mr. Speaker, that seniors in this province can 

expect a minimum level — a level of respect, a level of dignity, 

a level of safety. 

 

To the Premier: will he revisit his government’s decision and 

establish a reasonable floor when it comes to the care of our 

grandmas and grandpas, of our moms and dads? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the care of seniors who are in our care across this 

province is certainly a high priority for this government, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why we instituted the first review of our 

long-term care facilities in this province’s history, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we made the report public in full, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are dedicated to addressing this issue that we 

face in long-term care, for residents of today but also those in 

the future, Mr. Speaker. We believe, Mr. Speaker, by 

individualizing a plan around each and every resident within 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker, is a more appropriate way to 

deliver care to a senior, Mr. Speaker, that is in our care. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s responsive to their individual needs. 

 

Knowing that we have 8,700 residents at any given point within 

the health care system living in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, 

each of them have their individual needs, and we believe that 

we need to treat them as individuals as if they were living in 

their own home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when concerns came forward last 

spring, this was the minister who said there was no cause for 

alarm. This is the government, Mr. Speaker, that was forced 

into doing a report. When the report was completed, this is the 

government who said they weren’t even sure if they were going 

to release the report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the concerns that they have raised, Mr. 

Speaker, when we look at the actions they have done, Mr. 

Speaker, here we have the removal of minimum standards and 

then using this bizarre rationale that it is somehow about 

individualized care. 

 

We can also look, Mr. Speaker, at what other jurisdictions have 

done and what other studies have said and what experts have 

said. We know that one of the largest studies was commissioned 

by the US [United States] Congress and it was conducted by the 

Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services. It looked at 5,000 

seniors’ care facilities and it found that 4.1 hours of care per 

day is the minimum level needed to avoid poor resident 

outcomes. 

 

So let’s get this straight. We have, Mr. Speaker, this 

government removing the two-hour minimum. We have 

experts, Mr. Speaker, saying that four hours is the level that is 

more ideal, but instead of strengthening standards what we see 

from this government is the scrapping of minimum standards 

and a bizarre rationale about individualized care. 

My question to the Premier: will he listen to the experts? Will 

he admit that his government made a mistake and will he 

reinstate minimum care standards for seniors here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 

member opposite would reference a study from the United 

States. Mr. Speaker, let’s look closer to home here within 

Canada. In Ontario a recent study came out over the last . . . in 

2008. It says, and I quote: 

 

I am also convinced that any approach must be sensitive to 

the particular circumstances of each LTC home and the 

needs of their residents. Consequently, for this reason, I’m 

not recommending that there should be a regulation under 

The Long-Term Care Homes Act 2007 that provides a 

provincial staffing ratio or staffing standard [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

It speaks to the specific circumstances of each resident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have 156 facilities in this province that provide 

long-term care. Some of them are newer. Some of them are 

aging facilities. In some cases it may take staff to . . . Because 

of some of the circumstances, either of the resident or perhaps 

of the equipment available, Mr. Speaker, it may take a half hour 

to provide a bath for a resident. It may take an hour to provide a 

bath for a resident. Does the Leader of the Opposition believe 

that the resident that it takes an hour to bathe has had twice the 

care of somebody that would take half that time, Mr. Speaker? 

That’s the problem, Mr. Speaker, with the minimum hours. It 

doesn’t speak to the specific circumstances of every person. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this argument that we should 

scrap minimum standards because of the need for 

individualized care is horribly flawed, Mr. Speaker. Why can’t 

we have, why can’t we have a base of care for people, and then 

let’s have the individualized plans so that for those who need 

better bathing, Mr. Speaker, can receive it? Does this 

government actually think that people believe that if they’re not 

getting a bath once a week as they should, if they’re being 

forced to soil themselves in their bed, if they’re not getting 

meals like they need to because there isn’t staff there to help 

them eat, do they really think that individualized plans are 

taking place, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We have a minimum wage in this province so that we know a 

base level that people get paid. And, Mr. Speaker, we are happy 

when people get paid more than the minimum wage, but we 

ensure that there is a floor. And we should ensure that there is a 

floor and a base level for care for seniors here in the province. 

My question to the Premier: why is he using this bizarre 

rationale that individualized care somehow makes minimum 

care standards irrelevant? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, to the member, the Leader 

of the Opposition’s question, I would say that in terms of the 

regulations that we did change, what they have not yet 



3874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

acknowledged is that those regulations go back to the 

mid-1960s, Mr. Speaker. They spoke to a time when residents 

within long-term care were considered what we would consider 

today level 1 and level 2. When they made the decision in the 

1990s to scrap level 1 and level 2 from long-term care, what did 

they not do, Mr. Speaker? They didn’t adjust the minimum 

hours, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they left those in place even 

though it spoke to a different time. 

 

What we believe and what other provinces are moving towards, 

Mr. Speaker, is personalizing the care, ensuring that there is a 

plan in place for every single resident. What we have in place, 

Mr. Speaker, is a policy that within 14 days of moving into 

long-term care, there is a plan put in place based on the specific 

circumstances of that resident. It’s updated on a quarterly basis 

to ensure that it is in keeping with the needs of that particular 

resident, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, not only is that the case in 

terms of what was recommended in Ontario; as well in British 

Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my first question recognized that 

the two hours per day was not up to date. We agree with that, 

but that’s not a reason to scrap it; that’s a reason to make it 

better, Mr. Speaker. This government has watered down the 

regulations. This government has removed any reference to 

sufficient staffing, Mr. Speaker. And then we see the care crisis 

that seniors have here in the province. We hear, Mr. Speaker, 

the heartbreaking stories that families face when they are 

confronted with the reality that their loved ones have in many 

care facilities because of the chronic short-staffing. 

 

We have nurses in the province, Mr. Speaker, saying that they 

are very fearful for patients’ safety because of the lack of 

staffing, Mr. Speaker, and the lack of care. We have experts, 

Mr. Speaker, studies saying that four hours is a more ideal level 

than two hours. But what do we see from this government? 

Movement in the opposite direction — completely removing 

the floor, removing the base. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier: if he stubbornly 

refuses to actually regulate and ensure a base level for seniors, 

will he at least establish a target? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated what was 

the recommendation in Ontario in 2008. Here’s a 

recommendation from British Columbia in 2008: “Research 

supports that [and I quote] no specific ratios or levels to indicate 

the minimum or maximum levels of staff that are required for 

quality resident care.” The report goes on to say that . . . BC 

[British Columbia] reports that their decision are 

evidence-based, and I quote: 

 

Staffing decisions developed for publicly funded 

residential care should be made following consideration of 

many variables that positively affect resident and staff 

outcomes and, once made, should be evaluated to ensure 

the level and mix of staff result in positive resident and 

staff outcomes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re doing in Saskatchewan, 

looking at the resident as an individual, based on their own care 

needs, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we believe that that’s the 

proper model for residents in our care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the excuse that this government 

got rid of minimum care standards in order to allow for 

individualized care is absolutely ridiculous. We have heard 

repeatedly about seniors in care facilities not even getting basic 

care, let alone individualized care, so this government spin 

makes absolutely no sense. 

 

And instead of addressing the real problems and instead of 

restoring appropriate minimum care standards and ensuring that 

appropriate staff is in place, this government’s only solution has 

been to create a one-time payment fund. But we’re hearing from 

health regions that this is just a drop in the bucket. It will 

address some small problems, but it won’t address the larger 

underlying causes. 

 

To the minister: when will this government address the 

short-staffing crisis in seniors’ care and in health care in this 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it was on October 

1st where we released the results of the CEOs’ tours of 

long-term care facility. Mr. Speaker, I would have the 

expectation that the members opposite would’ve had in that 

time enough time to read the entire report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While there are some parts of this province and some facilities 

that do have some staffing issues — and we’ve committed to 

looking at those, Mr. Speaker, through our $10 million Urgent 

Issue Action Fund, Mr. Speaker — that wasn’t the case in every 

single long-term care facility, as the members would suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, partly because we have worked to address 

long-term care staffing issues over the first six years of this 

government’s term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Keeping in mind that there’s the same number of long-term care 

facilities, Mr. Speaker, keeping in mind that there’s roughly the 

same number of beds, Mr. Speaker, in long-term care, we’ve 

increased the full-time equivalents within long-term care by 700 

in the last six years, Mr. Speaker. That includes an increase, Mr. 

Speaker, when you look at RNs [registered nurse] and LPNs 

[licensed practical nurse], 13.8 per cent, and a 10 per cent 

increase overall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the CEO of the Prince Albert 

Parkland Health Region recognizes that this government’s plan 

is not sufficient to actually address the seniors’ care crisis. She 

says the P.A. [Prince Albert] Health Region is going to try to 

make the business case for some more lifts and some staff 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3875 

training, but she isn’t confident that the region’s identified 

needs will be met through this one-time payment fund. 

 

The CEO knows that the needs in her health region and in all 

health regions are tremendous, and that this one-time fund will 

only go so far. A one-time fund cannot hire more permanent 

staff, and that is what is needed. To the minister: why doesn’t 

this government have a real plan to address the short-staffing 

crisis in seniors’ care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly do have a plan 

to address the issues within long-term care facilities within this 

province, Mr. Speaker. The beginning of that was to actually 

identify what our challenges are in long-term care. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve done that through the CEOs’ tour. Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated on October 1st when we reported on the findings of 

that, we’ve put in place $10 million, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

that is to address the urgent issues that have been identified in 

that report, Mr. Speaker. What I indicated publicly at that time 

is we would look to see, Mr. Speaker, how many of those 

challenges that the $10 million can alleviate and then make 

decisions going forward into the future, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

also going to bring together stakeholders in December for a 

two-day visioning session, Mr. Speaker, to look at the future of 

long-term care. 

 

Unlike, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite who closed 16 

long-term care facilities, kicked out level 1 and level 2 out of 

long-term care, closed 1,200 beds, Mr. Speaker, and put a 

proposal before the people of this province to drastically raise 

long-term care fees in this province for our seniors — we’re not 

going to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the CEO of the P.A. 

Health Region that is raising concerns. We have already heard 

from the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region who said that the 

real problem is the level of staffing. Maura Davies says that this 

government’s one-time payment fund “won’t ultimately address 

the larger issue of adequate staffing or the condition of some of 

our facilities.” 

 

So now we have the CEOs of two of our largest health regions 

saying that this government’s plan won’t go far enough and it 

won’t address the real problems in seniors’ care. To the 

minister: they know what the problems are. When will we see 

real solutions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, well we are seeing real 

solutions. We’re seeing $10 million in an Urgent Issue Action 

Fund to address some of the challenges that were raised in the 

CEO tour, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a renewal of long-term care facilities 

across this province: 13 in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 

three of them I believe are already open; one in Saskatoon 

which the members had a hard time supporting that one, Mr. 

Speaker; and the replacement of three long-term care facilities 

in Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, right now, either through 

construction, planning, or completion, we are approaching 10 

per cent of our long-term care facilities being rebuilt by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region also had 

this to say — which I don’t believe was in the member’s quote 

— on September 27th: “The issue isn’t so much funding as 

having the right mix of services in the right place.” Right now 

that’s the mismatch we’re dealing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to try to address that going forward in the future. 

 

But I will remind the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, of their 

record: 16 long-term care facilities closed, 1,200 beds closed, 

level 1 and level 2 removed from long-term care, and a 

proposal, Mr. Speaker, to drastically raise long-term care rates 

for seniors across this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC–CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government failed to 

answer in the House the question yesterday as to whether they 

retained all records, files — electronic, hard copy, or otherwise 

— of IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre for 

geologic storage of CO2]. But they admitted to the media 

they’re in the possession of files and records. 

 

Can the minister or the Premier confirm to the House today, 

when this government stepped in to oversee the wind-down of 

IPAC, did this government retain everything or did they alter, 

dispose of, shred any of the contents that may now be relevant 

to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] fraud 

investigation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite needs to know that we didn’t step in to shut 

down IPAC. IPAC had a five-year term and that term was up, 

Mr. Speaker. And no, there was no interference in the 

wind-down of IPAC nor in the containment of the information. 

The financial records, the personnel records, and the HR 

[human resources] records are all in the possession of CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] at their 

Regina office, and all other records, Mr. Speaker, are in the 

Regina offices of the Ministry of the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when troubles emerged, 

including conflicts of interest and allegations of wasted 

taxpayers’ money, this Premier and that cabinet failed to get to 

the bottom of this file. When it comes to IPAC, one of the 

Premier’s closest advisers was there every step of the way and 

surely provided guidance on the matter and would have shown 

him that any of the reports brought forward were inconclusive 

and did not exonerate anyone from wrongdoing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has dismissed accountability 



3876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

every step of the way. It’s past time for them to take this waste 

seriously and this whole affair seriously. Will that government 

finally act to locate all of the IPAC records referenced here 

today in the government’s possession and immediately turn all 

of them over to the RCMP fraud investigation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, all of the records are 

fully available to the RCMP. They know their contact person is 

the president and CEO of CIC. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member also knows that the accusations were 

made while IPAC was under the management of the University 

of Regina. The cheques were being paid by the University of 

Regina at the time. He knows that when the government 

discovered or government members on the board discovered 

that there were difficulties, the funding to the university was 

suspended. There was a forensic audit ordered, Mr. Speaker. 

There was an independent IT [information technology] 

consultant that was hired to review the value of the IT 

equipment, Mr. Speaker. The funding control was taken away 

from the U of R [University of Regina] as well as the 

management control, Mr. Speaker, and there was a severed 

relationship with the IT company they were dealing with. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Educational Assistants and Other Resources in the Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, switching gears just a bit, 

educational assistants are critical for our kids, for students who 

need one-on-one attention, for students with intensive needs, 

and for the growing number of English as an additional 

language students in our classrooms. Mr. Speaker, having EAs 

[educational assistants] in classrooms is also critical for those 

students who don’t need extra help because they need and 

deserve teachers who devote his or her full attention to teaching 

the class and not being pulled in all directions. 

 

My question to the Minister of Education: has the government 

come around to supporting the critical role of educational 

assistants in today’s classrooms? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

question. Directly to answer the question, I would place a great 

deal of value on the services provided by educational assistants. 

They were working in the school system when I was a trustee 

and when I was a board Chair. We value and respect those 

services and continue to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite and advise the 

House that there has been an increase in each and every year to 

the overall operating grant for school divisions. Since 

November 2007, there has been an increase of some 23 per cent 

in operating funding. This is over and above the $600 million 

record capital investment and $165 million historic relief for 

property tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we continue to provide the services and the 

funding that are necessary to ensure that our schools are able to 

deliver good services to our students. These services are 

provided through a variety of different professionals within the 

classroom: psychologists, therapists, and a variety of different 

supports that are there. There are high-needs children that 

require special assistance, and we’re going to continue to ensure 

that they are receiving the necessary funding. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government cut about 

300 full-time equivalent educational assistants over a three-year 

period out of our schools, out of our kids’ lives. Since EAs 

typically don’t work full-time, Mr. Speaker, that’s probably 

more like 600 caring professionals that this government took 

away from kids who need them. A growing student population 

should be celebrated, but it also comes with a need to provide 

more resources, including EAs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are 1,235 more students in Regina compared 

to 2007. But I understand there are zero — zero — extra 

educational assistants. My question to the minister . . . And they 

applaud the population piece. It should be celebrated, but there 

should be an investment back into our students. 

 

My question to the minister: does he think 1,235 extra students 

deserve zero educational assistants? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

ought to check their facts before they have the nerve to stand up 

in this House and ask questions. They ought to be right on the 

accusations that they make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will give you some facts and some statistics. We 

have increased operating funding since we formed government 

by over 23 per cent. But let’s talk specifically about EAs. 

Compared to 2008, there are more regular teachers, 439; more 

student support teachers, 86 more; psychologists, 21 per cent 

more; speech-language pathologists, 22 per cent more; medical 

facilities and nurses up 105 per cent; social workers up 6 per 

cent. And, Mr. Speaker, we can talk specifically about EAs. In 

2007 there were 3,546; 2013, 3,560. So in addition to the other 

supports, the number of EAs has gone up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The reality of today’s classrooms, if that 

government would actually listen to students and teachers, is a 

more complex, more challenging classroom with a larger class 

size, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here are the school divisions that actually have fewer EAs 

today than they did in 2007: Christ the Teacher School 

Division, Good Spirit School Division, Holy Family School 

Division, Holy Trinity School Division, Horizon School 

Division, Living Sky School Division, North East School 

Division, Northwest School Division, Prairie South School 

Division, Prairie Spirit School Division, Prince Albert Catholic 

School Division, Regina Catholic School Division, South East 

Cornerstone School Division, Sun West School Division. 

 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3877 

My question to the minister: do the students in these school 

divisions have fewer needs, deserve less attention, or require 

less investment in their education than students did seven years 

ago, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I gave the number that are 

in the province. I also indicated to the member opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, that the number of other facilities that are there, some 

things, medical facilities, up over 100 per cent. There’s a 

variety of services that are available. I don’t do anything to 

minimize the good services provided EAs and want to continue 

to urge them to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under our government we have built 20 new 

schools. We’re talking about building nine more joint-use 

facilities. Mr. Speaker, under their government they closed 176 

schools and scared people off to Calgary where they’re living in 

another school division completely, Mr. Speaker. Those 

members opposite ought to be ashamed of their . . . [inaudible] 

. . . And to come in here and put fear into the parents of this 

province is not right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

110, The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 110, The Senate Nominee 

Election Repeal Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for the said 

bill to be read a second time immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave that the said 

bill be considered a second time immediately. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General to move second 

reading. 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Senate Nominee 

Election Repeal Act. 

 

The Senate Nominee Election Act was introduced in 2009 based 

on a desire to introduce elected representatives for 

Saskatchewan to the Senate. It was this government’s hope that 

if the federal government was committed to appointing 

provincially elected nominees, responsibility in the Senate 

could be incrementally improved through this voluntary 

process, at least for Saskatchewan. Given the uncertainty that an 

elected Saskatchewan nominee would actually be appointed, the 

costs of this process could not be justified. Therefore no 

election under this Act was ever held. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act will 

repeal The Senate Nominee Election Act. Repeal of this Act 

reflects the conclusion of this Legislative Assembly that 

reforming the Senate is no longer viewed as a viable option and 

that the Senate should be abolished rather than reformed. 

Repeal of this Act, in conjunction with a joint resolution of the 

House supporting the abolition of the Senate sends a strong 

message to Ottawa and the rest of Canada that Saskatchewan 

now supports the abolition of the Senate of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

that Bill No. 110, The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

committed? I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 

110, The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act be committed to 

the Committee of the Whole on Bills and that the said bill be 

considered in Committee of the Whole immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Committee 

of the Whole on Bills. 

 

Clerk: — Committee of the Whole. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair to go into 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

 



3878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY ON BILLS 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

 

The Chair: — Okay, I will call the Committee of the Whole to 

order. The item of business before the committee is Bill No. 

110, The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act. Clause 1, short 

title, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — It’s carried. 

 

[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 

of the Legislative Assembly, enacts as follows: Bill 110, The 

Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. I move that the committee 

report the bill without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report the 

bill, Bill No. 110 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 

report Bill No. 110, The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

without amendment and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a third time? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave that the said 

bill be read a third time immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave that the said 

bill be considered a third time immediately. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The leave is granted. The minister 

may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 110, 

The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 110, The Senate Nominee 

Election Repeal Act be now read a third time and passed under 

its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:24 until 14:27.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 53] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles Cheveldayoff 

Harpauer Toth Huyghebaert 

Doherty Norris Reiter 

Heppner Harrison Wyant 

Weekes Hart Bradshaw 

Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Campeau 

Wilson Marchuk Ross 

Kirsch Michelson Doke 

Cox Merriman Jurgens 

Steinley Hickie Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Parent 

Phillips Docherty Broten 

Forbes Wotherspoon Vermette 

Belanger Chartier McCall 

Nilson Sproule  

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — nil] 

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 

53; those against, 0. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3879 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[14:30] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 85 through 87. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 85 through 87. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Abolition of the Senate of Canada 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

note at the outset of my remarks that I’ll be moving a motion, 

the government motion for the Assembly’s consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue that we are about to 

debate in the Legislative Assembly and that we’re about to 

decide on. It’s not the most important issue facing the province 

of Saskatchewan. For most Saskatchewan people, it probably 

wouldn’t rank in the top 20 including, I would expect, for most 

members of the House. And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to 

spend a lot of time on the bicameral nature of our federal 

government and whether that should change. 

 

But we are going to make an important pronouncement, I 

believe, in a few moments. Not presuming the votes of hon. 

members, but I believe we’re going to make an important 

pronouncement, and not just to our own provincial citizens to 

whom we are responsible, for whom we work, but I think as 

well to the country, to let them know that the province of 

Saskatchewan after some considerable deliberation — and not 

at all, Mr. Speaker, revolving around current affairs, though 

perhaps informed to some degree by them — have come to a 

view of what might be best for the country with respect to that 

bicameral parliament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had a history of upper chambers in our 

country, not just at the national level but at the subnational 

level. I think it’s interesting to quickly canvass the history — 

some of them very short — of these senates, if you will, at the 

provincial level, of these upper chambers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1876 Manitoba abolished its senate, its upper 

chamber. In 1876, the same year, the province of Ontario also 

abolished its senate. New Brunswick did it in 1892, Prince 

Edward Island in 1893. Nova Scotia in 1928, and more about 

them in a moment. 

And in Newfoundland, their legislative councils stopped in 

1934, and there wasn’t a reappearance at all, Mr. Speaker. 

When they came into Confederation in 1949, they came in as a 

unicameral House without a senate. So they had obviously 

made a de facto decision that an upper chamber was not 

necessary in the interests of the people of Newfoundland and 

Labrador. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the latest province to move away from an 

executive chamber, executive council or legislative council or a 

senate chamber was the province of Quebec in 1968. 

 

I don’t want to belabour the points with respect to each of these 

decision points in each of these provinces, but I do want to 

focus a little bit if I can on the decision in Nova Scotia, both 

because I think it provides some symmetry now and informs us 

in this debate today, but it also provides a cautionary note about 

how difficult it is — and we ought to be under no illusions in 

this Assembly — about how difficult it might be to move away 

from an upper chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, Nova Scotia had an upper 

house until 1928. Their upper house began in 1838, so almost 

100 years of experience. In the period following Confederation, 

the legislative council came under increasing fire as 

unnecessary, expensive, and anachronistic. Interesting, the 

people of Nova Scotia, at least a good many of them, came to 

the conclusion that in 1928 the senate of that province, the 

upper chamber, was an anachronism. 

 

And so pressure mounted for the legislative council to be 

abolished, and what followed was almost 50 years — this is the 

sobering part for those of us who might think, well this might 

happen in short order — it took 50 years for Nova Scotia 

politicians to actually be rid of the senate. There was a 

Conservative government under Premier Rhodes that replaced a 

four-decade regime, a Liberal regime. And they first, Mr. 

Speaker, tried a hefty severance salary for their provincial 

senators. That didn’t work. 

 

And so they came up with a novel solution, Mr. Speaker. And 

by the way, this has been tested to some extent at the federal 

level, or at least replicated. The premier of the day — I get 

through the Lieutenant Government in Council, I would 

presume — just simply started appointing, because they could 

do it constitutionally, appointing a lot more senators who were 

of the same mind who were abolitionists. And they effectively 

voted themselves out of existence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there is an interesting lesson in this 

particular story because again the people of Nova Scotia didn’t 

find, didn’t see the use in an appointed upper chamber dating 

back to 1928, and it took five decades actually to move from 

that resolution to the actual abolition of that particular senate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in each of these provinces — and you know, 

we can’t canvass the history of each one since they’ve made 

their decision to go to a unicameral system — but I would 

expect if you asked the respective political scientists or 

historians in those provinces, they would probably agree, they’d 

probably offer that the democratic life of those provinces has 

not been any worse for not having an upper house. The 

governments, the orderly . . . you know, the peace, order, and 



3880 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

good government that Canadians want at the national level, at 

the provincial level has not been vulnerable to the lack of an 

upper chamber in those particular jurisdictions. Life’s moved 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When they’ve needed perhaps sober second thought — as is 

often attributed, one of the attributed qualities of the senate — 

those provincial legislatures do what our provincial legislature 

has done: you know, whomever might be, whatever party might 

be in power, they use their powers of inquiry. Sometimes it’s 

committees of the legislature. Sometimes it’s special 

commissions. But to think that these provinces that moved 

away from a senate then lacked sober second thought because 

they didn’t have an appointed chamber of peers of some 

description, I think would not bear out against the facts, against 

the historical facts of these particular provinces. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that we have examples 

of the abolition of senates at the provincial level. I understand 

this is not a perfect . . . it’s not perfectly analogous to what 

we’re debating today, but at least it’s instructive, and I think it’s 

informative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quickly, what about the history of our own 

national upper chamber, the Canadian Senate? Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting to reflect on the words of our first prime minister 

and I think the undisputed founding father of our country. Sir 

John A. Macdonald commented on . . . Well at the outset during 

the Confederation debates, he would have been commenting on 

the very nature of the country and its fabric and its institutions. 

And certainly the Senate was no exception. He said this, by the 

way, of the principle of equality in the Senate. This is what 

John A. said, and I quote, “In the Upper House, equality in 

numbers should be the basis. In the Lower House, population 

should be the basis.” Interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The definition though of equality at that time — when John A. 

Macdonald uttered those words, before the entire nation’s 

family came into existence and, you know, principally Western 

provinces but also Newfoundland and Labrador — wasn’t the 

equality of the subnational units. He wasn’t talking about that. 

Their concept for the Senate representing equality in the 

country, if the House was rep by pop and represented the 

population, was that the Senate would represent the regions. 

And at the time, I think that would probably be a reasonable 

measure of equality. 

 

But what happened in the intervening years of course is that 

provinces, great provinces like Saskatchewan and Alberta, came 

into the national family. And when all of that was done, 

finishing in 1949 with Newfoundland and Labrador — well 

much more recently actually with Nunavut as a territory — 

when the family was complete, so to speak, Mr. Speaker, then 

we had this strange situation where the Senate, its principle was 

supposed to be equality, was based on an equality of the regions 

where a region like Western Canada would basically have the 

same number of representatives in the upper house as the region 

of Ontario. But of course we know that Ontario’s not a region; 

it’s a province. 

 

So you almost have this hybrid equality in terms of that E — 

and I’ll get into this in a moment though — of the Triple-Es. 

We westerners want the Triple-E. We always think about 

equality of the provinces, not equality of a region to a province 

or to another province. By the way, this is not the fault of 

Ontario or Quebec. Just the way it’s always been; they get the 

same number as large regions of the country. 

 

And so I think the Senate has lost the opportunity then to 

provide the balance of a truly equal body. If the House of 

Commons is representative of the people, the Senate, if it’s 

working, should be representative of the units, of the 

subnational units — the provinces, in this case — of 

Confederation. So I don’t think it’s passing the test of equality 

today. Maybe the early test that John A. would have applied. 

 

What did he say, Mr. Speaker, about how effective this body 

should be? Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what John A. Macdonald 

had to say again. It’s a brief quote from the Confederation 

debates. He said, “It would be of no value whatever were it a 

mere chamber for registering the decrees of the Lower House.” 

John A. Macdonald is saying the Senate wouldn’t be much 

good if it’s just a rubber stamp. The Senate should actually . . . 

And we would have problems with this now, because it’s 

accountable, but bear with me. We’re on the effective measure 

of a senate. When it comes to be effective, John A. wanted it to 

be that way. The founders wanted it to be that way, Mr. 

Speaker, and so they said it should be more than a mere 

chamber for registering the decrees of the lower house. It ought 

not to just be a rubber stamp, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that for the most part, throughout all these decades, 

that’s what it is. Part of the reason for that is that senators are 

part of their respective parliamentary caucuses. They’re going 

to be a part of a government caucus. They’re going to be part of 

an opposition caucus. And for the most part, they will vote the 

party line of those respective caucuses. And so they will 

perhaps not be able to even represent the regions, even though 

we think equality of the provinces, they might not be able to 

represent the regions as best they could if they were 

independent. That’s the first point. The second point is they 

may not be very effective as they would likely wind up being a 

rubber stamp, with the government senators simply voting with 

the government caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by those two measures, the Senate has failed the 

test of being equal, in the modern definition, in terms of each 

province having equal representation. It’s failed the test of 

being effective. There has been important work done by the 

Senate. This is not in any way, this debate, a criticism of 

individuals who’ve served in the Senate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask ourselves, could the work 

they’ve done that we consider worthy and worthwhile be done 

without it? We’ve already talked a little bit about the ability for 

the Senate to make significant inquiry on issues and then report 

back to Canadians in a thoughtful and in-depth way. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, again I would submit that the provinces do this with 

the unicameral systems, and the House of Commons could do it 

through their committee system, through the ability of the 

Prime Minister and the cabinet to appoint Royal Commissions. 

There is the chance for a sort of thoughtful discussion and the 

sober second thought that’s often touted as one of the attributes 

of the Senate. 

 

So if it really hasn’t worked in terms of the principle of equality 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3881 

that John A. ascribed to it, and if it hasn’t really worked in 

terms of the quality of being effective then, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to ask ourselves, is the status quo worth fighting for, worth 

maintaining, or should we be looking at something else? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard some criticism, and it’s been — not 

criticism — I’ve heard some constructive comments in debate. 

We’ve had it in our own caucus. We had it in our own party, 

Mr. Speaker. You will know that this represents an evolution of 

our party policy. In fact we balloted our members here not too 

many months ago in the late spring, early summer: 3,727 ballots 

were returned; 3,216 voted in favour of abolition — 87 per cent. 

And that’s why we’ve changed our position. But as we’ve had 

this discussion and debate, there’s been many good questions 

that members of the party have asked and that members of the 

public have asked because, by the way, we want to also make 

sure we’re representing the people of the province, not just 

worried about what party members might say. 

 

And one concern that I’ve noted that’s a reasonable part of the 

debate is, but what happens in our country if there is a prime 

minister or a federal government that for whatever reason 

undertakes policies that are of particular harm, that have a 

deleterious effect on a region, maybe in our case on Western 

Canada? If we don’t have a senate do we lose a last line of 

defence? Mr. Speaker, again I think it’s important that we just 

canvass our own history with that same question because there 

have been examples, I think, when a federal government has 

taken actions that have hurt a region. The one that we would 

remember in our part of the world with clarity is the National 

Energy Program introduced by Prime Minister Trudeau. This 

was very damaging policy to all of Western Canada, very 

damaging policy. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there would have been senators at 

the time who decried the policy, but I can’t tell you their names. 

I don’t know who they are. And so I’m not sure that was or 

would be in the future the most effective source of opposition to 

a prime minister or a federal cabinet that’s bent on doing things 

that we don’t think are good for the region.  

 

Here is a name I remember: Peter Lougheed, Mr. Speaker. 

When it came to that particular battle against the National 

Energy Program, I remember a premier’s name. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, what has happened in our country is the provinces 

have filled a vacuum left by a senate that maybe John A. 

wanted to be equal, that maybe John A. wanted to be effective. 

But because of parliamentary whip votes, party discipline, 

because of the nature of the appointments to the Senate, and 

because it represents regions, not provinces — for all of those 

reasons, the de facto balance to a federal government is the 

provincial governments of this country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some people would say, well but Peter Lougheed didn’t 

stop the National Energy Program. Well did he or did he not? 

Western Canada, I think, was heard by a national party that was 

able to contest the next election. And, Mr. Speaker, because the 

House of Commons is elected and accountable, the next 

election defeated the Trudeau government, elected a 

Conservative government, and the National Energy Program 

was ended. So it didn’t happen right away, but that provincial 

voice within Confederation, not the Senate, did prove to be the 

balance against a heavy-handed government that took action 

against a region that objected strongly to the positions that they 

had taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I’m sure there were senators who opposed 

the National Energy Program, but I can’t tell you their name. 

And I’m sure there were even Liberal senators from Western 

Canada who opposed it who probably did not speak out. Why? 

Because they’re part of a parliamentary caucus. They’re part of 

a whip vote, Mr. Speaker. So there’s an obligation there to the 

centre, not to the provinces from which they come. What good 

is it, Mr. Speaker, to have a watchdog if he’s watching out for 

someone else’s house? It entirely misses the point. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if we believe as I believe now, and again it’s a 

subject of debate, but if we believe that the status quo was not 

on, I actually think there’s great consensus across the country, 

whether we believe that we can reform it or not, I do believe 

that Canadians understand the status quo is not on. If we think 

that though, if we believe it though, there are really only four 

options. And I’ll quickly talk about those, and then I want to 

make way for the Leader of the Opposition who has come to 

this position long before, long before I did. 

 

Four options, Mr. Speaker. The first is immediately reformed 

Senate, Triple-E Senate. The second is a marginally reformed or 

incrementally reformed Senate. We’ve seen some tinkering 

around the edges now, and I credit the federal government for 

trying certainly, Mr. Speaker, but that’s the second option. The 

third is abolition, and the fourth is abolition with a view to 

rebuilding something in its place that might work. 

 

So very, very quickly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to number one, 

I used to believe that we ought to advocate always for a 

meaningfully reformed Senate, specifically a Triple-E Senate. 

Mr. Speaker, I have come to the considered opinion that this is 

impossible, that any change is difficult — more on that in a 

moment — but this is impossible. 

 

I have never heard a premier in the short time I’ve had this job, 

at the tables in formal discussions at dinner or lunch, never 

heard a premier of one of the populous provinces — who you 

would need, by the way, whatever you believe about the 

amending formula. What’s going to be needed, whatever the 

Supreme Court’s going to tell us, we’re going to need the 

populous provinces to agree — I’ve never heard one of them 

say, and I don’t fault them for this, that they support a Triple-E 

Senate. 

 

Even when those provinces were at their most generous with 

respect to the Senate during Meech Lake — credit Premier 

Peterson, Ontario; credit Premier Bourassa in Quebec — even 

then, when they were prepared to move on the Senate, they 

weren’t prepared to move to a Triple-E. I don’t blame them. 

How would you explain that to your citizens, that you’ve given 

up one of the advantages you have in a major institution of 

parliament? So I’ve never heard any premiers since express that 

support. I just don’t think it is possible. 

 

What about a marginally reformed Senate where we elect a few 

and maybe put term limits on it? Again, credit the federal 

government for trying. Credit the Prime Minister for trying. 



3882 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

Couple of problems, Mr. Speaker, with that. Not all the 

provinces are going to elect senators. That’s very, very clear. In 

fact hardly any of them are. 

 

We just dealt with our legislation, but let’s just rewind for a 

minute and say, pretend for a moment that Saskatchewan would 

be willing to elect a senator. That would make Saskatchewan 

and Alberta, maybe New Brunswick — I’m hearing some 

rumblings from Premier Alward — and maybe the province of 

British Columbia. But for sure if we rewind back to that last 

Bill, there was two up until a moment ago — us, the province of 

Saskatchewan, and the people of Alberta. 

 

So then what would you have? Well you’d have kind of a 

hybrid Senate with a tiny minority elected, giving some 

legitimacy frankly to an institution that . . . whose majority, 

whose huge majority would be appointed in the same old way, 

by the party in power, by the PMO [Prime Minister’s office], by 

the Prime Minister, whoever it is, beholden more to that party’s 

policy and caucus loyalty, I would argue, Mr. Speaker, than — 

because of the definition of party discipline — than they would 

be to the region from which they came. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen elections for the Senate before where 

people run under party banners, federal party banners, and I 

think that helps make the point. What else is wrong with the 

marginally reformed Senate, as I’ve understood it, is that there’s 

still an appointment for life. You run for office once and you 

stay there for, well whatever the term is, a long term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all members in this House would agree that 

we all have a lot more focus on our work here and our 

responsibilities and how we fill out forms, mindful of the fact 

that in four years we’ll face the bosses in an election. There is 

the accountability of election, sure. That’s not bad. But what 

good is it if you don’t have the accountability of facing 

re-election, of going back to the voters and explaining what 

your position was on the potash takeover or why you filled out 

that form or why you said this? You know, it’s Thanksgiving 

that focuses the mind of us turkeys, Mr. Speaker, and in this 

hybrid version, it lacks Thanksgiving. It lacks that moment of 

focus. 

 

So the last two, very quickly. Abolition, it’s pretty clear, Mr. 

Speaker, would just stop being. And I think that we’ve made the 

case that the House of Commons has at its disposal all the tools 

of inquiry, all the moments to pause in between legislation, all 

the opportunity to consult that a senate would give to it. And it 

also has the accountability of course of facing a re-election, Mr. 

Speaker, and so it’s preferable. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, do think it’s more likely — still very 

difficult; I’m not naive about it — but more likely, and here’s 

why I would say that. Just as I’ve never heard a Premier say, 

from a populous province, that we would like to do the Triple-E 

Senate, I have heard two from populous provinces, the former 

premier of Ontario and the former premier of British Columbia, 

Premiers McGuinty and Campbell, support abolition. We can’t 

presuppose what the Supreme Court’s going to say. But if the 

Supreme Court says seven-fifty, and there’s British Columbia 

and there’s Ontario, there’s a lot more light of hope that shines 

on getting something done on abolition than there is, in my 

view, on a Triple-E Senate or a meaningful reform. And that’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, I understand it would be very difficult — 

very, very difficult — but I believe it to be at least a greater 

likelihood of succeeding. 

 

Finally there is the option of abolishing it with a view to 

starting over. I understand that people are very passionate and 

support the principles of bicameralism. I understand it 

completely. I do understand the notion around checks and 

balances. I think we . . . What’s happening in the United States, 

by the way, and the paralysis there in terms of their ability to 

deal with a major fiscal problem, relates directly to this question 

of checks and balances. And we all, if we’re interested in 

politics, should have the discussion of how much is too much, 

how much actually leads to that paralysis where you can’t 

fundamentally deal with an existential crisis within your own 

borders. But still I do understand the principles of 

bicameralism. 

 

And so it’s interesting. Some writers are weighing in on it, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ll leave the members with this. Ted Morton is one of 

them, from next door in Alberta, a well-known provincial 

politician. He said in the National Post on 4 July, 2013: 

 

It might be better to adopt a two-step approach. First, wipe 

the slate clean by abolishing the current Senate. Then start 

from scratch in designing a new model for an elected 

Senate that can be presented to Canadians. 

 

I think if you believe that, you could support this motion. 

 

Here’s another one. Andrew Coyne, who has been commenting 

on the issue as well and is a well-known commentator in the 

country, said this, and I quote, “So long as the Senate remains 

in place, the thinking runs, there will be too many vested 

interests, provincial or otherwise, with a stake in the status 

quo.” 

 

And this is not in his quote, but I would say chief among them, 

by the way, the senators themselves. But the quote goes on: 

 

Once it was torn down, it might be easier to come up with 

a reform plan that was satisfactory to all sides. Even if the 

attempt failed, we should at least be rid of the Senate as it 

is, sparing the country the embarrassment of an appointed 

house, well known as a den of patronage even without its 

recent ethical lapses, substituting its wishes for those of 

the democratically elected Commons. 

 

National Post, July 13, 2013. That makes some sense to me as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the only options of these four are abolition, 

and abolition with a view to starting over. Mr. Speaker, the 

status quo’s not on. The status quo is an anachronism. 

 

This appointed group, appointed by the Prime Minister, 

appointed by, really, political and partisan interests, again 

whoever the prime minister is, and then beholden to that 

political party and not the region necessarily from which they 

came, is not good enough for Canadians. 

 

Can a unicameral parliament, just the House of Commons 

facing the accountability of election, with all of the tools of 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3883 

consultation at its disposal, can it be worthy of the kind of 

government that Canadians deserve? I think it can be, especially 

if, Mr. Speaker, especially if in that place, that country where 

we’d have that kind of a unicameral situation that here . . . well 

at present fictional place. Especially if that federation had 

strong provincial capitals that were committed to stand up for 

the interests of their provinces regardless of who was in Ottawa, 

that were prepared to be a clarion voice for their provincial 

interests. Can that work for Canada? Absolutely it can work for 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. But we’re going to need the resolve to 

move forward. We’re going to need the resolve to move past 

the Senate and, Mr. Speaker, that’s what I am hoping the 

province of Saskatchewan sends as a message to this country. 

 

It’s time to move on. It’s time to give Canadians the kind of 

democratic, accountable government that they deserve. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I move, quite bluntly: 

 

That this Assembly supports the abolition of the Senate of 

Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly supports the abolition of the Senate of 

Canada. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the question? I 

recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And after a 

question period and a lot of activity going on today, it’s good to 

get to this point to be able to discuss this motion. It’s something 

that we’ve been talking about in this legislature for some time. 

It’s something that Saskatchewan people have certainly been 

talking about as of late, to a great deal, and it’s something that 

Canadians have been talking about in a way really that is 

unprecedented in capturing Canadians’ attention and their 

thoughts, sometimes their outrage, sometimes their frustration 

and their disbelief with how things have unfolded as we’ve all 

been glued to TVs in the past, in the past few weeks and 

months. 

 

But it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to remember that this isn’t a 

discussion simply about the last few weeks, the last few 

months. And I do appreciate many of the remarks that the 

Premier made, in a sense providing the historical perspective of 

some of the background, the background with the origin of 

Canada, with the experience in other provinces, and the position 

to where we find ourselves here today. 

 

My remarks, Mr. Speaker, may not be quite as lengthy as the 

Premier’s because I feel he has — that’s not a criticism — but 

he has outlined a number of historical realities and also 

explained a bit of the evolution of his own personal opinion and 

that of at least some of the members on the opposite benches. 

 

On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, this is perhaps an easier 

speech to give or fairly more of a straightforward speech 

because it has in fact been our position for a long time. It’s been 

certainly before I was born. Going back to my grandpa and 

probably back to my great-grandpa, this has been the position 

that we have held. And in hearing the remarks from the 

Premier, talking about the historical experience and the current 

reality, it really I think is, in my view at least, summed up in our 

opinion as New Democrats — and the opinion is shared by 

many Canadians — of where the Senate is now, and that being 

that it’s no longer appropriate and hasn’t been for some time to 

have an unelected, to have an unaccountable, and to have an 

institution that serves as an antique. And for those reasons, that 

has been the long-standing view that we have had since before I 

was born, that abolition is the way to go and that the Senate 

should be abolished. 

 

[15:00] 

 

If we take that historical perspective, we’d also combine it with 

the current reality that we see. And when we think of the 

priorities that Canadians have when it comes to services and 

what they expect their governments to do for them and with 

them, when they look at how public dollars should be spent in 

the most wise manner, we know that the $100 million a year 

that it costs to operate the Senate is significant. And those 

resources, those dollars, could be put to much better use. And 

that is something that we are very aware of in listening to what 

matters to, yes, Saskatchewan families but what matters to 

Canadian families. And we think those dollars could be better 

spent. And that is another reason why abolition in our view is 

the way to go. 

 

Because this has been our long-standing view, based on the 

convictions that in looking at the historical experience and then 

the reality that people face, we were not in favour of the 

pro-Senate-elections Act that the government brought in 

following the ’07 election, has evidence of our long-standing 

view of this position. 

 

I’m pleased, in speaking of that legislation, I’m pleased that it 

was a unanimous standing vote that we had here, stating that 

repealing that piece of legislation is the right way to go. I’m 

encouraged by that, and I hope that we can have that same 

unanimous voice coming from Saskatchewan as we consider 

this motion here because I think it is an important message to 

send. It’s an important message to send that it’s necessary to be 

modern. It’s an important message to send that it’s necessary to 

spend precious tax dollars in the best and most efficient way, 

meeting the needs of Canadians. And for those reasons we will 

be supporting this motion. And as I have said, and as we have 

said, we will work with the government when it makes sense to 

do so. In this instance we are happy that they have migrated to 

our position that this is the best course of action. 

 

And I think this is what Saskatchewan people expect of us. And 

I know as I’ve been talking with people again . . . I mean when 

you walk by a TV it’s not uncommon to have a number of 

people huddled around watching the proceedings on the 

television as if it were playoffs or a sporting event when in fact 

it’s very serious in nature. It’s not something that should be 

taken lightly. It’s not something that should be seen as a sport 

or as entertainment. 

 

But this really is about what sort of democratic institutions we 

want to have in the country, what sort of better government we 

want to have, and how we can ensure we are making the best 

decisions, yes, for provinces and, yes, for the entire country. 

 

I appreciate, as I said, much of what the Premier said with 



3884 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

respect to the historical experience, and I agree with some 

components of what he said, many components of what he said. 

I don’t agree with every component. I know when he stated that 

the Prime Minister, Stephen Harper, has tried to marginally 

reform the Senate, I think actions with respect to appointing a 

number of very . . . Well the evidence of stacking the Senate in 

his favour would speak against that notion. But in terms of the 

historical experience, there are a number of things that I would 

agree with. 

 

I am pleased to see the migration that the government has had 

on this issue. But the government has had a very mixed 

approach with respect to what is the best course of action for 

the Senate. And that was clearly shown through the pro-Senate 

legislation that was put in place for after the ’07 election. 

 

But it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, is that we do have the 

unanimous voice coming out of this legislature because we have 

seen messages from the government side where there’s been a 

real willingness to play along with many of the undemocratic 

and many of the less-than-favourable actions of the Senate in 

different occasions. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the government has been very 

happy to have Conservative senators play a role in campaigning 

and in involvement with the party, and so we know that there 

are strong ties there. And I, for that reason, Mr. Speaker, do 

hope that we have a unanimous voice coming out of the 

legislature, whether it is from members in urban areas or rural 

areas. I think that is an important message that can be sent from 

this province. 

 

I’m glad that the Premier has clearly come to this position that 

abolition is the way to go. We do know that in 2006, the 

Premier said that senators would have a far more meaningful 

voice in Ottawa if they were democratically elected instead of 

simply appointed by the government of the day, and the Premier 

expanded on his view on this issue in his earlier remarks. But I 

do want us to have an unanimous voice coming out of this 

legislature on the issue and the importance of abolition. 

 

I remember being a fairly newly elected member after the ’07 

election when we were going through the discussion about the 

pro-Senate legislation that the government brought in. And at 

that time, the current Health minister said that “The Senate as 

an institution has served this country for 141 years, and there’s 

nothing to suggest that this will change any time soon no matter 

how many times members opposite chant the words abolish, 

abolish, abolish.” 

 

So I’m not expecting or requesting any sort of chanting of 

abolish, but I think it is important, Mr. Speaker, to have a clear 

voice coming from the province with respect to the position that 

we do want to take. And this is a common-sense approach, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s what Saskatchewan people have clearly expressed 

to me and I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important as we consider 

this motion and we consider what steps that are next. 

 

The Premier talked about a lot of the interaction with other 

provinces and the need to have some change and to make some 

progress. And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, through a unanimous 

voice coming out of this legislature, that we would be able to be 

a constructive voice in the process for pursuing abolition and 

gaining the support of other provinces. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken for perhaps even longer than I 

intended, and I know that there are a number of members on 

both sides of the House who would like to enter into the debate 

on this issue and go on the permanent record. But I will say, 

Mr. Speaker, that we will be supporting this motion, and we’re 

glad that we’ve arrived at the position where the government 

also agrees to this approach. And we want to be constructive in 

the process with respect to working with other provinces and 

making some progress on abolition of the Senate. So with that, 

I’ll conclude my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add 

some comments to the ones that have been made already. The 

time this bill was initially introduced, I was the minister of 

Justice and was responsible for bringing it forward, so I think I 

would like to add some commentary to it. And I know the bill 

has been repealed, and certainly I think it was a unanimous 

choice. I hope that that doesn’t happen with a number of other 

pieces of legislation that I introduce through my career. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, prior to my time as a provincial 

politician, I was active on committees and executives with 

federal executive. I worked hard and spent a lot of time merging 

the Conservative Party and the federal Reform Party, and one of 

the things that I felt was important at that time was senate 

reform and the notion of a Triple-E Senate. I realized at that 

time the difficulties that may be there or may come about 

because of the constitutional requirements, having the support 

of the larger provinces. But I believed it was a good step, and it 

was something that would enhance democracy in our nation. So 

I worked for that, and the parties came together. Unfortunately 

there has not been the support for that since, and it’s something 

that remains outstanding on the federal list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had a senate in our nation for nearly 150 

years. In many ways we have been very well served by the 

Senate. We have a situation in our nation where it’s the same as 

all but one of the states in the United States. The United States 

federal government, United Kingdom, and Australia, among 

others enjoy the pleasures of a bicameral legislature. 

 

There’s certainly some significant benefits to having a 

bicameral legislature. You’ve got a better opportunity to deal 

with committees, better opportunities to have people go out and 

listen to the population. It’s often been referred to as a chamber 

of sober second thought, and certainly I think that’s part of the 

history that it enjoys in our country. Things that go through are 

not done on a knee-jerk or a quick reaction. They’re given some 

due consideration. And just the process from going from one 

House to the other often provides some time to have something 

that goes through too quickly in response to a specific political 

event. 

 

So there’s certainly issues that would indicate there’s some 

substantial benefits to having a second chamber in our 

government. We know that over the last period of time, the 

public acceptance of the Senate has fallen off, and there’s 

certainly been some issues around the Senate. We look at issues 

with the Senate, and we try to wrestle with that as Canadians. 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3885 

There are within the Senate many politicians that are very good, 

hard-working, and committed. I will mention, Mr. Speaker, 

specifically, Denise Batters, who was my former chief of staff. 

She was my chief of staff in this building for some five years 

and has been a tireless advocate for mental health issues. 

During the time that she was my chief of staff, her husband 

committed suicide, and she has taken up advocacy for mental 

health as her cause and she champions that cause, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, very well, very effectively. And it’s a voice that I 

would want to see continued for that type of purpose and want 

to wish her the very best for that. 

 

As we go through this, this is a difficult decision. We ought not 

take this type of thing lightly and ought to take it with a lot of 

due care and due consideration. At the time the bill for an 

elected senate was introduced, it was something that I believed, 

and I think most of our members believed it was a pragmatic 

approach. It was moving towards reform of the Senate on an 

incremental basis. We would have some elected senators over a 

period of time. We could perhaps move towards a constitutional 

amendment. I spent a significant amount of my time preparing 

the drafting, going around having discussion with people. The 

member from Weyburn spoke at the House at the time and 

provided some history, some interesting dialogue, and also 

spoke about the necessary of a pragmatic, incremental 

approach. 

 

As we prepared the bill, we talked and we got into the detail of 

how the Senate would be divided up, how you would have 

senators representing districts, even how you would apportion 

expenses. We saw the benefits of having elected senators from 

the province of Alberta, and we saw those people actually, with 

the current federal government, actually get appointed to the 

federal Senate. And we thought, yes, that’s something where we 

may be able to have a voice. 

 

But when we got into the reality of it, Mr. Speaker, that’s where 

the problems set in and the realization that this could not and 

was not working. In Alberta it was a different situation — 

fundamentally different. Alberta had a long history of 

provincial Tory governments. There was a Tory government in 

Ottawa. It was easy for the Prime Minister to say, well yes, the 

Tories in Alberta have elected an individual. They prepared a 

list. It will be easy for us to appoint that person as a senator. 

That person will represent Alberta in the Senate of Canada. 

 

Unfortunately in our province, we don’t have a Tory 

government; we have a Saskatchewan Party government. And 

in spite of what some commentators may say, we have active 

federal Liberals in our caucus and in our cabinet and also in our 

membership. And we have people that have also come across 

from the NDP [New Democratic Party], and we have very 

active support from members of trade unions in our party. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it could very well be a situation where one of the 

people that was elected in our province would not be an 

acceptable choice to the current Prime Minister. 

 

What would happen for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if Roy 

Romanow decided to run as a senator? Would the current Prime 

Minister be willing to appoint him as a senator? What would 

happen if say the current opposition leader were to run as a 

senator and were to win as a senator, whose caucus would that 

person sit in in Ottawa? Would he sit as an NDP member? 

Would he sit as a Conservative member? Would he sit as an 

independent? Would he, because we supported his election here 

in the province . . . Whose voice would he be speaking from? 

Would he be speaking as a Saskatchewan resident? Would he 

be speaking part of a provincial NDP caucus? And we were 

never able to resolve that. 

 

We had discussions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with some of the 

elected people in Alberta, and they said, oh well of course 

you’d sit with the Conservative caucus. But we didn’t hear from 

the Prime Minister a willingness to support somebody that came 

from another party. Nor would I expect to, Mr. Speaker. It’s just 

not a realistic option. 

 

We also had the simple answer as to who would pay for the 

election. When would the election take place? Would it take 

place in conjunction with a provincial election or a federal 

election? We left the legislation open-ended enough that those 

options continue to exist. Who, Mr. Speaker, would control the 

vote of that person? Would they vote along party lines? Would 

they be able to vote independently? Would they vote in 

accordance with provincial directions? Those were issues that 

have not nor can they be easily or readily answered. The reality 

of it is the Senate of Canada is a federal institution and must 

always be a federal institution and must be accountable to the 

people, that electors support that as a federal institution, and 

cannot be seen as a provincial one. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks by saying 

that I’m still a fan of and support having major changes to the 

Senate. I support the notion of a Triple-E Senate. I recognize 

and appreciate the problems there may be with other provinces. 

But I think this is an opportunity for all Canadians to stand up 

and say, we’d like to have a true dialogue. We’d like to have 

some other options on this. We know that the current model 

does not work, is not democratic, is not seen to be democratic. 

We’d like to set this one aside. We’d like to start with a clean 

slate. 

 

And what I’d like to do as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

challenge some of the current senators, and I know some of 

them are more than willing to, when that institution comes into 

place, I would like to see some of those people run, put their 

names forward, and test their public support. I suspect they may 

be surprised at how much there is for them if they choose to run 

because many of them have worked very hard. They’ve worked 

on committees. They’ve travelled back to their home provinces. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to set aside some of the differences 

that have taken place in the past or urge Canadians to see this as 

an enormous democratic opportunity for them to move forward 

and urge their federal politicians to embrace this as a challenge 

for all us. Thank you very much for the opportunity to 

participate in this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into 

this historic discussion here today and to support the motion of 

this Assembly here today as it relates to abolishing the Senate. 



3886 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

This is, as the Leader of the Opposition spoke, a position that 

has been long held by the party that I represent, that we 

represent, the CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation-New Democratic Party] dating all the way back, 

certainly well before I was born. 

 

And in fact I stand in this place and I think a little bit of stories 

and conversations with my grandparents who are no longer with 

us. And I certainly think of even my own dad and mom and 

some of their positions and these discussions on a Senate that 

certainly our family and our party has felt has been outdated 

and wasteful and unelected and unaccountable for many, many, 

many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this is a historic occasion. We welcome the position of 

government, the actions of government here today. This is a 

powerful statement to send to our country, to send to other 

jurisdictions. And we each play an important role by standing 

up here today and in voting. We play an important role moving 

forward from here in having our voice with other jurisdictions. 

And certainly as it relates to the NDP or the New Democratic 

Party, that’s a consistent position I believe right across, right 

across Canada and certainly nationally. But on the side 

opposite, certainly there’s a place for those conservative 

members to speak to fellow conservatives across Canada, share 

their position, share what brought them to their current position 

and to speak up for Saskatchewan people and Canadians. 

 

We see the Senate, as we say, as something that’s outdated, as 

something that’s certainly unelected and unaccountable and 

wasteful. And if we think of all the priorities of Saskatchewan 

families and of Canadians, that are pressing in their lives, 

whether it’s in health care or in long-term care, whether it’s in 

educational needs and in post-secondary education, if we look 

at the pressures in housing or the needs for municipal 

infrastructure, the demands are many. And here in 

Saskatchewan in a growing population, in growing 

communities, those dollars can be better utilized. So when we 

look to the $100 million dollars that is spent annually for this 

wasteful, unelected Senate, we see a better place in the lives of 

Saskatchewan families, which is also why it’s important for us 

to stand up here today, take our place, and to support the motion 

to abolish the Senate. 

 

As was mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition, we didn’t 

support the pro-Senate legislation that was brought forward by 

the government a few years back. In fact I recall being in this 

legislature when someone I respect, former Premier Lorne 

Calvert took to his feet and in response to their Triple-E Senate, 

of course laid out our position of the Triple-E Senate being 

abolish, abolish, abolish. And certainly commended him at that 

point in time, knew that was certainly a reflection of our party 

policy but something that was deep to his convictions as well. 

 

We don’t come to this position because of a crisis that we see in 

Ottawa right now. We don’t come to it because of the spending 

scandal that we see, although boy, it sure enhances the call for 

scrapping the Senate. We come to it because we see the lack of 

purpose, the lack of representation for regions. The Premier 

spoke at some length about the voice of premiers, voice of 

provinces in our nation, and I concur that those voices are 

valuable and are important. And certainly I think of the voices 

of premiers like Allan Blakeney and Roy Romanow and Peter 

Lougheed, and taking the voice of a region and a province and 

representing it on the national stage and advancing the needs of 

their jurisdictions. That’s a prime example of the kind of 

regional leadership that’s important. 

 

Often, you know, it was referenced that the upper chamber or 

the Senate was a house of sober second thought. Certainly it 

failed to be that, and it failed to be little more than a rubber 

stamp for many, many years where you had these unelected 

Senators that were beholden to their caucuses and to their 

parties, and that played a role in supporting the election of the 

party as opposed to supporting the best interests of the regions 

that they were supposed to be represented. 

 

So today is an important day. We welcome the voice of the 

Premier on this. We’ve been calling for this, for abolition of the 

Senate for many, many years. We do so not simply because of 

the Senate spending scandal or the fact that it’s probably this 

matter has surged in the polls as something that people want to 

see addressed. We do so because it’s a long-standing policy, 

and we believe that it’s in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

families and Canadians to abolish our Senate to better utilize 

those resources, those $100 million a year that are spent. 

 

So we’ve heard clearly from Saskatchewan people that they 

support abolition. They support our actions here today. I’m 

pleased to stand and take my place, both in the short speech I’m 

providing here today, but also in voting to abolish the Senate. 

So I’m pleased to support the motion and pleased to finally be 

able to support a unanimous call of this legislature to abolish 

the Senate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and I look forward to . . . appreciate the opportunity to enter 

into the debate on this matter. Before I begin my remarks, I 

actually would like to acknowledge the co-operation of the 

official opposition in, firstly, the repeal of The Senate Nominee 

Election Act bill, and also in facilitating the debate here today 

on this motion. So I want to acknowledge that. We’ve been in 

discussions on this for nearly two months now, so I thank my 

friend the Opposition House Leader for that. 

 

In terms of my arrival at this position, Mr. Speaker, I would say 

my journey would be very similar to that of the Premier’s. I had 

been a long-time proponent of a Triple-E Senate, but I think 

we’ve just got to the point where it just isn’t possible, Mr. 

Speaker. And I really don’t take this decision to support this 

motion lightly. The Senate has served as a foundation stone of 

our system since Confederation. Our nation’s founders 

fashioned their Senate after its venerable forerunners in the 

British parliament and the United States Congress. The Senate 

was an undeniably important factor in bringing the colonies 

together in Confederation. We must not depart from the 

example provided by our founders without careful 

consideration. 

 

However it’s also important to address the challenges of our 

time. When a foundation stone begins to fail, it must be repaired 

or replaced regardless of its past service or the bedrock from 

which it was carved. And our current situation is becoming 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3887 

increasingly urgent. A crack that starts in the foundation can 

spider and spread and make an entire structure unsound. We 

must act now regarding the situation in the Senate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to consider the nature of the 

Senate’s fatal flaw. The recent allegations stemming from the 

upper chamber are serious and merit closest scrutiny, but they 

are the symptom rather than the cause of the Senate’s decay. 

Very simply, the Senate is an institution without a mission. 

Elected members of parliament have a clear mandate to serve 

their constituents. Elections regularly reinforce this message. 

 

Senators have no such clarity, and Canadians have no such 

mechanism of enforcement. I spent three years on Parliament 

Hill and I can say first-hand that while some senators work 

hard, and the vast majority do work very hard, there are others 

that hardly work. And there is no means of measuring the 

accomplishments or negligence of either. Nor is this lack of 

mission without consequence. Ecclesiastes says, because of idle 

hands, the house leaks. The truth of scripture is evident as leaks 

from the Senate are flooding the front pages of our newspaper. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what is to be done with the Senate? I, like 

many others, had hoped that the Senate could be reformed to 

serve a meaningful purpose in our democracy. In my younger 

years, I had the great privilege of working closely with Prime 

Minister Harper. I know first-hand his commitment to fixing the 

Senate. He has tried and been thwarted at every turn, primarily 

by senators themselves, including those whom he appointed and 

had committed to support reform when accepting their 

appointment. How quickly they forgot. 

 

But all of these efforts have brought into stark relief the senate’s 

continuing failures. The foundation stone that is the Senate is 

too flawed to be repaired. Therefore it must be removed and 

replaced. It’s at this point that we find a ray of hope. 

 

Another foundation stone is becoming larger and stronger and 

has in a real way already replaced the Senate’s role in our 

federation. At the time of Confederation, a strong central 

government was considered a necessity. Provinces were mere 

satellites orbiting the centre of power in Ottawa. The Senate 

was to counterbalance central power by representing regional 

interests. 

 

Times have changed. Provinces, particularly in Western 

Canada, are no longer colonies that require supervision by 

central government. Today the interests of Saskatchewan are 

not dimly reflected by appointed members in a chamber of 

sober second thought. Today the interests of Saskatchewan are 

powerfully projected by our elected members of this Assembly 

and by our Premier. 

 

What is true in Saskatchewan is true across Canada as citizens 

empower their provincial capitals to represent their regional 

interests. In fact provincial governments have completely 

eclipsed the Senate as regional representatives. Therefore let us 

resolve to remove the Senate as a foundation stone of 

Confederation. It has served its purpose, and its flaws are now 

beyond the point of repair. 

 

I’ll conclude with a quote from Oliver Cromwell in his final 

address to the Long Parliament in 1653, I think, is somewhat 

apt: 

 

It’s high time . . . to put an end to your sitting in this place, 

which you have so dishonoured . . . 

 

Ye are grown intolerably odious to the whole nation. You 

who were deputed here by people to get grievances 

redressed, are yourselves becoming the greatest grievance. 

 

. . . depart immediately out of this place. 

 

Take away that shining bauble and lock up the doors. 

 

In the name of God, go! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I don’t know what to say at the start other than, 

amen to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And it’s interesting because in my remarks, and I guess I’ll get 

to the quote right off the hop here, but I’d like to quote the 

member from Meadow Lake, the Government House Leader 

from an editorial he’d written for the National Post, August 

13th, 2013 entitled “Why Saskatchewan supports abolition.” 

And the first sentence of that article states, “In Saskatchewan 

we know what to do with machinery that’s broken down and 

impossible to repair.” I couldn’t agree with that sentiment more, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I come from the inner city of Regina, and I grew up with a lot 

of friends where their folks worked out at IPSCO, now Evraz, 

Mr. Speaker. And of course, they found a way to take a lot of 

scrap steel from right around this province and put it to good 

use out at the old Interprovincial Steel Corporation, now Evraz. 

And the idea that you have to put up with broken machinery 

forever because there it is, and you can’t do anything about it, I 

think that’s odious to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that we look at the circumstance in Ottawa. It may 

be more acute these days, Mr. Speaker, but coming from a 

CCF-NDP perspective, the Senate isn’t a problem of a few bad 

apples, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The problem is the barrel’s bad 

itself and has no place in our democracy. And in terms of the 

arguments that have been raised over the years in terms of 

better regional representation, in terms of sober second thought, 

the speeches that have preceded me have put paid to those 

arguments rather elegantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I think that as we look to the history of this province, you 

think of someone like Justice Emmett Hall and the work that 

was done heading up a Royal Commission under Diefenbaker 

and what that did to lay the groundwork for medicare in this 

country. Or you think more recently about the work done by 

another royal commissioner, Roy Romanow, and the kind of not 

just sober second thought but foresight that can be brought to 

bear through an instrument such as the Royal Commission. And 

I think about the work that has been done in this province over 

the last decade where individual private members from this 

Assembly have been tasked to go forth to the province and ask 

the people what they think, to do that close work of thoughtful 

consultation with the people and coming back with ideas that 



3888 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

can be brought to bear in public policy. 

 

[15:30] 

 

There are many instruments that can be brought to bear that, 

you know, you hear about the great work that various Senate 

committees have done or certainly the champion work of 

certain senators throughout the history of this country. And this 

is not to take away from that good work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but it is to suggest that that is not the only venue that is fruitful 

for that kind of endeavour. There are other ways to get that 

policy work done, and surely to God the cost that we pay in 

terms of the health of our democracy isn’t worth it for a good 

committee report out of the Senate. 

 

I think about the anti-democratic nature of the Senate. And 

again I’m on a bit of a, you know, a streak lately, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of thinking about Jack Layton apparently. But 

I think about the climate change bill that was brought forward 

in a minority parliament and which passed the House of 

Commons which received the endorsement of the people’s 

representatives in the House of Commons only to be killed in 

the Senate by unelected, unaccountable senators. And to me 

that’s odious. 

 

I may not like things that are brought forward by members 

opposite, but the thing I know is this: they’ve got a mandate 

from the people. And if you’re a democrat, Mr. Speaker, and 

you respect the people’s will, then you respect the measures that 

receive majority endorsement in parliament. And for an 

unelected, unaccountable senate to have then turned around and 

killed that piece of legislation, to me I find, you know, no 

clearer argument need be considered in terms of the way that 

that institution should be wrapped up. 

 

In terms of the days that are upon us with the various scandals 

coming out of the Senate, Mr. Speaker, I’d say again it’s not a 

question, I think, of a few bad apples; it’s a question of a bad 

barrel. There are good people serving as senators as we speak, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. That has been the case historically, and if 

the Senate is allowed to continue I’m sure that will be the case. 

 

But in terms of the sober second thought, there are safeguards 

in our Constitution, the way that we’ve come to practice 

federalism, that stand up for those provincial rights, that in this 

province more than many others, we know well the battles that 

were joined in the ’70s and the ’80s in terms of the question of 

who calls the shots on natural resources, and fights that went 

back and forth between the provincial government and the 

federal government, and the clarity that eventually came to be 

brought to bear in terms of who has what power under our 

Constitution. 

 

And when I think about the patriation of our Constitution and 

then the establishment of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 

— again steps taken along the evolutionary path of our 

Constitution and our federalism in this country, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that I would submit render some of the initial impulses 

for the Senate invalid. 

 

And I say all of this mindful as well of the remarks of, I believe 

it was Premier Ross Thatcher once upon a time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, who had said that on a list of 100 priorities for the 

people of Saskatchewan, the Constitution would be about 104th 

or 5th, and its signal to just the sort of opening of the historical 

window that we have here today, where we do have this 

measure of agreement in this Chamber about the need for action 

now. 

 

And again it’s been very well dealt with in terms of the remarks 

that have preceded, but where the Premier closed in his 

remarks, he talked about the fact that there are those that 

question the ability for Canada to proceed as a unicameral 

chamber in terms of its parliamentary institution. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, historically that’s not been the case, but I’d 

also posit that history is made by the first-timers. History is not 

just to be observed and studied, it’s also to be made. And surely 

we’ve come to a place in our evolution as the good country of 

Canada where we can look to doing the initial sort of objectives 

that were set out for the Senate. Surely there are better ways to 

accomplish that, and surely we can clear this path and proceed 

once and for all, escaping this paralysis that comes up again and 

again. 

 

This has long been the policy of the CCF-NDP, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for the reasons that I’ve stated previously. But we as a 

party have not been beyond good faith efforts in terms of trying 

to come forward for Senate reform in the wake of Meech and 

with Charlottetown. We did not stand back from that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We joined to it. But those efforts to reform 

proved futile as well, and at the end of it I think confirmed for 

the CCF-NDP the futility of efforts put towards the reform of 

the Senate. 

 

I’ll end with a thought upon, once upon a time for myself, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege to work in Ottawa for a 

gentleman named Lorne Nystrom. And Lorne was elected at a 

pretty early age in 1968 and served through different of the 

historical battles and some tremendously interesting times. And 

he was an individual that made some of those good faith efforts 

around Charlottetown. He was also an individual that voted 

against the majority of his caucus on a question of provincial 

rights that saw him side with then Premier Blakeney against 

then leader of the federal party Ed Broadbent in terms of what 

was best for Saskatchewan. So this is an individual that had 

been through the mill in terms of the constitutional battles of 

this country, but had also been there in moments of good faith 

and trying to accomplish something for this country. 

 

But when I went to work for him in 1997, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

having gone through these different paths of evolution for the 

question of the constitution and the Senate, he came back to the 

House of Commons in 1997 as a devout abolitionist for the 

Senate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and did his part in trying to raise 

the need for action on the Senate. And he, as well as other 

individuals throughout the years in the CCF-NDP, did so from a 

perspective of having been considered for a Senate position 

themselves. And you know, it was always a good gig, 

particularly for the federal Liberals, to think about which 

CCFers or NDPers they could offer up a Senate position to. 

And I’m quite proud to say that in the main those folks said, 

you know, you can keep moving. They didn’t take that 

blandishment. 

 

And when I showed up in Ottawa in the fall of 1997 to work for 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3889 

Lorne Nystrom, I got to hear from one of my Liberal friends 

about how the office of then Senator Dan Hays, also the 

president of the Liberal Party of Canada, had played a 

fundamental role in the electioneering of the victorious Chrétien 

Liberals in that ’97 election. And it just affirmed for me, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that you’ve got unelected, unaccountable 

senators injecting themselves, you know, worse, Mr. Speaker, 

over into the electoral life of a country and of a province. 

 

And again we weren’t raising it for mischief last week, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of questioning the role that Senator Pamela 

Wallin played in the electoral life of this province. And the 

question I would like to have answered, Mr. Speaker, that gives 

me hope, I guess, is that if we can abolish the Senate, then that 

particular concern of myself is well taken care of because we 

won’t have any more senators to come forth and to inject 

themselves into the electoral affairs of the country or of the 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to be part of the debate here today. 

I’d like to say as well, it may be a question that the speeches of 

the Premier’s that I like in particular tend to be eulogies. The 

Premier, in my experience, had given a particularly fine set of 

remarks at the memorial for Allan Blakeney, and this is not to 

overextend the metaphor, Mr. Speaker, but I thought he gave a 

fine set of remarks here today. And may it be the beginning of 

the end for the Senate, the actions that we take here in this 

House today. I’ll be supporting the motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

certainly a pleasure to stand in this Assembly and to raise a few 

thoughts regarding the debate we are currently in today. And no 

doubt, Mr. Speaker, this debate, and the debate that’s taking 

place across the country, has a lot to do with . . . Well a number 

of members have been thinking about this for years and 

constituents across this . . . and Saskatchewan residents as well. 

It in some ways may be seen as having been spurred on a bit by 

what’s been going on in Ottawa. 

 

But I want to, first of all I want to just throw out a quote. And 

some of you may have taken the time to read The 

Parliamentarian that we just received and a quote by 

Jean-Rodrigue Paré in his article “Don’t Throw the Senate Out 

With the Bath Water.” “The Senate has only one problem, but it 

is considerable: it has no popular legitimacy.” 

 

I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through the years, I’ve been in 

debates on a number of occasions, and the debates have been 

anywhere about we should have and we must have a second 

body, a second body of sober thought, the importance to have a 

house of sober thought; to it’s time we moved on to a Triple-E, 

a duly elected, equal, and effective Senate; and now to the 

debate that’s taking place before us, the abolishment of the 

Senate. 

 

One of the concerns I have and I guess one of the thoughts that 

I’m bringing to this debate is the fact, have we, while there’s 

been ongoing debate through the years, have we actually, given 

recent happenings in Ottawa, actually taken the time for some 

second sober thought? My colleague, the Minister of Education 

and Labour, commented about the endeavours through the years 

to address and bring some changes that would make the Senate 

a more responsible and effective upper house. And, Mr. 

Speaker, while we’ve had a senate in Canada for a number of 

years — and members in the debate already have pointed out 

the number of years that the Senate has served this country — 

there are other countries in the world where there are senates. 

And Australia, for example, has a senate where there are 

basically equal representation. There are 12 members per state 

voted to the senate, and that election takes place at the same 

time as the general election. And from what I’ve been able to 

surmise, that seems to be working fairly well in that 

jurisdiction. 

 

We also have Germany, for example, has two houses — the 

Bundestag and the Bundesrat — an upper and a lower house. 

And the upper house there as well is made up of members 

appointed or elected by the . . . actually I believe in that case 

appointed by the regions. And there seems to be some ability of 

both houses being able to work together. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Earlier this afternoon we rescinded legislation calling for an 

elected senate that had been part of this Legislative Chamber’s 

bills, and there was no doubt that everyone has come to the 

understanding that electing a senate wasn’t possible and so why 

would you continue to have a bill sitting in the Chamber that 

really had no relevance at this time? However I would say 

having . . . Should we not make a further attempt to reform the 

Senate before we determine to abolish this institution? 

 

Finally I’m concerned that this motion, while reflecting the 

view of many members in Saskatchewan residences, brought 

forward at a time when the whole country is emotionally 

engaged in this debate — not because they have given it a lot of 

thought at the time, but more so because of recent happenings 

in Ottawa — and I’m also concerned that this motion is taking 

place and judgment being passed before due process is being 

followed. One of the senators in last night’s debate who 

abstained from the vote said this, and I quote, “I believe that we 

have rushed to judgment pending an RCMP investigation, and I 

don’t believe that we have taken all the facts into 

consideration.” 

 

This morning we gathered in the rotunda of this magnificent 

building to remember the many men and women who, through 

the years, through World Wars I and II, the Korean conflict, and 

the most recent Afghan conflict, who have stood for the rights 

and the freedoms that we take so much for granted. In fact in 

one of the messages this morning, it was spoken of the fact that 

we have the ability today to stand in this Chamber and debate 

because of the freedoms that were offered through the sacrifice 

of so many. We were reminded of the freedom of being able to 

speak our views freely and that all citizens have the right to due 

process and that we as individuals are presumed innocent until 

proven guilty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I bring forward these thoughts and these 

comments, I’m not oblivious to the fact that there’s a strong 

view of abolishment of the Senate. But I believe there’s a 

process, and it would have been my preference that this debate 

would have taken place at a later date, following closure of the 



3890 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

debate in Ottawa where all members and all individuals would 

have had the opportunity to have taken the time to really look at 

the debate and whether or not we move forward with the total 

abolishment of the Senate. So having said those few thoughts, I 

take my place and allow other members to speak. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 

into this debate which really is not necessarily a debate, but it’s 

a chance to talk about the future of our country as it relates to 

one of the constitutional parts of what we’ve had for many 

years. As my colleagues have stated and now the Premier has 

stated, we support abolition of this particular institution within 

the Canadian context. 

 

And this is a long-standing position of CCF-New Democrat 

politicians and people. And I think it relates to many questions 

around the fact that there was some power given to people who 

were appointed by the Prime Minister and effectively the 

executive side of government. And that particular concern has 

been there for a long time. So to have now the Premier and the 

Government of Saskatchewan come forward with a recognition 

that there’s something that needs to be changed, I’m very 

pleased about that, and I look forward to maybe a few other 

issues where the government will listen to the good advice that 

they get from this side of the House. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the negotiations took place around the 

development of the Constitution of Canada which, as we all 

know, includes the British North America Act, those two 

gentlemen who are on either side of you up there, here in this 

legislature — Mr. Macdonald, Mr. LaFontaine — were very 

much a part of the discussion about what we would have as the 

democratic structure for the country. And I think, to give them 

their due as the Premier has already done, they worked very 

hard to figure out a role for traditional Westminster institutions, 

both an upper house and a lower house. But unfortunately, it 

didn’t take too long in our Canadian history to understand that 

that upper house, the Senate, had outlived its usefulness. 

 

I’m often reminded when I’m sitting in this legislature or 

talking to people in Saskatchewan, that we have this legislature, 

we have this building, we have this form of government here in 

Regina because of the Senate. And people kind of forget this 

story. But the story goes that one of the negotiations around the 

establishment of a new province in the West was should it be 

the province of Buffalo, a great big province which would 

include Alberta and Saskatchewan, probably parts of northern 

Manitoba, and basically maybe have its capital in The 

Battlefords or some other spot, not Regina. But one of the 

considerations that came down to some of the final discussions 

in Ottawa was a discussion about how many senators would 

there be. And one of the things that they realized is if they had 

more provinces, they’d get to appoint more senators. And so 

here we are with Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that’s I think probably a time when it started to dawn on a 

few people that maybe this institution really wasn’t part of what 

we needed for our Canadian governance, for our Canadian 

democratic situation. Now as has been identified, there are a 

whole number of ideas about how the Senate might have been 

reformed or changed or dealt with. And as we all know, 

constitutional change is very, very difficult. And, Mr. Speaker, 

from this side of the House, having an institution that is 

unelected and not accountable has always been something that 

we would want to get rid of. 

 

Now it was quite curious to have the member from Moosomin 

mention the German senate, the Bundesrat. The Bundestag is 

the parliament or the house of commons and the Bundesrat is 

the senate or upper chamber. And one of the very interesting 

things about that institution is that it’s designed very much like 

what we have as our extra constitutional governance that the 

Premier referred to, which is the conference of the federation, 

the premiers. And basically the Bundesrat has six, five, four, or 

three members for each state. The biggest states get six. The 

smallest ones get three. 

 

And guess who the number one senator is from each state? It’s 

the premier. So you’d have, you know, the premier of 

Saskatchewan and the senior representative at the Bundesrat. 

And then every person in the Bundesrat from a state gets sort of 

a pecking order about when they could go. Really serious 

issues, the premiers are all there. Really minor issues, it’s some 

of us, maybe even from opposition, that would get to go. I’m 

not sure. But it’s interesting that some other countries . . . 

 

But the other side of that is, what we know this last summer and 

the summer before when the president of Germany Angela 

Merkel was having difficulty dealing with financial issues, it 

related to the fact that her government was elected as part of the 

. . . as a result of the vote in the upper house, or I mean in the 

house, the parliament side. But she didn’t have control over all 

of the states, and they were basically raising a lot of very good 

questions. 

 

So I guess I’m raising that because I know within the Canadian 

context we do not have a history of proportional representation 

or a whole number of other things that go with the German 

system, but that there are people who have looked at and tried 

to figure out whether some of those kinds of things might work 

in Canada. 

 

Now I think that practically, and our party has said for a long 

time, that the abolition of the Senate makes the most sense 

because the institution as it is set up in our Constitution no 

longer serves a function. And as we’ve seen over the last couple 

of years, this has even added even more problems to the public 

perception of it, and it may be a time that this will allow us to 

get rid of the Senate. 

 

Now one of the other aspects of any constitution relates to the 

issue of control or balance or dealing with the power of the 

prime minister or the premier. And a question that arises in 

Canada and is showing up in our papers over the last few 

months is that connection between the prime minister and the 

House of Commons when the prime minister has a majority 

government and therefore the executive power in there, and 

then the prime minister over and against the Senate. 

 

And practically it’s an issue that a number of Canadian political 

scientists have been asking about for quite a long time but 

especially a man named Donald Savoie. You’ve heard me talk 

about him before in this legislature. But one of the points that 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3891 

he made, about 20 years ago now, was that in Canada we have 

moved toward a form of court politics. And that’s a specific 

term that he used so you should put that in quotes, but basically 

the point is that our system of democracy, whether it’s on the 

provincial level or a national level, has seen more and more 

control go into the premier and cabinet but primarily the 

premier’s office or the prime minister’s office. 

 

And so one of the considerations that comes with the abolition 

of something like the Senate, which is this supposed place of 

second sober thought, is also to ask questions about the rest of 

the structure of our governments, both on a national basis and 

on a provincial basis, around how decisions are made and how 

some of that balance can be maintained in the structures that we 

have. And what we know is that within caucuses there are great 

debates, but much of that is not in the public so that the public 

understands how the actions of the premier or the prime 

minister have been tempered by work within the caucus. 

 

And so I think that we need to keep in mind when we’re 

looking at how today we’re proposing that we should support 

the abolition of the Senate that we shouldn’t just say, well that’s 

going to solve everything. Because there are a whole number of 

issues around how our government works that also needs to be 

addressed. And this may be actually a chance for us to go and 

address some of those issues and at the same time take some 

resources — $100 million a year — and place them in spots 

where they could be used to more advantage. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that this particular motion is 

here in front of this legislature today. I’m going to support it, 

and I’m very pleased that it also gives us a chance to look at 

some of the other issues that we have within our Canadian 

democratic system. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m certainly 

pleased to be able to present my remarks on this important 

issue, on this motion that we have before the House here this 

afternoon. 

 

I’ve been listening quite closely to all members who have 

entered into debate. All the members have made some excellent 

points, and I must say that, for the most part, I agree with most 

of what has been said here. But I do have an opinion on the 

Senate, and I thought it incumbent upon me to state my opinion. 

 

I think I’ve heard all members who have spoken this afternoon 

who have said that our current Senate that we have in Canada is 

broken. And I certainly agree with that; it doesn’t do the job 

that it was initially intended to do. You know, with the recent 

controversy that we see in Ottawa has certainly attracted a lot of 

attention and so, you know, people are tuned in. I hear stories 

last week of people . . . And I think someone mentioned, you 

know, in an airport the question period was on or debates were 

on in Ottawa, and people were gathering as if it was the seventh 

game of the Stanley Cup or the gold medal hockey game and so 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I wonder if this is the time for a nation to make a decision on 

this very important issue. Certainly we need to debate it, talk 

about it. I subscribe, and it’s sometimes difficult for me to 

subscribe to the old adage: never make an important decision in 

the heat of the battle. Take a breath. Step back a bit. Think 

about it and then make an informed decision looking at all 

points of view. And I think that’s something we need to do and 

so on. But on the positive side, this current attention that the 

Senate has attracted to itself has certainly spurred the discussion 

across the country. And I certainly think that’s a good thing. 

 

I’m a firm believer, Mr. Speaker, that at least at the federal level 

that we need to have some sort of chamber of, the old cliché, a 

chamber of sober second thought. 

 

I have to admit that I never was a strong supporter of a Triple-E 

Senate, and I’ll tell you why. Because it seems to me, the 

problem with the current Senate that we have, amongst many 

things, but one of the problems is that the senators are 

appointed by the prime minister of the day, and they are part of 

the federal caucus. And so there is really no division between 

the House of Commons and the Senate. 

 

You know, we’ve seen in recent days, Whip votes, those sorts 

of things. Well if you’re going to have that, you’re not going to 

have an opportunity for members of that House to speak their 

own minds, give their own views because they are part of a 

political party. And we all know, being members of this House, 

we’re all members of political parties. We know how parties 

work. 

 

There are good reasons for having a unified voice and those 

sorts of things, but sometimes I think the mindset of our 

caucuses are that you cannot publicly speak, you know, take an 

opposite view of your caucus. I have, you know, I’ve seen it on 

a rare occasion since I’ve been in this House, but generally it’s 

an unwritten rule that there may be a price to pay. At the very 

least there’s shunning will happen and so on, you know. And I 

mean that’s the nature. It’s not a criticism, but it’s the nature of 

the beast, I would say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In Canada, in our province, we have three levels of government. 

We have the municipal level, which is closest to the people. It’s 

very easy. If your garbage doesn’t get picked up or your street 

doesn’t get cleared, you can get a hold of your city councillor, 

your municipal councillor and, you know, express your 

concerns. 

 

The provincial level, we’re a little bit more removed from the 

people we represent, but all of us I believe go home almost 

every weekend. We have constituency assistants in our 

constituency and, you know, we are somewhat more accessible, 

you know. At the federal level, they sit much longer. Our 

members from Saskatchewan have long flights back to Ottawa, 

back and forth, although they do come home. And I know they 

try to keep in touch as much as they can with the constituents, 

but they are I think, if you ask them, at least it’s my impression 

they are more isolated from the people that they represent. 

 

So putting that all into a mix of being a bit more distant or quite 

distant from the people that you actually represent, you know, 

the whole politics of the party structure and caucus solidarity 

and so on, I think sometimes elected members can perhaps be 



3892 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

rushed through some decisions, feel that they can’t adequately 

stand up and represent their constituents or, at the very least, 

present their opinions. I mean we do see the case of . . . And it’s 

been an ongoing thing over the years where in Ottawa the Prime 

Minister’s Office has been increasingly more power and more 

power over the daily procedures in the House of Commons. 

 

You know, we see it here within our own legislature. I’ve been 

in this legislature for 14 years. I can’t remember a time . . . 

Perhaps there has been one or two times where a member on the 

government side — whether it was when the members opposite 

were in power or now when we are; this party is in power — 

where a member of the government stood up and actually spoke 

to, in second reading debate, to a piece of legislation. The odd 

time maybe, if it does. Well as I said, I can’t remember. 

 

Going to our committee structure, we have government 

members always have the majority of the committee members 

in the committees but yet very rarely that government members 

actually participate in the committees. And in the past, 

government members had, you know, participated. But it’s 

generally to make some sort of a political point, so there really 

isn’t that sober second thought. And I mean like I said earlier, 

there are reasons and I understand that. But sometimes I feel 

that the control is too much control from the centre, if I could 

use that term. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, when I have an opportunity to 

meet with other elected members from across Canada, it doesn’t 

take too long before the members, we get around to having this 

discussion, the amount of power we have ceded as elected 

members to our senior staff. Again, you know, there are 

reasons, but I think sometimes we as elected members are a bit 

guilty in ceding as much power to our staff as we have, and so 

on. 

 

So getting back to this motion today and to the Senate, I think 

that it’s important that we do have that chamber of sober second 

thought. If you look around the world at the matured 

democracies, most of them do have a second chamber. The 

member from Lakeview outlined the system they have in place 

in Germany. We know about the House of Lords in London. 

We have . . . The Australian parliament has a Senate that’s 

representative from the states. There are 150 members of the 

legislative . . . or the House of Commons there and 76 members 

in the Senate which are made up of representatives from their 

states and territories. And so there are models out there that 

perhaps we could look at. 

 

I liken the current situation here in Canada to a family that has a 

house that’s quite old, not serving the purpose, in desperate 

need of repair. And the question is, do we renovate or do we 

tear the thing down and rebuild, rebuild something that works 

and will serve the purpose? I would say that with the Senate, I 

would say that yes . . . I don’t know yet. I’m not at that point 

where whether the Senate in its present form can be reformed. It 

may not be able to. But one of the things that absolutely needs 

to be done is there has to be that break has to be given between 

the House of Commons and the Senate because as long as 

there’s that political tie, you will never . . . the Senate will never 

be that independent body. 

 

So there are certainly examples out there in other countries and 

other mature democracies that I think we need to look at. So I 

think perhaps that at this time we perhaps are maybe a bit hasty 

in calling for tearing down the house. Maybe we better take a 

breath and step back. But certainly I would like to make it 

abundantly clear that the current composition and the way the 

current Senate in Canada operates, its day is long past, and we 

need to make some significant changes, whether that’s tearing 

the current one down and rebuilding a new one that actually 

works and serves the people of Canada or reforming it. 

 

However we’re one province. There are 10 provinces and 3 

territories in Canada. The Supreme Court has been asked for an 

opinion as to how . . . dealing with the Senate. All those things 

need to transpire before there will be any action I’m sure in this 

country, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I’ve been very pleased to be 

able to add some remarks to this debate this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I hadn’t 

intended to rise and make comments this afternoon in the 

debate, and after hearing many of the comments that have been 

made so far, I thought I’d like to weigh in with just a couple of 

my own. So I thank the House for the opportunity to do that. 

 

There’s just a few comments. I’ve been thinking about this for a 

while, and in response to some of the comments that were just 

made, I don’t feel like this is a rushed decision. This is 

something that has been considered by the public and certainly 

by the members on this side of the House for many, many 

decades. So this isn’t a rushed decision, and it needs the 

impetus and the kick-start I think to start a serious debate 

amongst legislatures to test the will of the country. 

 

And in fact I would have liked to have seen the motion go a 

little bit further and challenge other legislatures to have the 

same debate and to put forth the view of the people, then take a 

snapshot of where we are right now in Canada in each 

provincial legislature. And I’m hoping if they’re following this 

in the news — and I know they will be — that other legislatures 

will be prompted to follow the initiative of this legislature and 

have this debate. 

 

I don’t feel it’s being rushed. I think that this is a long-standing 

topic for, I think some members pointed out, since the 

beginning of Confederation almost. And so I would urge 

members opposite to consider that or members to consider that 

and say, this is just the first step in a long discussion. And 

hopefully the rest of Canada will have the same discussion. 

 

One of the things that concerned me when the whole recent 

scandal started unfolding was a comment made by our former 

lieutenant governor and Clerk of this Assembly who was 

interviewed. And he was talking about his time in the Senate 

back in the ’90s I believe or sometime in the last millennium 

anyways. And he talked about what happens when you have 

people who are appointed for life, and he talked about the sense 

of entitlement that some of these people . . . It slowly crept in. 

When they first arrived in the chamber, they were gung-ho to 

do the work that the Senate was set out to do. And then all of a 

sudden a sense of entitlement started creeping in. 

 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3893 

And I won’t want to attribute this to every member of the 

Senate, Mr. Speaker. We know there are some very honourable 

and duty-bound senators who take that very seriously. But I 

worry about the sense of entitlement. And when there is 

largesse available on the taxpayers’ dime, it always concerns 

me when I see people that have unlimited and unaccountable 

access to taxpayers’ money to do different actions, either on 

behalf of Canada or not, maybe on some of their own motives, 

and no accountability. I think that’s a very dangerous situation 

to put people in. Good people are put in that situation, and 

sometimes I think, as we’ve seen, make some very unfortunate 

decisions as a result of that. 

 

We heard lots about the original purpose of an upper chamber. 

When you think of the development of the Westminster 

tradition of parliament, and that’s where the House of Lords 

didn’t quite trust the commoners. They didn’t think the 

commoners were able to make the right decisions. And these 

were the House of Lords people who had all the property. They 

had the power, certainly on a property level and an economic 

level. And it was those pesky commoners that had the ability to 

pass laws simply because of the way England developed and 

the way that people started demanding more from their Crown 

and the royalty. 

 

And when the royalty realized they needed the people in order 

to make the country work . . . You need the workers. You need 

the labourers. You need the commoners to make the country 

work and to pay the taxes. So when we had lords that were 

worried about their own personal interests able to sit in an upper 

house and oversee the commoners, Mr. Speaker, then you could 

see why it was important to them at the time to be able to 

override those decisions. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I think Canada is a very different place here in 2013. I don’t 

think that we need to have lords, and in this case senators 

second-guessing what we do as a House of Commons in our 

federal state. And certainly we see in the provincial level, we 

don’t need a sober second thought chamber here in 

Saskatchewan for us to make reasoned and good laws. And for 

us to think that it’s still necessary at the federal level I think 

overlooks the reality of the evolution of Canada, who the 

commoners are now. 

 

Who are the commoners? They’re people that are all walks of 

life, all professions. And we all work together to elect those 

commoners’ representatives in the lower chamber. And that we 

see is . . . It’s not to say that the lower chamber doesn’t need 

any reform either, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not the subject of 

today’s debate. But I think, as my colleague from Regina 

Lakeview indicated, there may be opportunity for discussion at 

that level as well. 

 

When you think about evolution in our democracy, one of the 

things I think that’s really important to mention is that women 

got the vote. And when Canada was formed, women were not 

allowed to vote, and that was seen as proper and acceptable in 

those days. Slowly women’s groups started organizing. 

Suffragettes came along. Nellie McClung had her say. And then 

the discussion started, and then eventually women were 

recognized as people or persons for the purpose of the Senate 

and for the upper chamber. And all of a sudden, with a lot of 

work on the part of the suffragette movement, women were 

recognized as people and they were given the vote and the 

franchise. Now that doesn’t happen overnight, and we need to 

see that kind of discussion happening in chambers like this 

throughout the country. This is another example to me of just 

evolution. 

 

I was fortunate last weekend to attend a Canadian parliamentary 

association conference in Newfoundland. And one of the topics 

that was headed up by a Clerk from the Winnipeg legislature 

was about parliamentary conventions and when it’s appropriate 

to maintain conventions. And we know those conventions are 

very cherished . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. This is a very important debate. I 

would hope that members would take that into consideration. If 

you wish to have private conversations, take them to the lounge. 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

talking about parliamentary conventions and how they are very 

cherished in houses of legislature across the country, and the 

speaker from Winnipeg indicated a number of conventions that 

we don’t always understand why they exist, but then she gave 

us some of the reasons behind them. 

 

One of the ones that I’m very interested in in this Chamber is 

the notion of petitions. And I’m hoping that we can have a 

discussion at some point about the role of electronic petitions in 

a modern legislature. We see other legislatures and other 

jurisdictions that are starting to move along that road. We need 

a discussion about that and what the role of petitions are in the 

day and age when we have the Internet, when we have easy 

access and, you know, what do they call . . . push-button 

activism. So can any yahoo sign up a petition and get 100,000 

people? Perhaps. So how would we as a legislature want to 

receive those types of petitions? 

 

But to insist on people going around with a photocopied sheet 

of paper and physically presenting themselves in a day and age 

when electronic communications is pretty much accepted across 

the board in other areas, why would we not have that discussion 

here in the legislature? And I’m saying the same thing applies 

for the Senate discussion. I think it’s one that every legislature 

should be considering, and I’m very proud that Saskatchewan is 

one of the first legislatures that is debating this type of motion. 

 

My final point, Mr. Speaker, is on the fact that the $100 million 

that are currently being expended in the Senate are taxpayer 

dollars. These are dollars that are paid for by the hard work of 

Canadian citizens. And, Mr. Speaker, it just really disappoints 

me, and in some instances disgusts, me when we see that 

extensive entitlement and that unelected, unaccountable activity 

going on on the backs of the hard work of Canadian citizens. 

And it bothers me to no end and I can see how largesse and that 

sense of entitlement can creep in at all levels. And I think we all 

have to really, you know, think about it in terms of our own 

activities and something I know that members keep in the back 

of their mind. This isn’t our money. This is taxpayers’ money 

that we’re spending. 

 

It’s something that was really hammered home to me when I 



3894 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

worked as a public servant for 17 years with the federal 

government, and my senior lawyer that I worked with was 

always talking about, this isn’t our money and this isn’t our 

time. This is Her Majesty’s time and it’s the people’s money. 

And I think that’s where our Senate has failed us. I think it’s let 

us down. It’s lost course. We’ve heard many metaphors as to a 

house that’s needing repair or a piece of machinery that needs 

repair. I also think it’s also not so much needing repair, but it 

simply isn’t functioning as it could or should, and it’s time that 

we get rid of it. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today on this day where we have marked the sacrifice 

of others in the service to Canada and the principles that we all 

would consider core values, we in this legislature, in this 

Assembly, are in a rare and privileged position to offer our 

reflections on Canada’s parliament, most specifically regarding 

our Canadian Senate, which means that we are speaking about a 

key part of the fabric of Canada in the 21st century. 

 

Canada, among the most highly cherished and easily recognized 

countries for the quality of life afforded our citizens. Canada, 

where our Coat of Arms offers a model drawn from Hebrews 

that speaks to the desire for a better country. And so we turn our 

attention, collectively, to the Senate where we would casually 

refer to the Senate as the upper house or upper chamber or the 

chamber of sober second thought. This chamber of sober 

second thought, we’re told by C.E.S. Franks in his book, The 

Parliament of Canada, was absolutely vital for the creation of 

our country. To quote, “Confederation would not have 

happened without the creation of the Senate.” So we begin to 

understand the weight and the significance of our deliberations. 

 

I’ll speak quite clearly. I am of two minds on the issue of our 

Senate. First and quite consistently, I have been a supporter of 

the idea or notion of a senate — that is, a supporter of 

bicameralism — and to this value I remain true. And I’m not 

alone. The roots of bicameralism can be found in the ancient 

world stretching from Asia across the Middle East and to Rome. 

The notion was refined in the medieval era, and as democracy 

was recognized in North America through the revolution, we 

saw that even the revolutionaries of the United States paid great 

tribute to the bicameralism that had been formed and founded in 

the modern sense in Great Britain. 

 

The constitutional delegate to the convention where the fate and 

future of the American constitution was deliberated upon and 

ultimately decided, the representative from Pennsylvania and 

Delaware, John Dickinson, offered a very frank assessment 

about the significance of British traditions: “In the formulation 

of the Senate, we ought to carry it through such a refining 

process as will assimilate it as near as may be to the House of 

Lords in England.” To this there was aroused no controversy. 

That is, even in the heart of revolution, principles were 

recognized in the value of a chamber of second thought given 

credence and weight. 

 

So if that’s the first portion of the two minds that I have, the 

second that has been equally consistent is that I have been very 

hard pressed to support the status quo of our Canadian Senate, 

in part out of regional grievance, that is, some notion of equality 

in part because of the democratic deficit that we see through an 

appointment process, now quite consistently regardless of 

partisanship that simply reflects and reinforces increased 

powers in the House of Commons and ultimately in the office 

of the Prime Minister — any prime minister. 

 

Before I go on, I would like to offer, I hope, some marks that 

we can all take stock in. And that is there are many, many 

hard-working, professional, constructive citizens and senators 

that contribute to the success of key aspects of our upper 

chamber. They come from Saskatchewan. They come from 

Alberta. They come from the West. They come from Ontario. 

They come from Quebec and they come from the Atlantic 

provinces. To these people, we all obviously turn our minds. 

They have done their best and continue to do so. 

 

I’d also like to acknowledge some of the important work that 

has been undertaken by the Senate — work in foreign policy, 

work in national security, work in affairs regarding Aboriginal 

people in Saskatchewan. There are many stories to tell here, but 

I’ll offer just one. 

 

During a recent gathering of Métis peoples and others at Back 

to Batoche, senators quietly and without fanfare gathered in a 

basement asking the advice and insights of elders and others 

from those communities, took note, and listened attentively as 

informal testimony was gathered and many lessons learned. I 

was fortunate to have been invited by a senator to simply sit in 

and observe this informal but vitally important session. 

 

But with these two comments deliberated upon and today 

delivered, fundamentally as I weigh the value of bicameralism, 

which I continue to support, and the challenges that plague and 

continue to plague Canada’s upper chamber, fundamentally it is 

to the latter, and that is that I have not been a supporter of the 

status quo of the Senate in this country. 

 

Indeed, among my first, if not formative, democratic acts as an 

adult, perhaps uniquely offered on this occasion, was a simple 

act of citizenship that, in the autumn of 1989, I voted for a 

senator, Senator Stan Waters. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Another act that many of us undertook in this House was that 

we then passed an Act to again, in good faith, attempt to 

reinforce that spirit of incremental, if uneven, change that we all 

hope for, for our Senate. But this hope, this faith in an 

incremental, if uneven, progress for Senate renewal has turned 

to a source of frustration. And hence, after much deliberation, 

my support for the motion today, but with a condition that this 

statement allow Canadians to think deeply about ways to 

rebuild or upon reflecting upon some of the statements and 

commentary of my colleagues, perhaps a refashioning of 

Canada’s upper chamber. 

 

As I support this motion, I cannot turn my back on the spirit and 

support that I continue to have for bicameralism. Provinces play 

a remarkably important role, perhaps an increasingly important 

role in checking national powers of our federal government. But 

I will hope that the deliberation and debate that ideally comes 

from today, not simply across Saskatchewan but across our 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3895 

country, I hope that it will allow us to think carefully about the 

categoric difference recognized in our constitution as well as in 

our culture of substate jurisdictions, provinces, and territories 

versus the role of a national government, our national 

government. 

 

In the deliberation, as today we recognized Remembrance Day, 

in the deliberation of war and peace, of international commerce, 

of national infrastructure, of federalism itself, provinces 

certainly have a role. But I would submit that so would an upper 

chamber. Quite simply there are key roles, fundamental roles to 

be played by an upper chamber when we think about sustaining 

our motto, the motto on our coat of arms: “They desire a better 

country.” 

 

I would also welcome the opportunity to ensure that the debate 

included potential dollars that could be saved by removing an 

upper chamber. I will posit, this is a slippery slope. Democracy 

costs money, but based on history, the alternatives cost a lot 

more. I hope that through this Act and our statement, there is to 

be another type of upper chamber that could maximize public 

dollars through thorough and professional accounting standards 

and at the same time strengthen Confederation, strengthen 

Confederation and Saskatchewan’s role in that Confederation, 

as manifest in a renewed or refashioned upper house. 

 

And so it is to strengthening Saskatchewan’s role in 

Confederation, Confederation itself, and the hope that an upper 

house would better reflect the long-held values that we have 

come to associate with Canada, our Canada, where we perhaps 

can turn our attention, where Saskatchewan may be able to play 

a leadership role. A generation ago, Alberta took a lead role in 

fostering the discussion and acting upon incremental Senate 

reform and renewal. Perhaps it will be to Saskatchewan — as 

Peter Gzowski described our dear province, the most Canadian 

of provinces — where we can play a key role, a fundamental 

role, in refashioning an upper house for Canada. 

 

Today I believe what we see is the close of an era. The end of 

the era of incremental senate reform and renewal as it has been 

tried in contemporary Western Canada. And I hope, as we turn 

the page, that we will help to write the next chapter of nation 

building, especially as it relates to future options for an upper 

chamber for our Assembly in Ottawa. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured today to join this 

debate on the Senate. You know, with the Senate . . . When I 

was first . . . I wasn’t very political. I always thought the 

Senate, I thought they were independent members. I was fairly 

politically naive in my twenties; I wasn’t very politically active. 

I thought they were actually what they were designed to be like 

in the States, that they were a second House: equally 

independent, that each province had a say. 

 

As I became more politically active with the Reform Party, and 

our party started with the Triple-E, and I know I remember 

being part of that, our policy. And that was very well received 

at the doorstep — was, you know, the Triple-E, the reform. 

Because the people knew for a very long time that the Senate 

was fatally flawed, right from the start when you look at how it 

was even formed. 

 

And as I watched it evolve, I could . . . I realize now that 

unfortunately they’re not going to change. They’re not going to 

. . . we’re not going to get any decent reform. So I believe that 

we may have to abolish it. I mean, that’s the will of the people. 

Just that’s not this legislature; it’s just a motion. 

 

But I know when I talk to constituents, they’re very unhappy 

with the way the Senate has been set up unfairly. And I’ll go 

back to when it first started with Upper and Lower Canada. 

There was 24, I believe, 24 senators; the Maritimes had less, got 

less. As the provinces each came on, they were given less than 

Ontario and Quebec. How is that fair?  

 

In the States they started with 13 colonies. That’s what formed 

the United States. As each state came on board, it was given the 

equal number of representatives, the same as each one of the 13 

original colonies. In Canada that didn’t happen, and to me that’s 

why it’s fundamentally flawed right from the start. It seems like 

the base of power wanted to be controlled by Upper and Lower 

Canada, then transferred to Ontario and Quebec. I would think 

with time that they would want that resolved. Myself, coming 

from the province of Saskatchewan, I mean we don’t have as 

much population as Ontario and Quebec but we have more 

population than the Yukon, the territories, Nunavut. I feel that 

they should have an equal say just the same as the province of 

Saskatchewan does, even though they don’t have the same 

number of people involved. 

 

And that’s what I feel an upper house is. That’s what I 

understood an upper house to be when I was a kid, when I 

wasn’t that politically astute as what, you know, exactly how 

our house was set up. To me an upper house was supposed to be 

like the States. You have one area or the lower house, you have 

one set up by population, the other by area. So a state the size of 

Montana, very little population, has as much say in one house 

as the state of California, state of New York. I’ve always 

admired that, and I’ve always thought we’ve been 

fundamentally flawed. 

 

And as time gone on I’ve got to talk to, unfortunately very few 

senators. I don’t see many. But I’ll talk a little bit about the 

personal, some personal interactions I had. I was in the CPA 

[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] event in Quebec. 

This is many years ago. This is when we were still in 

opposition. And there was a senator there. He was from 

Quebec. And naturally our stance then under — we were in 

opposition — was still you know, supporting Triple-E, reform. 

You know, he went on to explain why that was fundamentally 

wrong. 

 

You know, he said there was people in the Senate . . . How do 

you put it? It would be beneath them to actually ask for a vote, 

that you wouldn’t have the quality of people there. And I’m 

thinking what, like me? Like my counterparts on both sides of 

the House? I felt like saying, is that what you mean, you know? 

And he went on to say, no, we need a better . . . He didn’t say 

better, but he said we need a certain quality of people in the 

house, and that’s why it has to be appointed. You wouldn’t have 

that quality if they had to go door to door to knock, to ask for 

the right to represent the people. And that’s what senators are. 

They’re the same as us. They’re representing constituents. 



3896 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

They’re representing provinces. You should be out there talking 

to the people to find out their views. 

 

You know, the only senator I’ve ever seen at an event in rural 

Saskatchewan was Pamela Wallin. We were at Dafoe when we 

were doing the . . . dedicating the base there, an old World War 

II base. And I mean, she was there. She was out talking to 

people, stayed there all day. 

 

I’m not discounting the work that senators have done. But do 

they deserve to be there for life? We have many defeated 

candidates that worked hard, on both sides of the House — 

maybe more on that side — but they worked hard. Do they 

deserve to be, you know, do they, would they deserve to be here 

for life? No. The people, the constituents have spoke. There’s 

been a, maybe, change in policy. That is why I have a problem 

with the Senate being the way it is. 

 

You know, I look back in the history, I’ve got many pages of it 

here. The only reform that I could actually see that have 

happened, in the information I got from our library, was in ’65, 

1965. They changed from when you were there to the day you 

died, till age 75 you had to retire. In 100 years that’s the only 

change that they made, the only meaningful reform. That was 

50 years ago. I mean, how much longer do we have to wait to 

make meaningful reform in the Senate? 

 

I mean, I just believe just the way it is set up that there needs to 

be reform. And if it has to start right from scratch, we may have 

to do that, because there doesn’t seem to be, with the senators 

now, any desire to change. If there is any little bit of talk of 

change, they always say automatically, they’re grandfathered in. 

The ones that are there are grandfathered in. I mean, how . . . 

You have been there for 10, 20 years. You can’t go out. And 

many of them could probably go out and win an election. And 

you probably should, because it’s public money that’s 

supporting you. You’re there to represent the views. When 

we’re there, in a democracy — and this is a democracy, this 

country — you’re here to represent the people, you know. It’s 

an honour to represent them. 

 

We go back to . . . I’ve got another story on another CPA trip. 

And it was Ottawa; it was international. And we were sitting 

around a table. And there’s a small African nation, and I forget 

the name of it. But there they have districts. They call them 

districts, I believe. They have an elected representative, but they 

also have somebody that’s appointed for five years. The 

government gets to appoint them for five years. So you really 

have two representatives from that district. The government in 

power gets to represent them, so it’s kind of an offset if too 

many members get voted in in the opposition, you know. But 

it’s only for five years. You know, and we were kind of like, we 

were just sitting around and thinking that’s not right, whatever. 

 

And then we were talking about constituents and how we deal 

with constituents. And the one that was appointed for five 

years, you know what she said? I can remember that. She said, 

you know, constituents, they can be a bloody nuisance. You 

know, well yes, I imagine they could be if you don’t have to 

answer to them, you know. You don’t have to, you know, if 

you’re not elected, where you have to actually ask for the vote. 

 

But then there was a guy from, and I forget his name, Ray 

somebody. He said, you know, how does your upper house 

work in Canada? I said, well they’re appointed. He said, for 

how long? I said, well just to 75. Okay, they’re five years; 

you’re 75. Okay. By who? Well the party in power. Yes, yes, 

the party in power. And then he said, but they’re independent, 

right? He said, they’re not . . . No, I say, they actually sit in 

caucus, so you know, from what I understand they’re party 

partisan. He said, really? How is that a democracy? He said, 

you know, I always thought you guys were pretty high on 

democracy. And I said, well we are, up till we hit the Senate, I 

guess. 

 

And I changed the subject to rugby even though I don’t know 

nothing about rugby because . . . But you know what? He 

actually wanted to discuss it a bit, you know, go on to more and 

more. But I actually couldn’t defend it. Like, I had nothing. 

Like he said, do you think that system’s kind of right? And I 

had nothing. I just . . . You know, that’s our system, but when 

you lay it out like that, to me it doesn’t seem right, you know, 

that you’re appointed for life. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Another thing I went through here, some of the provinces had 

upper houses. And the main reason they got rid of them, it says 

in the library here, was partisan appointments. The people lost 

confidence in that upper house. There was a couple that said 

economy of scale, money. But the more reasons I think, the 

extra . . . There was four reasons, I think, that said partisan 

appointments. And the people lost confidence in the upper 

house and then naturally, you know, it just dissolved. 

 

And unfortunately I think our people have lost confidence in 

this upper house. And I’ll admit, to me, it’s a great institution. I 

mean, you know, that’s why I love being in this legislature. I 

love the upper and lower houses. But I just don’t like the way 

that one is set up. And when I talk to my constituents, you 

know, they don’t speak very highly of the upper house. They 

don’t speak very highly of the Senate. It’s almost becoming, 

you know, a joke on the coffee row. And it shouldn’t be. These 

are people that are in, you know, one of our top legislative 

chambers. You know, they shouldn’t be that way, but they are 

because they’ve let . . . They haven’t adapted to change. And 

I’ll get . . . Well it’s an institution. 

 

You know I can remember a long time ago when there was a lot 

of golf clubs in the States where only male members could join. 

One of the arguments was, well it’s an institution; I mean it’s 

just the way it’s always been. But that’s changed with time. 

And I think the Senate has to change, but I don’t think there’s 

any will with the senators to change. I’ve never heard any one 

of them say, you know what, this is wrong to be appointed for 

life. 

 

I know at one time we had our Senate bill. I talked about 

running for the Senate because I respect the House of 

Commons. I respect this House. I also respect the Senate. I 

would run in an election. Now I doubt if I would have ever been 

appointed, but if I was, I think my ego would probably say, yes 

take the appointment. But I think it would eat at me over the 

many years knowing that, you know what, I didn’t really earn 

this. It was because I did something that the Primer Minister 

liked or I raised money or just for whatever reason. I didn’t earn 



November 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3897 

it. And that is fundamentally wrong when it comes to 

democracy. 

 

We’re a democratic nation. I mean right from the Grecian times 

when democracy started, it started with the will of the people. 

And the Senate will have to change by the will of the people. 

We’re starting a message here. I’m hoping that that message 

will grow, because I mean, one province, one motion isn’t 

going to change the Senate. But they need to hear that there is a 

will for change out there, that people want a change. And if you 

will not change, if you are stubborn and will not make a change, 

then maybe you’ve become irrelevant to politics and to the 

people of Canada. And if you are, then you need to be 

abolished. 

 

You know, I support this motion wholeheartedly. You know, I 

mean I started with the Triple-E and worked and just watched 

and listened over the years, and just realizing that they’re never 

going to change, that there is no will to change. Yet the people 

want it. But you know what, they’re so far removed from the 

people unless there’s something in the news that brings this 

foremost — and there is now — then it’s on people’s minds. 

But you know what, most people don’t even realize that they 

have senators. They don’t realize that we have six. If I was to 

go around, if you just mentioned the Senate, they’d just say, 

what do we need them for? They’ve never seen a senator. So 

how do you represent a province, any province, if you don’t 

spend a lot of time in it, if you’re not out at events, if you don’t 

have an office? I imagine they have something in Ottawa, and 

maybe an email address. But you’re there, the Senate is there to 

represent the will of its provinces, you know, to be the second 

sober thought for that province. 

 

But if you’re not engaging in that province . . . And there might 

be some that are, but I think with the election you would get 

more engagement. You would get where people would say, yes, 

we support the Senate but these are our views, and this is what 

we want to hear you talk about. 

 

I know the Premier talked about the energy program. You 

know, you’re right. I never heard a senator ever stand up . . . 

BHP Billiton, never heard a senator ever just — from 

Saskatchewan or Alberta or for an issue that’s in that province 

— saying, you know what, I’m voting against my caucus or I’m 

talking against this or I’m bringing this motion. You know, you 

never hear anything about them. They’re just like they’re a 

silent majority way back in the background, and they really, 

they almost feel like if they don’t say anything, people would 

just ignore them. And now that it’s been brought . . . And it’s an 

issue in the news. 

 

So I’m hoping that the people will start to realize that if they’re 

not going to reform that they need to be abolished. And it’ll 

have to start and it’ll start with the will of the people, but I’m 

glad that we’re starting here in this legislature. And I think 

other legislatures, some of them are going to follow suit. 

They’re going to follow suit with motions along this line. And 

if the talk is there that we need to get back to democracy, we 

need to get back to the principles of democracy. And that’s not 

in the Senate. And I mean with partisan appointments, it just 

doesn’t work anymore. And with them being ruled by the 

caucus and having, you know, some provinces have more 

senators than others and no accountability. You’re there. You 

don’t have to answer to anybody. 

 

Another thing I heard about, and I forget which news reporter 

said it . . . I think it was Global, could be on Global. He said, 

you know, the second day the motion came out in the House, in 

the Senate, when they were making the motion on the three 

senators, he said, this is the first time in a long time, he said, 

they’re all here. They’re all here. And I’m a betting man, but I 

don’t have the records in front of me, but I’ll bet you on one 

hand, in one session of Senate, you could count the number of 

days each one is there, that the Senate is full. I could be wrong 

but I’ll take a bet that I’m not. 

 

Because there’s no accountability. It’s not televised. There is a 

Hansard, you know. And in this day and age, as things have 

moved on, I think the Senate has to move on. And if it’s not 

willing to move on, then I’m sorry to say but I support 

abolishing it. And with that I support the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question moved by the Premier is: 

 

That this Assembly supports the abolition of the Senate in 

Canada. 

 

All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. They ayes have it. 

The motion carries. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

move: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada and 

the leaders of the opposition parties in the House of 

Commons, as well as the premier of each Canadian 

province and territory. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada and 

the leaders of the opposition parties in the House of 

Commons, as well as the premier of each Canadian 

province and territory. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



3898 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2013 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 

a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:55.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Page 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3869 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3869 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3869 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3869 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3869 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3869 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3869 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3870 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3870 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Sisters in Spirit Candlelight Vigil 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3870 

 Service of Remembrance 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3870 

 Walk to Breakfast and Extreme School Makeover Challenge 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3871 

 Lieutenant Governor’s Military Service Pin 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3871 

 Global Transportation Hub Groundbreaking Ceremony 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3871 

 Investment in Trades and Technology Centre  

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3871 

 Saskatchewan Family Physician of the Year 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3872 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Special Care Standards and Staffing 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3872 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3872 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3873 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3874 

 IPAC–CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3875 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3875 

 Educational Assistants and Other Resources in the Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3876 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3876 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 110 — The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3877 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 110 — The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3877 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY ON BILLS 

 Bill No. 110 — The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act ......................................................................................................... 3878 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 110 — The Senate Nominee Election Repeal Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3878 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 3878 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3879 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Abolition of the Senate of Canada 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3879 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3883 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3884 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3885 



 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3886 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3887 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3889 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3890 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3891 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3892 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3894 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3895 

  Harrison (transmittal motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 3897 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


