




















































Hansard: October 28, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 3A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3639 

 October 28, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, it is my pleasure to introduce to you 

today Caitlin Taylor seated in the west gallery — Caitlin, you 

just give us a wave here — and joining Caitlin is Chelsea 

Coupal from my ministry, Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Caitlin was our 2013 Saskatchewanderer, and she 

did a fantastic job representing our province this past summer 

by showcasing all there is to do and see in Saskatchewan during 

the summertime. She helped achieve the Saskatchewanderer 

project’s ultimate goal. She helped to break down 

Saskatchewan stereotypes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that Caitlin did some videography of 

her travels around the province. And I saw a short clip of it, her 

video this morning at an announcement that we did — I’ll speak 

a little bit to later on — but she visited all the corners of the 

province and engaged in social media with people from, not 

only across the province, but across Canada and indeed the 

world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now Caitlin’s taking a little bit of time off. She tells me she’s 

going back to university in January, and she aspires to be a 

journalist. And so we wish her well on that endeavour, and we 

just want to thank her for all of her hard work this past summer, 

Mr. Speaker, in promoting all the great tourism attractions that 

we have in this province. Thank you so much, Caitlin. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and on 

behalf of the official opposition, we too want to thank Caitlin, 

our Saskatchewanderer, for all the work she’s done and all the 

places she’s visited. And we know that she got an opportunity 

to see some of the wilds of Saskatchewan but now she’s going 

to see the wildness of question period, which is an experience 

that everyone should encounter. So good luck to you on your 

future studies, and we look forward to the happenings for this 

year’s Saskatchewanderer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased today to rise in the Assembly and introduce two 

individuals who are from my constituency. We have Judy 

Hamilton, who is a long-time resident of Fishing Lake, and Phil 

Frohman, who is her partner. They are here today with Lenni, 

and I know that they are very interested in the workings of the 

Assembly. And I’m always proud to have somebody from the 

constituency here, so I’m asking everyone to please help me 

welcome these individuals to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members, it gives me great pleasure to 

introduce Ms. Phyllis Jones, who is here today at her 

Legislature today to receive the 2013 Council of the Federation 

Literacy Award which will be presented a little later this 

afternoon. Joining Phyllis today is her husband, Ken Jones. 

 

The Council of the Federation Literacy Award was created by 

Canada’s provincial and territorial premiers in 2004 to 

recognize the importance of literacy as an essential building 

block for a vibrant society and economy. The award is 

presented to individuals who demonstrate outstanding 

achievement, innovative practices, and excellence in literacy. 

 

Phyllis Jones embodies all of these qualities. For the past 24 

years, she has volunteered at the Regina Public Library and 

helped numerous adults achieve their personal literacy goals. 

For the past 11 years, she has led weekly English language 

tutoring sessions for recent immigrants, assisting them with the 

transition to life in Canada. This incredible commitment to 

literacy is truly worthy of recognition, and I would ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming these special guests to 

their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the official opposition, it’s my pleasure to welcome Ms. Phyllis 

Jones and Ken Jones to their legislature to recognize and 

congratulate Ms. Phyllis Jones on her recognition, her award, 

and for her life of leadership in literacy in our province. And we 

recognize the power of literacy for a family, for a community. 

We recognize the bridge that it provides from often despair and 

challenge to hope and opportunity. And your life’s work, 

through the Regina Public Library, working with so many 

newcomers that have come to our province exemplifies that and 

certainly provides an extended opportunity to many. 

 

So thank you so much to Ms. Phyllis Jones for her life of 

leadership and the very important recognition, winning an 

award on behalf of the Council of the Federation Literacy 

Award. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I would like 

to introduce a resident from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, Terry 

Abadiano. Terry’s been a resident for . . . has been employed at 

SaskPower for 37 years. He’s now retired. He’s got the 

opportunity to now come and observe the Assembly. So thank 

you very much, Terry, for making time to come today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, I would like to introduce Mr. Dave 



3640 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Kerr, who is seated in the west gallery, to all members of this 

Legislative Assembly. If you can give a wave, Mr. Kerr, that 

would be appreciated. 

 

Dave is a rancher from Lashburn, Saskatchewan. He is also 

finance Chair of the Saskatchewan Forage Council, and I met 

with them earlier today. I ask all my colleagues to join me in 

welcoming Dave Kerr to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — I’d like to take this opportunity to 

introduce to you 38 grade 10 students from the Gordon F. Kells 

High School in Carlyle seated in the Speaker’s gallery 

accompanying their teachers, Mrs. Dawn Jones and Ms. Brenda 

Beaver, and parent chaperones, Mrs. Tammy Forcier, Mrs. 

Starley Meisner, Mrs. Nickie Doty, and Mrs. Dorothy Harvey. I 

would ask all members to welcome them to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for reasonable funding so all 

Saskatchewan students can do well. And we know that students 

who need support from educational assistants and other 

resources are not getting this support because of chronic 

underfunding. New Canadian students are often not receiving as 

much support as they need for learning English, and the 

Government of Saskatchewan has chronically underfunded 

student support. And their agenda must change to reflect the 

real priorities of Saskatchewan classrooms today. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the government to immediately 

increase financial support for all Saskatchewan students, 

including resources to limit class sizes, to provide 

resources for students with special needs, to support 

English as an additional language, and to provide more 

support for Aboriginal education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to rise to 

present petitions in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School on behalf of concerned residents right 

here in Regina. We know that this vital infrastructure to a 

community, to students, and to this school was not addressed 

for many years despite calls from the community and the school 

board to that government, Mr. Speaker. And we know that that 

caused the significant deterioration of that gym and caused the 

closure of that gym. And now we need to work together to 

ensure a new gym for Sacred Heart School. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the Sask Party 

provincial government to immediately commit to the 

replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 

Community School. 

 

And the petition is signed by concerned residents here in 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefitted from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent to own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our beautiful North. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good residents of Air Ronge, La Ronge. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present a 

petition for a private bill on behalf of petitioners from St. 

Thomas More College. The prayer of the petition requests to 

amend the Act of St. Thomas More to reflect the role of St. 

Thomas More College society and to make other incidental 

changes to the Act. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to amend An Act 

respecting St. Thomas More College, being chapter 6 of 

the Statutes of Saskatchewan, 2001 accordingly. 

 

And as your duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

The petition are signed by the president, chief financial officer, 

Chair of the board, governors of St. Thomas More, and I’m 

pleased to present it on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Commitment to Our Shared Futures 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday the city of Saskatoon 

permanently raised the Métis and Treaty 6 flags in front of city 

hall, and over the weekend the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations held its annual cultural celebration and 

powwow. I congratulate the First Nations and Métis on these 

significant events. 

 

I enjoyed my time at the powwow, and frankly I would love to 

see this legislature fly the Métis and treaty flags. But as I said in 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3641 

my remarks at the powwow, the true measure of our 

commitment to our shared futures is not just whether we show 

up at events or make token gestures. Rather the true measure of 

our commitment to our shared futures with the First Nations 

and Métis is what we actually do. It’s whether we seek to bring 

people and communities together or whether we choose to 

exploit division and misunderstanding. That is the true measure 

of our commitment to our shared futures. And that’s also a 

measure of our commitment to building a stronger 

Saskatchewan for generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Saskatchewan’s First Nations and Métis on the flag raising and 

the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Pow 

Wow. And I hope both of these events serve as a reminder to all 

members of what really matters. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 

today to bring attention to Breast Cancer Awareness Month, 

which is its annual campaign to increase awareness of this 

disease. Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers 

among women and has affected many people across this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while most people are aware of breast cancer, 

many forget to take the steps to have a plan to detect the disease 

in its early stages and encourage others to do the same. We have 

lost too many mothers, grandmothers, daughters, sisters, and 

neighbours to this illness. Mr. Speaker, this disease may have 

the power to take away a woman’s health, but it will never be 

strong enough to take away her heart, her spirit, and her love. 

 

We are making progress in the fight against this illness. Early 

detection, effective treatment, innovative research, and 

unconquerable spirits are turning the tide in the battle against 

breast cancer. 

 

Today I want to remember all of the brave women who have 

been touched by breast cancer and all those who have lost loved 

ones. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to 

recognize Breast Cancer Awareness Month and all those who 

have been affected by the disease. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Treaty 4 Flag Raised at Board Office 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize 

Thom Collegiate and the students of Ms. Kim Sadowsky’s 

native studies 10 class for successfully spearheading the effort 

to fly the Treaty 4 flag at Regina Public School’s board office. 

The ceremony took place at the J.A. Burnett Centre on October 

15, 2013 and was attended by trustees, elders, administration, 

students, and parents. 

 

Treaty 4 was entered into between the Crown and the area First 

Nations in 1874. It is critical that this agreement to share 

territory in exchange for various commitments and provisions, 

including the well-being of the children in generations to come, 

is understood. It is encouraging to see the leaders of tomorrow 

in co-operation with the Regina Public Schools, the Treaty 4 

First Nations promoting Treaty 4 education and treaty education 

and better recognition of First Nations and Aboriginal voices in 

the province. 

 

Building a full understanding of who we are as treaty people is 

invaluable. The treaty relationships between First Nations and 

the Crown are important to all Saskatchewan residents, whether 

Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal. As provincial legislators, we too 

need to know and remember our shared history and value our 

cultural differences, and this must be reflected through our 

actions. 

 

I call on all members of this Assembly to commend and thank 

the students of Thom Collegiate, Regina Public School’s board 

and administration, and Treaty 4 First Nations for their 

leadership. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Prairie Football Conference Championship 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday afternoon there was another epic battle 

between the two Saskatchewan football clubs when the Regina 

Thunder played the Saskatoon Hilltops in this year’s Prairie 

Football Conference championship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give huge congratulations to the Regina 

Thunder on their monumental 21 to 16 win over their rivals in 

Saskatoon. This is the third time in four years the two 

Saskatchewan teams have met in the championship. And this is 

the Thunder’s first Prairie Football Conference championship 

victory, so it was a very special win for all the players, coaches 

on the team. The Thunder were led by the Prairie Football 

Conference champ MVP [most valuable player], Asher 

Hastings, who threw for over 300 yards and a touchdown. 

 

Now that the Thunder has secured this win, they will be the 

hosts for the Canadian Bowl on November 9th when they 

compete against the Vancouver Island Raiders. If the Thunder 

are successful in defeating the Raiders, it will be the 32nd time 

a team from Saskatchewan will have won the national 

championship. I’d like to especially recognize Coach Scott 

Macauley on his team’s win in his first year as head coach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate all the players, 

coaching staff, and medical staff on their team win and wish 

them the best of luck in the Canadian Bowl next week. Go 

Thunder. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Integrated Health Centre Opens 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last week I 

had the opportunity to attend the grand opening of the new 



3642 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Parkland Integrated Health Centre in Shellbrook. It was an 

exciting day for residents of Shellbrook and the surrounding 

communities, and it was a milestone for our province's health 

care and long-term care infrastructure renewal plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2009 we announced a plan to replace 13 

long-term care facilities in our province. This new integrated 

facility replaces the Parkland Terrace Nursing Home as well as 

the Shellbrook Hospital. The success of this project is an 

example of our commitment to renew health and long-term care 

infrastructure in the province. 

 

We have invested tremendous resources to strengthen our 

long-term care infrastructure to ensure our long-term care staff 

have an efficient workplace and residents have a safe and 

comfortable place to live. We are ensuring health care providers 

have the work environment they need to provide quality care. 

This infrastructure project provides strong evidence that having 

high-quality health services in rural areas is possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government continues to deliver our promise 

to put patients and long-term care residents first, and it’s 

committed to improving the health care infrastructure in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Twinning of Highway 11 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this 

Assembly today to share that a major milestone to support 

Saskatchewan’s growth was reached last week as the last 

section of twin lanes on the busy Highway 11 corridor between 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert opened to traffic. I had the 

pleasure to attend the event to celebrate the completion of this 

project, along with my colleagues from Prince Albert Northcote 

and Batoche. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Highway 11 is a vital link between Prince Albert, 

Saskatoon, and Regina which serves our province’s 

resource-rich North and supports significant mineral and timber 

resource development, manufacturing, and tourism. 

 

The second set of lanes will provide for increased capacity, 

reduced logistics costs, and improved access for local 

industries, while at the same time making for a much safer and 

more efficient drive for shippers, tourists, and other motorists 

who use Highway 11. The increased use of this highway 

reflects the growth of our province in recent years. Having the 

infrastructure to support this growth is key, Mr. Speaker, and 

this is what this project is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

thanking the Ministry of Highways and their partners who 

contributed to the completion of this project that opens up 

traffic to beautiful northern Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 

I had the pleasure of presenting in the 30th annual 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce ABEX [Achievement in 

Business Excellence] Awards gala at TCU Place in Saskatoon. I 

was joined by my colleagues from Saskatoon Southeast, 

Saskatoon Greystone, and Moose Jaw North. 

 

The ABEX Awards, which stands for achievers in business 

excellence, have gained prominence as the most highly 

esteemed symbols of business excellence in Saskatchewan. 

They highlight pivotal business elements of provincial 

prosperity and are the only business award that honours all 

private sector enterprises in Saskatchewan, regardless of size or 

activity. 

 

I was honoured to present Affinity Credit Union with the 

Aboriginal Business Partnership Award on behalf of 

SaskEnergy. Affinity Credit Union is a leader in delivering 

financial services and also values the cultural diversity of its 

members. Additionally Affinity brings a strong sense of 

community and connection to Saskatchewan’s heritage and 

strives to enhance social, economic, and environmental 

well-being for its members and communities. 

 

Other ABEX Awards winners included Ron Carson, Anderson 

Pump House, Diamonds of Detroit, Alliance Energy Ltd., 

Superior Cabinets, Bioriginal Food & Science Corporation, 

Shercom Industries, KDB Investments, Prairie’s Edge 

Development Corporation, LB Distillers, and Wilhelm 

Construction Services Inc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Affinity Credit Union and all other 2013 Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce ABEX Award winners. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Issues Raised by Nurses 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We learned this past 

weekend, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan’s nurses have grave 

concerns about the safety not only of residents in long-term care 

facilities but also of patients in hospitals. So my question is for 

the Premier: does he share the nurses’ concerns or does he 

stubbornly dismiss them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, over the first term and now longer, Mr. Speaker, of 

this government’s administration, this government has been 

very successful in signing a partnership agreement with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Mr. Speaker, that set out a goal 

of hiring 800 new nursing positions over the first term of 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report to the House that not only 

did we achieve that, but we exceeded it by more than 200, Mr. 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3643 

Speaker, so that there’s now more than 1,000 more nurses in 

Saskatchewan providing terrific care to the people of 

Saskatchewan, to our patients, Mr. Speaker. Through our 

partnership, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully renewing that 

partnership in our negotiations that are upcoming, we look 

forward to having a fulsome conversation with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses to address concerns that they 

would have. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the very specific question was 

whether or not this government shares the concerns that have 

been raised by our province’s nurses. According to Tracy 

Zambory, the president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, a 

lack of staff in emergency departments in regional hospitals 

means more and more patients are transferred to Saskatoon and 

Regina. This is what Zambory says: “The pressure is immense 

in Regina and Saskatoon. What nurses are telling us about the 

pressure is that they are very fearful for patient safety. They are 

very fearful that there is going to be a tragic event happening.” 

 

So my question is for the Premier: is he also very fearful for 

patient safety or does he think that Saskatchewan’s nurses are 

overreacting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government will endeavour to do 

what we have already done over the last six years, is take the 

concerns of all of our health care providers very seriously, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, when we read quotes before 

the 2007 election from then president Rosalee Longmoore 

talking about the nursing shortage under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] where she said, and I quote, “There is no 

light at the end of the tunnel unless it’s a train. These staffing 

levels are dangerous,” Mr. Speaker, that’s why this government 

took action. We hired 800 additional nursing positions, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact we exceeded that by an additional, roughly 200 

more than that, Mr. Speaker — more than 1,000 nurses in the 

system that weren’t there before when the NDP were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the pressures on regional centres, Mr. Speaker, we 

are working to address the emergency room situation that we 

find in our province, Mr. Speaker, which could only be said to 

have been exacerbated, Mr. Speaker, by 52 rural hospitals and 

the Plains here in Regina closing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, nurses have expressed that they 

are very fearful about patient care, about patient safety. That 

was the question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The main reason our province’s nurses are very fearful for 

patient safety is what they identify as “dangerously low staffing 

levels in acute and long-term care facilities.” I’ll repeat for the 

government’s sake — they are very fearful, Mr. Speaker, 

because of dangerously low staffing levels in long-term care 

facilities and in hospitals. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he agree with the nurses that 

staffing levels are dangerously low, or does he stubbornly 

dismiss these concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, unlike the previous NDP 

government before us, Mr. Speaker, we will take concerns that 

are brought forward to us, Mr. Speaker, both through our 

partnership discussion, Mr. Speaker, which has been very 

fruitful for the people of this province and for patients within 

the system, that has led to over 1,000 new RN [registered nurse] 

positions within the system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can talk specifically about long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker. When the members opposite were the government, 

when that government was turfed out of office by the people of 

the province, there were 1,206 RN full-time positions, Mr. 

Speaker. Today, with the equivalent number of beds within the 

system, Mr. Speaker, 1,324, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Do we have some areas that we need to address? Absolutely, 

Mr. Speaker. But the record is vastly different from when the 

members opposite were the government. Mr. Speaker, in fact 

when you look at, in the hospitals across this province on a 

nurse to bed ratio, it has improved 11.5 per cent since the NDP 

left office, Mr. Speaker. More work to do, and we’ll do that 

through our partnership with SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses] and through ongoing negotiations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing how this government 

loves looking back, Mr. Speaker, ignoring the reality, ignoring 

the reality of what Saskatchewan’s nurses are saying today, that 

they are very fearful for patient safety in Saskatchewan’s 

facilities. Here’s a quote from the Leader-Post: “Zambory 

maintains that the increased drive to reduce inefficiencies in 

health care is being done without enough attention paid to the 

impact on patients.” 

 

So here’s the current reality, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what nurses 

are saying today. They are very afraid about patient safety, that 

staffing levels, Mr. Speaker, are dangerously low and that this 

government’s drive to cut corners is affecting patient care. Yet 

this government stubbornly refuses, Mr. Speaker, to admit that 

there is a problem, stubbornly refuses to listen to the nurses that 

are speaking today about the quality of care, about the safety of 

care for patients in Saskatchewan. My question to the Premier: 

will he listen to these nurses who are on the front lines of our 

health care system or will he choose to ignore them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, through, as I 

said before, through the very successful partnership that we 

have with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses as well as the 

engagement that we have with front-line nurses, Mr. Speaker, 

front-line health providers . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How’s that working for you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — We take those concerns very seriously. 



3644 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

And I just heard from across the way, how’s that working for 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I’ll give you an example. Between 1996 and 2001 under 

the NDP, we lost 451 nurses. Mr. Speaker, in the last six years, 

we’re up 1,000 nurses. So I think it’s working pretty well, Mr. 

Speaker, knowing that we have more work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen both in long-term care and acute care, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen increasing numbers of health 

providers, Mr. Speaker, through a successful partnership with 

SUN, through ongoing negotiations with both that organization 

and others, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we know that we have a 

long ways to go still to claw ourselves out of the deficit in terms 

of infrastructure and staffing that were left by the NDP, but 

after six years, we’ve made significant progress, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think it shows a track record that this government can get 

the hard jobs done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Combatting Bullying 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Thursday the government said it would wait until Anti-Bullying 

Week in November to release its report and its action plan. The 

minister told the media, and I quote, “We’ve got Anti-Bullying 

Week coming up and we thought it’d be an appropriate time to 

try and announce it.” 

 

Now I’m sure I’m not the only one who finds it outrageous that 

this government would choose to put its own PR [public 

relations] tactics ahead of meaningful anti-bullying tactics. My 

question to the minister: will he admit it’s a mistake to keep 

delaying action and will he please just table the government’s 

strategy? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend 

we had heard media reports of another suicide of a young 

person that was bullied in the city of Regina. On behalf of all 

members, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to offer our deepest 

condolences and sympathy to the family. 

 

The Legislative Secretary, the member for Saskatoon Fairview, 

has been travelling across the province and has been conducting 

hearings, meeting with students, parents, teachers, and 

community stakeholders. The date for submissions is actually 

open until the end of this month. Because we know that this is a 

time-sensitive matter, they are working at gradually assembling 

the information as it comes forward. 

 

I can advise that they have heard from over 1,000 students, 

parents, teachers, and community stakeholders. In addition to 

that, we have received some 66 written submissions. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we are still receiving written submissions until the end 

of the month and one of the groups that we have not heard a 

submission from, written or otherwise, is from the members 

opposite. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition had this to say on Twitter and . . . 

I’ll give that answer later on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the final 

consultation meeting for the Legislative Secretary was held on 

June 13th. But here’s what the minister said last week to the 

media, and I quote: “They’ve done their work.” 

 

So it’s been 138 days since the final consultation meeting, and 

the minister has admitted that the work is done. But he said the 

government is waiting for Anti-Bullying Week in order to 

unveil the report and their strategy. And that’s simply 

unacceptable. The need for action is urgent. My question again 

for the minister: will he admit that it’s a mistake to keep 

delaying the action, especially since the consultation period has 

long been done? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Secretary is 

doing the work as she receives the information. She has 

indicated that it is open to receive submissions until the end of 

this month. We are working with her and will have the response 

from the government released at the same time. We will not 

wait for any particular deadline. We will get it done as soon as 

is practical. But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the 

members opposite that they are still accepting submissions until 

the end of the month. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition had this to say on Twitter over 

the weekend: “Absolutely heartbreaking. I am committed to 

working with the government to ensure Saskatchewan does a 

better job of combatting bullying.” That was the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place, the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re still missing the NDP submission. We’d be 

glad to receive it. He has till the end of the month. We look 

forward to receiving it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Special Care Standards and Staffing 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 

Premier refused to explain why he removed the minimum care 

standard from the special care home regulations. The Health 

minister attempted an explanation but it was absolutely bizarre. 

He claimed that the government removed the minimum care 

standards so that they could institute personalized care. To the 

minister: what does he understand to be the definition of 

minimum? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for her question. We do require minimum basic 

standards aimed at promoting health, safety, and comfort of 

each resident. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I have the time in a 

one-minute answer to go through the entire 193-page document 

that the government released in the spring, released to the 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3645 

public, Mr. Speaker. But unlike the previous care requirements, 

these minimum standards are personalized and the outcome is 

focused. It’s outcome-focused rather than time-based, Mr. 

Speaker. In other words, they focus on things like assisting in 

good personal hygiene, effective medication management, and 

proper nutrition, among other things. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A minimum 

standard simply establishes the floor. It says that you must at 

least achieve this particular level of care. So it is pathetic for 

this government to try to claim it removed the minimum 

standard to allow for personalized care. 

 

It’s been two years since this government watered down the 

regulations, yet we sure don’t have that wonderful personalized 

care that the minister claims was the rationale. Instead, seniors 

are being woken up at 5:30 in the morning and being left to soil 

themselves because there are not enough staff. To the minister: 

will this government admit it made a mistake by removing the 

minimum care standard and by removing any reference to 

sufficient staffing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the wording in the regulations that was removed two 

years ago that spoke to the minimum in regards to time, Mr. 

Speaker, dates back to when the regulations were put in place in 

1966. Mr. Speaker, this was at a time, in 1966, where typically 

as compared to today it would be level 1 and level 2 care, Mr. 

Speaker, where it spoke to two hours or 45 minutes or even 20 

minutes a day, Mr. Speaker, as the standard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting to know that when we moved 

to a different assessment model in the 1990s under the former 

government, Mr. Speaker, and when they got rid of level 1 and 

level 2 out of our long-term care, Mr. Speaker, and closed 1,200 

beds, why they didn’t adjust, Mr. Speaker, the hours, the 

minimum hours in the regulations to take into account the level 

3 and level 4 that long-term care would now serve, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was an antiquated way to provide standards. 

Mr. Speaker, we think that there is a better way to do it, Mr. 

Speaker, in a more personalized fashion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Health minister 

actually tried to claim that the government changed the 

regulations to ensure that each resident gets “adequate care at 

all times.” He went on to say that adequate care is measured in 

part by residents having clean and trimmed fingernails and 

toenails. That is ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. The reality is that 

seniors are being told to soil themselves, they’re missing their 

baths, their bed sheets are not being changed, they are being 

served cold meals — all because there is not enough staff. To 

the minister: does he honestly think the residents are getting 

manicures and pedicures when there is not enough staff to even 

help residents to get to the bathroom? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

mentioned in previous answers, we know that staffing is an 

issue within long-term care, Mr. Speaker. But we know that 

within a stable number of long-term care beds in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, we have dramatically increased staffing in 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker, knowing that some facilities do 

need some help, Mr. Speaker, and we’re looking at that through 

our Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle though has indicated in recent 

days, and I quote, “Ten years ago, it was not at all unusual for 

residents to be left in bed for the day at the Wascana Rehab 

Centre when we were short-staffed. As part of our cultural shift 

journey, this no longer happens,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think that the member opposite is 

perhaps trying to blend two issues. One is the care, the 

personalized care, Mr. Speaker, that is evaluated on a quarterly 

basis so that we can adjust what care levels they need, with 

contingency plans in any facility, Mr. Speaker, that would have 

difficulty filling a particular shift. Those are two different 

issues. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Provision of New Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government seriously 

considered a P3 [public–private partnership] school approach 

back in 2008, but it backed away from that. It didn’t like what it 

saw. So my question to the minister: what changed since 2008? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the province is in a great place. It’s growing 

exponentially year over the year. The last quarter has seen the 

most growth this province has ever seen. We have seen 

infrastructure challenges and so we’re looking at all the ways 

that we can address those infrastructure challenges. Part of that 

is a P3. 

 

Now we know the opposition is totally opposed to P3. What is 

interesting now is they’ve certainly latched on to the school 

piece and they’re opposed to bundling of schools. We don’t 

know if they’re opposed to every other P3, but we know that 

they’re opposed to school bundling. 

 

The member opposite says, what has changed from 2008 to 

2013? In 2008 in Saskatchewan, just after the NDP lost 

government, 3,500 less students per year in our schools, to 

2013, 2,140 increase in students in our schools, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why our infrastructure is challenged and that’s why we 

have to look at other possibilities to make sure all the schools 

are possible that we need in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 



3646 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to talk 

about the situation in Alberta, but the truth is that the first batch 

of schools used a bare-bones design that had classrooms and 

little else. Daycare centres, community associations, and 

extracurricular activities were essentially shut out. So my 

question to the minister: is that the kind of bare-bones design he 

has in mind for the new schools that Saskatchewan needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I really find it quite 

interesting that the member opposite would talk about the 

experience in Alberta on a negative light, especially after, you 

know, his leader was on Gormley not very long ago and talked 

about . . . wanted to use a common sense approach and wanted 

to do smart investing into education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he should have tuned into Gormley today, Mr. 

Speaker, when they had the people from Alberta talking about 

what they have experienced in Alberta, Mr. Speaker: $240 

million worth of savings, Mr. Speaker; a total of 40 new schools 

built, Mr. Speaker. It has been an excellent experience. Instead 

of having one bundle and going wrong, they’ve had bundle 

number two, bundle number three, and they’re on their fourth 

bundle, Mr. Speaker. I think we’ve got a lot to learn from 

Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government isn’t scared to look over the 

border and look at what is done in other provinces to make sure 

we have the infrastructure we need here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we know the experience in 

Alberta has been fraught with challenges by way of community 

access. The private providers in fact wouldn’t allow portables to 

be added to schools and, as I say, many of those extracurricular 

activities and community programs were shut out. And we 

know the cost from the experience in Nova Scotia where, when 

the Conservative government canned the P3 program, they 

actually saved $2 million per school, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But last week at the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] 

luncheon, the Premier said he was proud of the fact that a grade 

6 tuba player was able to influence the design of the band room 

in Swift Current’s new school. I agree. That’s great. 

Communities should have direct influence into the 

infrastructure that matters to them. But my question to the 

minister is: how can that kind of local input happen if this 

government just bulk buys cookie cutter schools? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting listening 

to question period and the dynamic duo over there, Mr. 

Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition said earlier in question 

period he doesn’t want to look back; we shouldn’t look back. 

And then the Education minister quotes something from Nova 

Scotia . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, critic. Sorry. Did I 

say minister? Mr. Speaker, the critic for Education quotes Nova 

Scotia from 16 years back, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to 

look back but then they quote Nova Scotia 16 years back. 

 

The truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, since 2004, P3s across 

Canada have been very, very successful. This opposition party 

is ideologically opposed to P3, Mr. Speaker. They get their QP 

[question period] speaking notes straight from the Water Watch, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s their speaking notes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. If you 

listen to the people from Alberta, what the Leader of the 

Opposition said on Gormley was heresy, Mr. Speaker. 

Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. They are grabbing at straws because 

they have nothing else to grab for. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would expect the people 

of this province to expect of us to at least look at the experience 

of other jurisdictions where P3s have been brought forward and 

to assess what’s gone on. And when we do that assessment, 

when we look through the common sense lens that we’ve 

spoken about, what we know is that it costs way more. 

 

And it’s not just New Democratic parties that are recognizing 

this. It’s also provincial auditors. It’s also a Conservative 

government. And then we recognize the many challenges by 

way of the needs of communities not being accommodated. Yet 

this government stubbornly dismisses those concerns. So my 

question to the minister is this: what kind of due diligence has 

his government done on this plan or is he simply plowing ahead 

because of ideology? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard day after 

day petitions read on schools that are needed, especially from 

the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, we’re moving 

forward with a plan to ensure that those schools are built. Nine 

facilities, Mr. Speaker, under the P3 model. 

 

But again I challenge the opposition: is it the fact that we’re 

bundling schools? Are they totally opposed to P3s? Because, 

Mr. Speaker, if they are and he’s used his colleagues, other 

NDP governments . . . I don’t think he’s read all the quotes 

from other NDP governments, Mr. Speaker. For example, what 

did his famous federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, say, Mr. 

Speaker? A public-private partnership can be the right solution 

in certain cases. They don’t quite claim to be on the same page, 

Mr. Speaker. What about the Manitoba NDP Finance minister, 

Stan Struthers? Public-private partnerships can provide an 

opportunity for the public sector to build projects more 

efficiently and more effective. Better value for their money 

invested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only NDP party that’s on the wrong side of 

this issue is the one sitting across the aisle. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on top of the evidence and 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3647 

experience of P3 schools costing more, forfeiting community 

control, access, and influence, the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association and local companies, as well as the design 

community, have weighed in, sharing their real concerns about 

being shut out of the building process. To the minister: how can 

he simply brush off these concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to 

meet with the Saskatchewan Construction Association and we 

were certainly able to go over our plans moving forward for 

P3s, Mr. Speaker, and it certainly I believe answered a lot of 

their questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seem to be in quite a 

laughable mood. But, Mr. Speaker, in the last eight years, we 

have put more than $600 million into the infrastructure of 

schools, Mr. Speaker, and we built 20 new schools. These 

bundling of schools will be on top of the investment that we’ve 

already made. And once those contractors heard that, plus they 

have the opportunity to participate in the new P3 bundle, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that they feel that there is more work, lots of 

work ahead for them, especially when you look at what other 

construction companies have said from other provinces, that it 

has been a good experience. Mr. Speaker, the only ones that are 

dead set against P3s — and the Construction Association, and 

go ask them, they’re not against P3s — the only party that is, 

the only people that are, are those nimble nine sitting over there. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Saskatchewanderer Program Expansion 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

earlier today our government announced an expansion to the 

Saskatchewanderer program to a year-long position. This 

expansion will be a one-year pilot project that will be a joint 

effort between my Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport, the 

ministries of the Economy and Agriculture, as well as Tourism 

Saskatchewan. One of the advantages of a growing province is 

our ability to invest in and expand programs like this one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more people live in Saskatchewan today than in 

any other point in our province’s history. Our population 

recently exceeded 1.1 million people and we expect this growth 

to continue. Now is the perfect time to have the 

Saskatchewanderer, a well-recognized provincial ambassador, 

show off Saskatchewan to not only potential visitors but 

potential residents. Since the summer of 2011, previous 

wanderers have demonstrated how we play in Saskatchewan in 

the summertime. However, we are going to have the 2014 

wanderer demonstrate how we work, how we live and play in 

Saskatchewan all year-round. 

 

The main goals of this project remain the same: we want the 

wanderer to break Saskatchewan stereotypes; we want to 

encourage people to visit and to live in our province. This 

program will help highlight the amazing quality of life we have 

to offer. We will have the opportunity to showcase all of the 

amazing recreational, cultural, and travel opportunities. 

 

Along with experiencing our province’s wonderful tourism 

attractions, the wanderer will showcase some of our province’s 

career opportunities. They will learn more and share 

information about Saskatchewan’s thriving industries, including 

agriculture. They will show the world that it’s easy to achieve 

your career goals, complemented with a vibrant quality of life. 

 

The position is being hired through a traditional application 

process. While applicants will still be required to apply using 

short videos, there will be no public voting. There will, 

however, be a rigorous interview process. Representatives from 

all involved ministries and Tourism Saskatchewan will form a 

panel that will select the final candidate. Applications open 

Monday, November 4th at noon and close Monday, December 

2nd at noon. The job is a 12-month position. The wanderer will 

start in January 2014 and will wind up in December of 2014. 

This is a pilot project, Mr. Speaker. The new format will be 

tested for one year. If it works well, this will likely be the new 

format in future years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to thank Bennett Dunlop Ford and CAA 

[Canadian Automobile Association] Saskatchewan who have 

agreed to sponsor the year-long 2014 Saskatchewanderer 

project. Our hope for this pilot project is to further showcase 

what Saskatchewan has to offer. People are choosing to visit 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they are choosing to stay. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re very pleased 

to see this expansion of the Saskatchewanderer program to a 

year-long program. Saskatchewan is an incredible province 

with so many amazing things happening throughout the year, 

and so expanding this program in order to highlight more of 

those things is really a common sense thing to do. 

 

I also like that the program will be expanded to have the 

Saskatchewanderer focus not only on how we play here and all 

of the recreational aspects of our province but also to include 

how we live and how we work. What’s really unfortunate is that 

the Saskatchewanderer won’t have an opportunity to highlight 

our province’s film industry because it’s been forced out of the 

province. Perhaps this government will correct its mistake to 

allow that to happen. 

 

But again, we’re pleased to see this program expanded and 

certainly hope that it is successful in breaking down 

Saskatchewan’s stereotypes and encouraging people to continue 

to visit and live in our great province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask 

for leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding absences. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding absences from the Legislative 

Assembly. Is leave granted? 



3648 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 

Saskatchewan Rivers, Saskatoon Eastview, and Saskatoon 

Nutana for Thursday, October 31st to attend the 35th 

Canadian regional seminar in St. John’s, Newfoundland 

and Labrador on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 

Saskatchewan Rivers, Saskatoon Eastview, and Saskatoon 

Nutana for Thursday, October 31st to attend the 35th 

Canadian regional seminar in St. John’s, Newfoundland 

and Labrador on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask for leave to 

make some motions about committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview has asked 

for leave to make motions about committee substitution. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Committee Membership 

 

Mr. Nilson: — I move: 

 

That the name of Warren McCall be substituted for the 

name of Cathy Sproule on the Standing Committee on 

House Services. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Lakeview: 

 

That the name of Warren McCall be substituted for the 

name of Cathy Sproule on the Standing Committee on 

House Services. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Trent Wotherspoon be substituted for the 

name of Danielle Chartier on the Standing Committee on 

the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Lakeview: 

 

That the name of Trent Wotherspoon be substituted for the 

name of Danielle Chartier on the Standing Committee on 

the Economy. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Danielle Chartier be substituted for the 

name of Warren McCall on the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Lakeview: 

 

That the name of Danielle Chartier be substituted for the 

name of Warren McCall on the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter back into the debate from the throne here 

today. Following up from my entry into the speech, I’m 

cognizant of the fact that I did speak for the better part of an 

hour on Thursday and was able to cover a lot of what really 

matters to the people, families, and communities within Regina 

Rosemont, as well as touching on some of the general feelings 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3649 

and sentiments towards the Throne Speech. So I don’t intend to 

be very long here today, Mr. Speaker. I want to make sure I’m 

giving space to all members to be that voice for their 

communities. 

 

But I would say that from last Thursday till now I’ve had the 

opportunity to continue to listen and to meet with community 

and to discuss what was or wasn’t in the Throne Speech at 

community events, and throughout the entire weekend in fact. 

And it seemed to me that the general consensus was that this 

was a incredibly flat Throne Speech, that it certainly didn’t 

contain an exciting vision for the future and didn’t embrace the 

opportunity that we have before us. And I think we’re reminded 

so often that we have such a special opportunity in this province 

right now with the demand on our resource economy and the 

hard work that Saskatchewan people, entrepreneurs, and 

families are providing, and that this should be the day and the 

time that government is building on that opportunity, that 

government is extending opportunity, that government is 

diversifying our economy to ensure stable, long-term prosperity 

for the future. And we certainly didn’t see that in the this 

Throne Speech. 

 

So what I heard throughout the weekend about the Throne 

Speech was that it was a bit of a non-event, that it was flat, that 

it lacked a vision. I know that was highlighted by The 

StarPhoenix editorial suggesting that the Throne Speech had no 

vision, and that as Bruce Johnstone has rightly pointed out, that 

this government truly has had a poor economic agenda. We 

have a special time in Saskatchewan by way of the 

Saskatchewan economy, but that government truly has 

struggled to put forward plans that build on that opportunity, 

diversify our economy. And we didn’t see that being addressed 

in this Throne Speech. 

 

We’ve focused in, as the New Democratic Party official 

opposition, on a few critical areas. Of course many across the 

province have been hearing us bringing attention to these 

matters, being their voice, addressing what matters to 

Saskatchewan families. But we didn’t see the action that we 

needed to in those priority areas — seniors’ care and long-term 

care and the inadequate supports and the failure to provide 

dignity of life and quality of life to those seniors, our parents 

and grandparents, all across the province. 

 

We didn’t see any meaningful action to address the failure to 

support the classroom, the failure of this government to support 

education. And this is critical to our economic and social 

well-being. I believe that the backbone or the foundation of any 

strong economy, of building a future, is your education system. 

 

And it’s incredibly disturbing to see the continued lack of 

support by this government and the continued actions of this 

government that are actually harming the good work going on 

in classrooms all across the province, harming the potential of 

young people — the cuts in education, the cuts to educational 

assistants, the larger class size, the complexity that educators 

are dealing with in the classroom, the complexity and 

challenges that students are facing in the classroom, and the 

complete dismissal of the voice of parents and students and 

teachers and school boards on this front, Mr. Speaker. We 

didn’t see anything in this Throne Speech to make amends or to 

make reparations or to address those challenges. 

As I say, we’ve been focusing on diversifying the 

Saskatchewan opportunity, on extending opportunity on 

building long-term stable prosperity well into the future. And 

we didn’t see that in this Throne Speech either. We’re willing to 

give credit where credit is due. We’re pleased to see attention 

that we’ve called for to be provided to adult basic education. 

There just simply shouldn’t be a wait-list for adult basic 

education in our province. This is critical to unlocking the 

potential of an individual, their family, but also our province. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Just the same, we need to be aggressive and strong in our 

actions for apprenticeship. And we see some steps on that front. 

I’m not sure yet that we have the plan in place that 

Saskatchewan people deserve or that employers and 

entrepreneurs in the Saskatchewan economy needs. 

 

When I look at the scan of the needs and what matters to the 

families and communities throughout Regina Rosemont, they 

are certainly, they certainly share those concerns on senior care, 

the failures of this government in the classroom, and the 

importance of education to our province and to the next 

generation, or the diversification of that economy. 

 

Some of the unique and localized issues we didn’t see any 

action on — and I went through those on Friday, but just to 

place them back onto the record — is that we never saw 

anything to provide supports for the community of Dieppe, for 

example, who had their school closed down because of 

inadequate funding by this government just a couple years ago. 

And it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, to see Dieppe School shuttered, 

Mr. Speaker, at a time when we have growing populations 

throughout our student population. We need to be utilizing our 

educational infrastructure. And I know this government 

announced, you know, a P3 school plan. We’ve been calling for 

new schools. We’d like to see those open quicker in a more 

cost-effective fashion. 

 

But those P3 schools, that plan doesn’t do anything to open the 

doors of Dieppe School, reopen the doors in my constituency. 

And recognizing just how important a school is to a community, 

that it’s the hub for the community, and when I look at Dieppe, 

I know how vital and how important it is to the families, to the 

recreation, to the cultural offerings, to the arts offerings of 

Dieppe. And we’ll continue to bring attention to the inadequacy 

of funding of this government that forced the closure of Dieppe 

School. And we’ll continue to propose that this government 

come to the table to work with the school board and bring 

forward the resources it needs to provide that school back to the 

community. It’s in great shape as a school, in good shape by 

way of the infrastructure. And certainly the people of Dieppe 

deserve nothing less. 

 

I’d also, didn’t see any attention, any address of the challenge 

that I continue to raise in this Assembly, and that’s the 

inundation of Dewdney Avenue with heavy-haul truck traffic. 

Without a doubt, this is comprising the peace of mind, safety, 

and security of those that are utilizing Dewdney as a transport 

artery connecting families to work, connecting families to sport, 

connecting families to recreation, but it’s also dramatically and 

unacceptably impacted the life of those living directly on 

Dewdney Avenue. 



3650 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

And I’ve sat in the houses, Mr. Speaker. I’ve heard the 

cupboards shake. I’ve felt the homes shake, Mr. Speaker. And 

the real concerns of those along Dewdney Avenue, the property 

owners, need to be heard about the potential degradation and 

cracking of their foundations; about the noise and disturbance to 

their peace of mind; about the impact on their property and 

potentially their values; and most importantly about the safety 

of their children, of their families, Mr. Speaker, which we need 

to make sure we’re addressing before there’s a crisis. 

 

And the provincial government has a very important role here 

to step up to the plate, to bring forth the resources and a 

willingness to work with our municipal partners to ensure that 

the issues here are addressed in a way that’s acceptable and 

satisfactory to the community. 

 

I also haven’t seen anything in this budget, we speak about the 

important role for care for our seniors, didn’t see anything to be 

addressed for Pioneer Village, which provides very important 

care for many seniors, many residents. And those residents, 

parents and grandparents, come from all across the province, 

and the workers work incredibly hard, but the building itself is 

past its time. And it needs to be rehabilitated or probably, well, 

more properly be rebuilt, Mr. Speaker. And we haven’t seen 

any commitment from this government to do just that, and it’s 

an important, important support structure for the entire 

province. And we’ll continue to be that voice. 

 

We’ve spoken about health care in the broad sense, impacting 

an entire province. But of course as I mentioned on Thursday, 

Mr. Speaker, in northwest Regina, the challenge of getting a 

family doctor is significant. When I’m sitting with the family 

doctors, the GPs [general practitioner], and chatting with them 

about some of the pressures and challenges they’re facing, 

they’re suggesting to me that there’s a pending crisis by way of 

the age and looming retirement of many general practitioners 

throughout northwest Regina. We need to do a better job. 

 

When we know that families need that vital support in our 

hospitals, in our emergency rooms, we need to make sure that 

they’re not going into places that are understaffed and 

overcrowded, where beds aren’t available to them, Mr. Speaker. 

We need to make sure that they can go in with confidence that 

the health professionals and health services that they deserve 

and need are going to be there for them and that the space itself 

will provide them a space of dignity and a place to have their 

health care needs addressed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are many of the local pieces that I touched on last 

week. Of course I went on in greater length recognizing all the 

good work within the constituency, recognizing the special 

opportunity, the special time we have in Saskatchewan right 

now, and recognizing that if we’re not going to be making those 

investments now in education or in seniors’ care or in 

diversifying our economy to ensure stable, long-term prosperity 

for the long term, when are we going to be doing it, Mr. 

Speaker? If we can’t do it during this special time of economic 

activity and strength, when are we going to be making those 

investments? 

 

And I think of this in education in such a significant way and, 

you know, looking at all of the needs. And I found it so 

interesting. And I heard from so many up at the STF council on 

Friday, meeting with many educators and asking their 

perspective on what they thought of the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker. And what I heard was that of all of the needs and 

pressures and challenges that our teachers and our students and 

our parents are facing, that the Throne Speech fell entirely flat, 

that it was vacuous on addressing the challenges within the 

classroom, the needs within the classroom, the social 

infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. We had it popped upon us, the P3 

school plan, Mr. Speaker, by this government. 

 

And we’ve been calling for many years for new schools to be 

constructed. We would suggest that government choose the 

most common sense approach, the most cost-effective approach 

in a way that reflects the needs of a community, Mr. Speaker, 

and that doesn’t bring forward needless delays. And that’s why 

we don’t support the costly, risky private P3 school agenda of 

this government. So we need the schools, but we also need to 

have the investment into the repairs that are needed of the 

school infrastructure, the classroom infrastructure in the 

existing schools all across the province. None of that was in 

place, Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech. 

 

And away from the hard infrastructure of education, we have to 

recognize, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’ve listened to teachers. I 

listened to parents, I listened to students in every corner of this 

province, and I’m hearing from them a significantly increased 

class size, Mr. Speaker, resources that have been constrained or 

cut, hundreds of educational assistants that have been cut by 

that government, and a class that brings forward challenges and 

complexity and also tremendous opportunity, Mr. Speaker. But 

we need to make sure that we’re supporting those professionals, 

those students, those parents, those communities. And this 

budget doesn’t go any distance to doing that meaningful work. 

 

So as I look at the Throne Speech, you know, it’s a 

disappointing Throne Speech — all of this opportunity and 

government failing to build upon it. And then I was 

disappointed to hear the speeches of members opposite who 

have spoken to date — we’ll see what tone and tenor we hear 

moving forward — but no humility provided. Getting up and 

sort of perpetual back-patting of themself and government. 

Maybe they’re tripping over themself, Mr. Speaker, to put 

apples on the Premier’s desk in a hope and an attempt that they 

might become a cabinet minister one day, Mr. Speaker. But I 

don’t think that’s what those backbenchers have been put there 

to do, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that’s what this government 

was put there to do. It’s not to gush over the Premier and to 

back-pat a government and look in the rear-view mirror and to 

have sort of this very partisan tone and approach. 

 

What they should be doing is to have some humility, to have a 

rightful pride in the good things that are going on in the 

province, the hard work, Mr. Speaker, but then also to be that 

voice for constituents in every corner of this province — 

whether it’s in Prince Albert, whether it’s in Lloydminster, 

whether it’s in Estevan, whether it’s in Swift Current, whether 

it’s in Saskatoon, Regina, or any spot in between — Mr. 

Speaker, being that voice on what matters for Saskatchewan 

families. And I hope that the speeches that we hear today by 

members opposite maybe will reflect that sincere voice, the 

sincere needs. 

 

But it seemed to me in just two speeches from this government 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3651 

that they’re choosing an approach of sort of a partisan approach 

that’s out of sync and out of step with Saskatchewan people 

who aren’t partisan in the sort of way we see here. They’re 

people who care about their communities, that care about their 

province. They care about their families, and they want to see 

common sense leadership to address their needs. 

 

We have a lot of good going on in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

for which we’re all proud of. Saskatchewan families and 

workers and entrepreneurs, school boards, and teachers and 

students are working harder than ever before to fulfill the 

opportunity within communities and for their families. But this 

government clearly isn’t holding up its end of the bargain, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So on the issues that matter to Saskatchewan families, we’ll be 

that voice. We’ll be that voice. We’ll bring that voice to this 

Assembly, and we’ll work constructively to bring forward 

solutions that matter to Saskatchewan people. 

 

But at this point in time and being cognizant of the fact that 

many others would like to get into the Throne Speech 

discussion, and certainly I welcome and encourage that as well, 

I’d like to move an amendment to the motion. So at this time I 

move, seconded by the member from Athabasca: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 

And that this Assembly condemns this government for its 

lack of vision, for its actions and often failure to act, which 

are making education and seniors’ care worse; and for its 

failure to deliver a smart growth strategy which includes 

diversifying our economy so that our prosperity is 

sustainable for the long term. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved an amendment to the motion, the following 

amendment: 

 

And that this Assembly . . . 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 

And that this Assembly condemns this government for its 

lack of vision, for its actions and often failure to act, which 

are making education and seniors’ care worse; and for its 

failure to deliver a smart growth strategy which includes 

diversifying our economy so that our prosperity is 

sustainable for the long term. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand here and second the motion that my colleague 

has presented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that, from our perspective as 

we listen to the Throne Speech as the opposition, one of the 

important points that we want to raise is that, to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that if there is certain things that the province 

and the government is doing well, then certainly from our 

perspective as the opposition, we want to make sure that we 

look at it and certainly look at it very thoroughly and make sure 

that the benefit is there for Saskatchewan. So if there’s things 

within the Throne Speech that are of significant benefit to the 

people of Saskatchewan, then the practical part of the 

opposition will certainly support that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think some of the things that we want to certainly focus on is 

how the public in general is going to be served by this 

government. And certainly the tone set out in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, we wanted to see what the media had to 

say about that, the immediate reaction that the media had to say 

about that, Mr. Speaker. And I would point out that the big 

headlines today or that day, when the Throne Speech came out, 

was really from The StarPhoenix. And the editorial talked about 

how poor the Throne Speech and the tone for this next session 

was presented by the Saskatchewan Party government. This 

government, Mr. Speaker, this government has stubbornly 

forgotten to listen to the people. They push forward their own 

agenda, and quite frankly they have underperformed despite all 

the great assets that they inherited from the previous 

administration and from the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I want to quote one particular part, Mr. Speaker, of that 

editorial by The StarPhoenix. Now one has to understand that 

The StarPhoenix is totally neutral. They don’t show who they 

vote for. They work independent. They’re not persuaded by 

anybody. So this StarPhoenix board, the editorial board, penned 

an editorial. And basically the bottom line that they had, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think it hits the nail on the head, Mr. Speaker, 

and I quote, “What’s frustratingly weak is its vision for 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s The StarPhoenix editorial out of 

Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition certainly agrees that 

the Saskatchewan Party was given every opportunity to make 

Saskatchewan a solid place to live for many, many years. And 

what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, after a few years, six years, they 

have disappointed a number of sectors and a great number of 

people throughout this great land. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

this is some of the things that we’re quickly picking up as we 

travel as an opposition, that quite frankly the people in 

Saskatchewan understand that this government refuses to listen. 

They don’t consult, Mr. Speaker. They’re stubborn, and they just 

plod forward with their own agenda and their own plan as to what 

they think is best for Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

is not the way that the Saskatchewan people want to see their 

government act, and they have certainly advised the opposition of 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again The StarPhoenix today, quite frankly, let out what I think 

the people of Saskatchewan are starting to feel about this 

government, Mr. Speaker. Quite frankly they are frustratingly 

weak in its vision for Saskatchewan, and that is going to spell 

trouble for many people in the province. And we in the opposition 

want to make sure people know exactly what The StarPhoenix, in 

our view, has talked about when they talk about the frustratingly 

weak position and vision that the Saskatchewan Party government 



3652 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

have for the people of the province and of course of our future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at . . . I want to pick on one particular 

point here. The government’s speech certainly has a disappointing 

tone. We understand that. It is disappointing, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know that this government does not plan to hold up its end of the 

bargain when it comes to things that Saskatchewan families need, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families. 

 

And they’re talking about the care for seniors, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

really important. We’re going to be talking about that for a number 

of days here during this fall sitting. We’re talking about the 

education challenges, Mr. Speaker, when we hear teachers 

complaining on a steady basis, Mr. Speaker, how this government 

has underperformed when it comes to support towards our 

education system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we also want to talk about a number of issues in our own 

area. And I want to talk a bit about how this government has failed 

many Saskatchewan families in my particular area first of all, Mr. 

Speaker, and then I want to go on a broader base of the province 

overall. 

 

I would say that from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

things that this government has recently done that has really hurt 

northern Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker, is their plan to 

throw many working families out of Sask Housing units, Mr. 

Speaker. This is going to have a dramatic negative effect on 

many working families in northern Saskatchewan. And this is 

kind of the reaction that they have when they see this Throne 

Speech and then they see the actions of this government, being 

stubborn and throwing out working families. And I want to 

explain this to the people of Saskatchewan, how this is 

impacting and affecting people in the North and I think 

affecting people all throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over time, over time — and I’m glad that the 

Minister of Housing is in the Assembly — but over time, many 

of our families are talking about trying to build themselves up 

over time. Many young families, as they’re gradually getting 

together, starting to get married, starting to have children, then 

obviously they’d need a home. So a lot of times in northern 

Saskatchewan they have what they call a social housing unit. 

They rent this unit off the local housing authorities, and then 

they live in those units and they pay rent every month, much 

like they’d pay rent at the apartments that we stay at here in the 

city, or other places that rent apartments. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan there isn’t a 

housing market. It’s not as if there’s a huge demand for 

housing. There isn’t an open market, so to speak, so many times 

people that have certain rental units in these communities . . . 

They’re only a defined amount. There’s only a defined number 

of units that’s available for renting. And, Mr. Speaker, many, 

many times families are crowded in these units, and they often 

have a tough time making ends meet. 

 

So as the young families are starting to build up, many of them 

will go to school. And we see reference in the Throne Speech 

about cutting the wait time for adult basic education. But we 

support that, Mr. Speaker. We think that’s a great idea. And 

why wouldn’t we support the fact that we want to see more 

adults become more proficient in math and science and reading 

and so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker? So obviously it’s 

something that we would support. 

 

But in northern Saskatchewan some of the people that rent, the 

families that rent these units, as they go through adult basic 

education, which they have, and as they take training and as 

they get jobs and as they get employed, Mr. Speaker, you’re 

starting to see that these families are becoming more and more 

independent. And one of the things that I think worked very 

well in northern Saskatchewan was the government of the day 

came along and told these families that, instead of us renting 

these units to you for the rest of your life, why don’t we look at 

the rental purchase option? Why don’t you buy the house off 

the government and we will sell it to you based on its fair value, 

fair market value, and then we will be out of your hair? Then 

you can own your own home. You can become independent. 

You can do what you want with your family. You can pay your 

own taxes, pay your own maintenance, look after the house and 

the property, and you could actually be an independent family, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So some of that work was being done, and many of these 

families were quite excited. So whether it’s the mother or the 

father that started going to school, started training — and these 

things take time with young kids and young families — and as 

they earned more income, Mr. Speaker, they were hopeful that 

one of these days that they would own their home. Like every 

other homeowner in the province, home ownership was 

something that many of those northern Saskatchewan families 

wanted. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that they strive for 

and that they desperately needed. 

 

Now what happened, Mr. Speaker, and this particular Throne 

Speech talks about supporting families and they do the exact 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. What happens now, Mr. Speaker, under 

this government’s watch, is they’re now telling those families 

that have taken years and years to build their lives up, to get a 

career, and they paid in those years rent — month after month 

they paid their rent to that housing authority, and they continued 

to raise their families in these units — now this particular 

government is coming along saying, oops, we’ve changed our 

mind. We’re not going to let you buy those units anymore. 

We’re not going to give you the option of renting off us for 10 

or 15 years, and we’re going to make sure that you don’t ever 

own your own home. That’s what this government’s done, Mr. 

Speaker, to working people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now many of these working families, whether it’s the mother or 

the dad, if they began working after years of training or years of 

taking the ABE [adult basic education], then training and finally 

getting a job, this government comes along and saying, we’re 

not going to let you buy your house anymore. In fact we’re 

going to increase your rent because you have a good job. 

 

So many of those families that may work at the mine, finally 

getting into the mine, finally getting a decent salary, finally 

being able to pay for things that their children need and they 

desperately need, this government comes along saying, we’re 

going to start charging you rent based on your income, whether 

it’s 2,000 a month or 2,500 a month. We’re going to charge you 

that for a house in northern Saskatchewan that sometimes is not 

in very good shape. It’s not worth the money that people are 

paying, but you’re going to pay it. That’s what this government 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3653 

has done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now is that helping working families? Absolutely not. And this 

is one example, Mr. Speaker, of how this government has 

simply come along and said to working people, you’re making 

too much money; you’re becoming too independent, so we’re 

going to shackle you a bit more. We’re going to make you pay 

2,500 or 1,500 a month, whatever amount of money you make, 

and guess what? You’ll never own that home again. You’ll 

never own that house. You’ll never have the opportunity of 

owning that house. That’s what this minister and this 

government’s done to many working families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as they ride off into the sunset one of these days in their 

political careers, that they can take from northern 

Saskatchewan, that they denied working people the opportunity 

to buy their home. Why, Mr. Speaker? No one can ever guess 

why. And that’s one of the questions that I have in the 

Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, is why would they go and work 

against working families? A working mom and dad would have 

the opportunity, the opportunity to own their own home. This 

government has snatched that opportunity away from them, and 

I say shame on every single one of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now people that work in the mine . . . And I’ve explained this 

to some of the mining companies. I’ve told some of the mining 

companies that some of your employees are being penalized by 

this government because they’re making a decent salary. Why 

doesn’t the government give that family the opportunity to buy 

out that house at fair market value, get rid of government 

involvement in their particular house, and give them the 

opportunity and the dignity to finally own their own home, to 

finally own their own home, Mr. Speaker? And they’ll pay for 

their house. 

 

And what happened, Mr. Speaker? This government has said 

no. We’re not going to do that anymore. And any option of the 

remote housing program to support families that want to build 

their own homes using their own money and having the 

government support them to a point where they can become 

independent and not be on social assistance the rest of their life, 

to become taxpayers — that’s what they strive to be, Mr. 

Speaker — that program is also gone. 

 

The RRAP program [residential rehabilitation assistance 

program] to help seniors get their houses properly insulated so 

there isn’t mould in their walls, so that they’re able to have a 

nice clean and warm house to live in, that program is also gone, 

Mr. Speaker. We phoned for RRAP applications. We were told 

by Prince Albert that there’s no money in RRAP. It’s all gone. 

And this was a few months ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So between the remote housing program, the home ownership 

program, the renovations program, help for seniors, help to 

recognize the young working families, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has turned their backs on those people that are 

Saskatchewan people, and I say shame. 

 

Every single day, every single day the member from 

Cumberland and Athabasca are going to be making comments 

about housing in northern Saskatchewan, of how you have 

turned your backs on working people and how you have denied 

them so callously the opportunity to buy their home at their fair 

market value and that you’re forcing them to pay rent that are 

sometimes as much as 15 to 2,500 a month, depending on what 

they make, for the rest of their lives, Mr. Speaker. Why would a 

government do that? And they turn around and talk about trying 

to help Saskatchewan families and, on this side, we say 

hogwash. There’s no, no evidence whatsoever that shows that 

this government is doing anything to help Saskatchewan 

families. And that’s one example from one constituency that I 

say today it’s a crying shame. So every time that we hear a 

family had to move out of a Sask Housing unit, we’re going to 

give credit where credit is due, and it’s going right to the 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

The Sask Housing minister is fully aware of the problems in 

northern Saskatchewan. And we’re going to see, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to see whether she supports those working families 

and whether she does the right thing and reinstate that program 

and give them the opportunity to own their own homes. 

Otherwise every word that she utters in here about caring, about 

compassionate efforts to help a Saskatchewan family will ring 

hollow unless we see action from that government and that 

minister to correct this massive injustice to working families in 

northern Saskatchewan when it comes to owning their own 

homes or building their own homes or fixing up their own 

homes, Mr. Speaker. This is really important, and that’s why I 

tell people this is a serious matter in northern Saskatchewan. 

And Saskatchewan families are hurting because of this 

government’s indifference when it comes to housing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on their behalf I say shame. Shame to that 

government. Shame to that minister. And you can do the right 

thing and start fixing the problems that you created because 

you’re ideologically driven to make sure that people who are 

out on the streets and working families don’t get the respect that 

they deserve when it comes to owning their own homes, Mr. 

Speaker. And I say shame, again. 

 

Now I sit here, Mr. Speaker, and this is the reason why I get so 

upset when I see these kind of things happening is because we 

know that the Saskatchewan Party inherited all kinds of great 

news. We know that they inherited all kinds of great news. 

When they first got into office, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that 

the Premier said when the media interviewed him as the elected 

Premier, well the cupboards are bare, he said. That was his 

comment. And then a few weeks later he said, well we didn’t 

really find the cupboards too bare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is this party, this government, this 

government inherited the biggest surplus, the biggest surplus of 

any government in the free world, Mr. Speaker, in the free 

world. They got the biggest inheritance. And when they come 

into office, Mr. Speaker, they come into office, they had all this 

money in the bank. They had all this money in the bank. They 

had a growing population, Mr. Speaker. They had a growing 

population. They had a booming economy, Mr. Speaker. They 

had a record spending in health and highways, Mr. Speaker. 

Things were going really good, Mr. Speaker. Things were going 

really good. And they came along and they formed government, 

Mr. Speaker. And now for absolutely everything, every bit of 

good news, we hear them, oh it was us. 

 

[15:00] 

 



3654 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

They’re bragging and boasting it was us, Mr. Speaker. It was 

us. And you know, it’s people are sitting there smiling, and 

they’re being very, very polite. But for a government that brags 

and boasts about all their spending and all the great things that 

they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 

saying, you inherited all that great news. All the heavy lifting 

was done before you guys assumed office. All the hard work 

was done before you came along. But don’t forget, Mr. 

Speaker, the one thing that we often say in the opposition here 

when it comes to that government is please don’t mess it up. 

That’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the right wingers over there, the right wingers are saying, 

oh you know, we developed profit. We developed all this great 

news. It was us. It was us, they say. Mr. Speaker, people in 

Saskatchewan know it wasn’t them. The whole province knows 

it wasn’t them. In the six years that they assumed office, Mr. 

Speaker, they have been spending dollar after dollar after dollar, 

Mr. Speaker, and they have been flying out all over the 

province, and they’ve been assuming all this great news. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I did see a picture of the Minister of 

Agriculture, on their website, getting off a combine. That’s 

pretty good optics, you know, but we in the opposition, and I 

think the vast majority of people of Saskatchewan are starting 

to sense it and they’re starting to feel it, that this government, 

this government’s always boasting and taking credit for things 

they didn’t do. 

 

Now the only thing missing when they see that Minister of 

Agriculture come off his combine is the only thing I saw — 

well I didn’t see but I was expecting — was the Premier to 

come sauntering up to the Minister of Agriculture and saying, 

so how long did it take you to combine the whole province. 

That was the optics that they wanted to impress the people of 

Saskatchewan, you know, with the PR and the slick campaign 

that they do. That was the only thing missing, was the Premier 

coming out of the side shot and saying, well thanks to the 

Minister of Agriculture for combining the whole province. 

 

The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, it is the farmers that built 

this economy, that helped build the economy, Mr. Speaker, and 

it’ll continue being the farmers. Now the impression the 

Minister of Agriculture wanted to give was, coming out of the 

combine, was he just finished combining the whole province 

based on some of their speeches in the Assembly, and we 

should thank him for that. 

 

Now the only thing that was missing again was the Minister of 

Agriculture and, oh, on the way down from combining all 

throughout the land, we fixed a bunch of roads too. You know, 

while we fixed a bunch of roads, we brought about 20 more 

companies in as well. 

 

Like, Mr. Speaker, this self-promotion, the self-promotion of 

this government, you know, the constant, the constant PR and 

the slick advertising and the constant message that they send 

out to people, you know, I just sit there, Mr. Speaker, and I 

shake my head because the bottom line is they had absolutely 

nothing to do with the booming economy, the growing 

population, and the great resources that the government 

currently enjoys. They inherited all that great news, Mr. 

Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan know it. They know 

it, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And that’s why when I sit here and I listen to the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker — I’m going to listen to the Throne 

Speech responses from those guys — I’ll guarantee you one 

thing: there’ll be a lot of back-patting. Yes, we’ve done it boys, 

boys and girls. We’ve done it, you know. And I sit here, and the 

right wing, the biggest single joke here, Mr. Speaker, is the 

right wing is claiming credit for an economy that they didn’t 

create. They’re claiming credit for an economy that they didn’t 

create. They’re claiming credit for their resource boom that they 

had nothing to do with. They’re claiming credit for the growing 

population which they had nothing to do with, Mr. Speaker. So 

the more and more that they pat themselves on the back, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know that’s foolishness. 

They know that’s foolishness.  

 

And on our side when we talk about smart growth, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re talking and make sure that absolutely everyone in this 

province is in engaged, Mr. Speaker, and that we don’t go after 

working people in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that we 

work with them to own their own homes. Give them the dignity 

of home ownership. That’s part of smart growth, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s not penalizing those people by rebuilding their lives, Mr. 

Speaker. As soon as you get a little ahead, right away this 

government, this minister, slaps them back in line saying, oops, 

sorry, you’re going to rent the rest of your life; you’ll never 

own your own home. And that’s a crying shame, Mr. Speaker. 

It is a crying shame. 

 

Now I sit here, Mr. Speaker, and I look at some of their 

examples of how they’re going to build nine new schools. I 

think it’s 18 schools that’s in the mix, if I’m not correct. But, 

Mr. Speaker, their experience on P3 . . . I listened to the 

Minister of Infrastructure today talking about P3 and, Mr. 

Speaker, from what I understand is the federal government is 

actually asking these guys for advice on their fighter jets and 

their choppers under a P3 scenario. They’re also asking advice 

as to how do you guys do the school things in Saskatchewan? 

 

Well I tell you there’s a lot of New Democrats laughing their 

heads off throughout the land, and I almost guarantee you that 

the people that are involved with accounting saying, do not ask 

advice from the Saskatchewan Party government on P3s. And 

please, if you look at some of their experience on how they’ve 

procured some of their portable classrooms, don’t let them 

anywhere near the fighter jets procurement process in Ottawa. 

And for heaven’s sakes keep them away from choppers 

because, Mr. Speaker, based on that minister’s performance on 

procuring portable classrooms, we’d give him a big, fat F. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s that? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — A big, fat F. And they don’t have the 

answers. As much as the minister wants to stand up here and 

yell out stats and boast and point his finger, they do not know 

the challenges attached to P3s. 

 

And as my colleague the member from Regina Rosemont 

pointed out, the quote that he used — and I’m not sure where he 

got the quote from — but the line that I think is really important 

is debt is debt is debt. That’s the bottom line. Debt is debt is 

debt. And I’ve sat here, and I watched him as they were 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3655 

glowing about their P3 partnership. Nobody spoke about the 

debt, Mr. Speaker, that it’s going to leave the province. Nobody 

spoke about the debt. 

 

So here you have a party, a government that inherited all this 

great opportunity, inherited a growing population, a booming 

economy, a growing population. Things are just moving along 

really good, Mr. Speaker. And now they’re so addicted to their 

spin that they want more PR. They want to look like they’re 

God’s answer to government right across the world. So what do 

they do, Mr. Speaker? Since they’re running short of money 

they decided, well let’s go do a P3 deal. This way we’ll 

announce that 18 schools today, but people will pay for them in 

the future. This way we can get more press coverage. Isn’t that 

a novel idea? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they inherited all this great news, and now 

they want to saddle the future generations with more debt, but 

they want to get the credit for building those schools when it’s 

going to be future generations that’ll be paying that debt. So I 

go back to the point, debt is debt is debt. And no matter how 

many of them stand up today, and their response to the Throne 

Speech is more back-patting — look what we did; look we’ve 

done — I’ve got a news flash for the Saskatchewan Party 

government. Number one, you had absolutely nothing to do 

with this great economy, the growing population, and the 

money in the bank. You had absolutely nothing to do with it. 

You simply inherited it, Mr. Speaker. That’s the bottom line. 

And secondly, as you go down the P3 path, you’re going to be 

saddling future generations with debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And third, Mr. Speaker, while you have the opportunity, while 

we have the opportunity here in Saskatchewan, we within the 

NDP want to see that economy boom for another 30 years, and 

that’s why you have to engage as many partners as you can. 

That’s all of what we talk about on this side under smart 

growth. And smart growth includes things like engaging the 

teachers. Smart growth includes things like respecting our 

seniors by giving them dignity and quality of service in their 

homes and in the public homes as well, and that includes 

bringing more companies into our province, Mr. Speaker. But it 

also includes them engaging the Aboriginal people, Mr. 

Speaker, the Métis, the First Nations. They’re a part of our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is why I get so angry sometimes as an MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] when I look at some of the ads 

that the Sask Party’s running, Mr. Speaker. Why are you being 

so . . . Why are those ads so divisive? They should be . . . They 

should bring people in. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan in my view, Mr. Speaker, they’re a 

very gracious people. There are a lot of solid people in this 

province. There’s a lot of good people in this province that 

know that in order for us to survive, we’ve got to work together. 

I think our motto as a province is “from many peoples, 

strength,” Mr. Speaker. And the First Nations people and the 

Métis people as well as many other people from all walks of life 

in this province really live by that theme. I think the 

Saskatchewan people are deserving of a government that 

doesn’t use those divisive tactics to try and politically gain at 

the expense of unity and harmony of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

And when I see that kind of action, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

smart growth, Mr. Speaker. That is just pure crass politics, and 

that’s a shame. And that’s why I think The StarPhoenix 

editorial basically said, what’s frustratingly weak is its vision 

for Saskatchewan. This government does not listen to the 

people. They’re stubborn. They simply look after themselves 

and their friends. And, Mr. Speaker, the bad thing is the people 

of Saskatchewan are going to pay for that for many, many 

years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sitting there . . . I’m sitting here, and I 

can tell the people of Saskatchewan — I want to use Meadow 

Lake as an example since the Meadow Lake MLA seems to be 

chattering away there — when we sat down, Mr. Speaker, I 

remember one year in government we had to put $14 million, I 

think it’s $14 million, and covering the operating loss of the 

Meadow Lake pulp mill, Mr. Speaker, that pulp mill. The NDP 

government of the day had to pay millions of dollars each and 

every year. That was the agreement that the former government 

put in place. So the government of the day, the NDP honoured 

those payments, and we paid all the operating loss of the pulp 

mill at Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, year after year after year. 

That was what was set up, and the NDP honoured those 

commitments and those payments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Did that have an affect on our bottom line? Did that have an 

affect on our budget? Absolutely it did. Absolutely it did, Mr. 

Speaker. But it was the right thing to do to keep the economy in 

Meadow Lake strong. They brought in the OSB [oriented strand 

board], Mr. Speaker. They brought a new school. They brought 

a bunch of services into Meadow Lake. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

was the right thing to do. But people ought to know, the fact is 

there was commitment made, and we followed those 

commitments to ensure that certain sectors were included in our 

overall strategy when it comes to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I listened the other day to a couple of the comments made 

by a few people across the way. And I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, sitting on this side of the Assembly is certainly a . . . 

Sitting on the government side of the Assembly certainly 

provided me with a lot of information over time. 

 

And I can remember the discussions around the royalties when 

we talked about how we wanted to attract more companies to 

Saskatchewan. And I remember the one time we went into 

Lloydminster, and when we were in Lloydminster, there was a 

bunch of folks from the Canadian Association of Petroleum 

Producers — CAPP was their association’s name — and they 

spoke glowingly about the royalties that Saskatchewan put in 

place and the then Premier Calvert saying he’s going to bring 

the oil patch to the kids as opposed to sending the kids to the oil 

patch in Alberta. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a huge shift. And I’ll tell the 

right wingers across the way, that was when Stelmach was the 

premier of Alberta, and he was talking about the royalties and 

how he was going to relook at them and rejig them. And 

industry said, no, we’re off to Saskatchewan; we’re going to 

invest in Saskatchewan. And today, Mr. Speaker, we see the 

benefits of some of that work being done by people like Eric 

Cline, Eldon Lautermilch, Maynard Sonntag, Lorne Calvert, 

Mr. Speaker, a couple of members that are still serving here 

today. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, there was no MLA from 



3656 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Melfort around there. There was no Arm River guy around 

there. I looked around. I don’t remember those guys being in 

that room. 

 

And today now they pat their backs, and they say what a great 

job we’re doing, how good we are, and fantastic thoughts that 

they have and the great work that they have done. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we know every single common sense person in this 

province knows that you don’t build, rebuild a province in six 

years, that you don’t pay down debt 40 per cent overnight as the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland asserted the other night. 

Overnight they paid it, Mr. Speaker. People are much more 

brighter than that, Mr. Speaker. About the only people, about 

the only people that seem to believe and continue to spin is they 

continue to believe amongst themselves that they’re this great 

answer to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 49 members across 

the way. 

 

And I can tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, that our day will 

come when the people of Saskatchewan will realize that this 

fake government really can’t get a lot of things right. They can’t 

get anything right, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why the Throne 

Speech, the Throne Speech, everything from saddling debt on, 

things like P3s, you’re putting the debt onto future generations. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a crying shame. 

 

[15:15] 

 

You’re kicking out working families out of housing units that 

they can’t buy. That’s a crying shame. That you’re trying to 

isolate First Nations and Métis people away from everybody 

else through some of your advertisements. That’s a crying 

shame, Mr. Speaker. That you’re not engaging the universities, 

the teachers, enough to extend to building a brave, bold, new 

economy that can last for years, that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these articles that we have, the editorials in The 

StarPhoenix, the editorial in The StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, is 

somebody that’s totally neutral, and they sense that this 

government just can’t figure it out. They just can’t figure out 

what to do with all that opportunity. And yet what they do well 

is they spin and they self-promote — bunch of slick PR 

messages that people of Saskatchewan are increasingly getting 

tired of. And Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan do not 

like a government that brags about something that they didn’t 

create but continues to brag anyway. And sooner or later, that 

stuff catches up to you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know there are families in northern 

Saskatchewan that are going to suffer because of the housing 

program changes that this government is making. They are 

waiting for the opportunity to come to the Assembly and talk 

about how they need to get this government to figure it out and 

get it right. And so far, Mr. Speaker, I get so angry, I get so 

angry when I see some of the activities happening that really 

impact working families in northern Saskatchewan. You know, 

they just simply don’t get it. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Silver Springs begins to rant, Mr. 

Speaker. I can almost guarantee you that he owns his own 

home. He owns his own home. But there’s probably about 50 

families in northern Saskatchewan wouldn’t mind the 

opportunity he enjoys right now — home ownership. They 

wouldn’t mind that opportunity to own their own home like he 

does, Mr. Speaker. What’s wrong with the Saskatchewan family 

in the northern part of our province owning their own home like 

the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs does? Absolutely 

nothing. It’s fairness. And it’s fairness, Mr. Speaker, right to the 

core. 

 

And that’s why today when the Minister of Housing tells 

people, you’re going to rent off us forever; I don’t care what 

you make, that’s why it’s patently unfair. And that’s why the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is something that we cannot 

support. And that’s why on this side of the House, we’re going 

to get up every day and challenge the government for the things 

that they’re doing wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they’re doing plenty wrong, whether it’s going to war with 

the working families in northern Saskatchewan, going to war 

with the working people, not recognizing the teachers, Mr. 

Speaker, isolating the Aboriginal community. That is not what 

Saskatchewan’s about. You weren’t given a mandate to govern 

based on dividing us. You were given a mandate to govern to 

build a bright, bold new future by uniting us all in a common 

cause, and we don’t see no evidence of that whatsoever, Mr. 

Speaker, no evidence of that whatsoever. 

 

So you can stop bragging about your highways. Stop bragging 

about the growing population because you had nothing to do 

with that. Stop bragging about all the money you have in the 

bank — you’re barely making a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker 

— and start thinking about what the Saskatchewan people really 

need. They need a government that thinks beyond the next two 

years, Mr. Speaker. They need a government that thinks beyond 

self-promotion. And, Mr. Speaker, what they’ve got to figure 

out is that the words that they speak in this Assembly, the 

responses they have to the Throne Speech will ring hollow. 

 

I’m going to sit here and listen to them rant and rave, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m going to sit here and listen to them rant and rave. 

And they laugh. They laugh. And the bottom line I can tell you 

right now, every single one of them will be bragging. They’ll be 

bragging, oh we’ve done this. We’ve done that. They’ll be 

marketing their leader, their Premier. They’ll be marketing this. 

They’ll be marketing that. 

 

The bottom line, to this current government, Mr. Speaker, it is 

industry. It is farmers. It’s the working men and woman. It’s the 

universities. It’s all the people of Saskatchewan that are 

building this province. It is not government. That’s why we tell 

you today, stop back-patting yourselves because you look silly 

and, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan do not like that. 

 

Now one of the members from Martensville chirps from her 

seat, Mr. Speaker. And I used to watch a lot of politics on TV, 

and I remember Margaret Thatcher, the prime minister of 

England. There you go. They’re clapping. They call her the Iron 

Lady, Mr. Speaker. Why did they call her the Iron Lady? 

Because she made so many cuts because the government of 

Britain was in a lot of trouble, England overall. They cut and 

they cut and they cut. And the reason why, the reason why they 

cut, Mr. Speaker, is because the country was going broke, she 

said. The country was going broke. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 when the NDP were in power and 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3657 

the NDP had to cut because we’re going broke, all of a sudden 

it was not acceptable to the right wing. So Margaret Thatcher 

can do it on one hand, but the NDP can’t do it because if the 

NDP do it, then it’s wrong. So that’s why the logic behind the 

right wingers is completely silly, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t even 

know what they’re doing half the time. So my point to them is 

that while it’s good for Margaret Thatcher to be called the Iron 

Lady for making all these cuts, but as soon as the NDP do it, 

well it’s wrong. That’s how silly this Saskatchewan Party is 

when they’re trying to figure out the logic of where they’re 

coming from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I was going to talk a bit about the Senate, Mr. Speaker, just 

the Senate overall. You know, and I know this is not the place 

and the venue for it, but clearly I think . . . Quite frankly, I’m 

just wondering, Mr. Speaker . . . I remember a couple of years 

ago when my colleague, the member I’m seconding the motion 

for, threw me under the bus when he said I had failed 

accounting now, Mr. Speaker, in high school, so don’t look to 

me for financial advice. And he was right. I did fail. I did fail 

high school accounting. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they threw a couple of senators under the bus 

over there. Now I wouldn’t mind seeing them go and talk to 

those senators, the same senators that were out campaigning for 

them, Mr. Speaker, because we know a lot of those guys hold 

federal Conservative cards. They’ve got Conservative cards 

over there. Quite a few of them have them, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know that some of those senators were out there helping them 

campaign and fund raise. 

 

Oh and all of a sudden, a couple of days before the problem hit, 

the Premier was talking about going to Ottawa and fixing the 

Senate. What a great opportunity to make the headlines. I’m 

going to go and fix that Senate, he said. He didn’t bring it up at 

the first ministers’ meeting. He casually mentioned it. And he 

was told no, none of that’s going to happen. And now as soon 

as the senators get in trouble, they throw them under the bus 

too. Oh we don’t know them. We don’t know them. Well didn’t 

they speak at your convention? Oh I don’t remember that. You 

know, and we sit here saying, well come on, you guys. They’re 

your cousins. No, they don’t remember any of those guys now. 

And as far as reforming the Senate? You don’t hear the Premier 

speak about that. 

 

My theory is, my theory is is that whenever there’s an 

opportunity to be in front of the parade or to be PR, the slick PR 

machine that they want to be, well why not jump in front of 

these issues? The only problem is, they shouldn’t jump in front 

of the Senate bus. Wait till it passes you by. And what 

happened was, as the Senate bus is running over the senators 

that are in trouble now, Mr. Speaker, we see now no word from 

the Sask Party. No word from the Premier. No word from the 

right wingers over there; those that have federal Conservative 

cards. They’re not talking about the Senate no more. Oh, those 

rotten senators. That’s what they’re saying now. We don’t know 

them. We don’t know them. 

 

I wouldn’t mind seeing, Mr. Speaker, the response they might 

get on some of the senators’ families and friends when they’re 

out campaigning next time. You knock on their door. Hello. 

How are you? You know, I wouldn’t mind seeing that, Mr. 

Speaker — what they’d be told in some of the places that these 

senators are from. I would like, I would pay for a front seat for 

that reaction because I know some of the families of some of 

the senators are probably saying holy, I thought we were all one 

big family at one time, and now we don’t have . . . What’s 

happening here? Are you trying to disown us? I wouldn’t want 

to be in any of the MLAs’ shoes today, going knocking on some 

of the senators’ families’ and friends’ doors this next election, 

Mr. Speaker. Because they threw, they threw these senators 

under the bus. They threw the senators under the bus. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the bus is running over them, and these guys are 

simply getting off the way. They’re getting off the way. 

 

And as far as Senate reform, I’m sitting at home and I hear this 

press release, that the Premier of Saskatchewan’s going to go 

and fix the Senate. And I said, well what the heck is that about 

now? And, Mr. Speaker, I guess he did go try fix the Senate. 

But he said, we should fix the Senate. And everybody around 

the room looked at him and that was it — didn’t fix it. Why did 

he tell the people of Saskatchewan that he could fix the Senate? 

It’s all about PR. That’s all it was about. They’re trying to 

change the channel. They’re trying to change the channel, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is exactly my point, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government has to be serious about things that matter to the 

people of Saskatchewan instead of jumping in front of parades, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You have to understand that you’ve got to manage the economy 

that you’ve inherited and manage it well, Mr. Speaker. This 

government has not had a major problem right now since 

they’ve been in government because they’ve spent the money. 

They’ve made all the announcements, and they’ve been running 

this PR campaign, Mr. Speaker. But the people of 

Saskatchewan know it; the people of Saskatchewan know it. 

We all know it, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell you, one after another 

different groups and different areas and different sectors and 

different cities and towns and villages, they’re beginning to 

realize that the Saskatchewan Party government doesn’t listen 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And recently all we’ve seen from this particular government, 

Mr. Speaker, is not only the PR and spin, but now they continue 

going to war with the working people. And now they’re 

beginning to sell off the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, and Information 

Services Corporation is a good example. And while they’re 

quietly sitting back undertaking their own ideology on things 

like the Crowns, on education, and on finances, Mr. Speaker, 

the people of Saskatchewan are continuing to sit here and 

saying, what’s going on? There is a seed of mistrust that’s 

quickly growing amongst the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s why I say today, that’s why I say today, Mr. 

Speaker, when I look at some of the measures taken under The 

Election Act for photo ID [identification], the increase in the 

MLAs, Mr. Speaker, the advertisements . . . We got a pamphlet 

in the mail talking about all the accomplishments that the Sask 

Party government is taking credit for. All that, Mr. Speaker, it 

tells me one thing. Why is the current government protesting so 

much against the NDP opposition? What is it in their minds, in 

their psyche, that they continually protest against the NDP, the 

opposition, and the different groups out there, Mr. Speaker? I 

don’t have the answer to that, Mr. Speaker, but I know 

somebody out there does. Now what I want to tell the people of 



3658 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Saskatchewanland is this, very simple: we have a government 

that inherited all the great news. They inherited everything, Mr. 

Speaker. Their timing was impeccable because the population 

was growing, economy was getting strong, money in the bank, 

and they came along. And six years later, six years after the fact 

of bragging, we now see through the Throne Speech that you 

want to put more debt on to the future generations through 

things like P3s, Mr. Speaker. They’re ignoring working 

families. They’re going to war with the teachers, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re going to war with northern people. They’re going to 

war when I think overall, with the mindset of many that think 

that we should unite our province, not divide it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think, I think the people of Saskatchewan 

will see the folly in this particular government’s ways and now 

will say, Mr. Speaker, as you hear from their responses, as we 

hear from their responses, Mr. Speaker, how much PR and spin 

they’re doing for their own benefit. And I’ll say again, Mr. 

Speaker, the silliest thing that I heard in the last couple of days 

in this Assembly was the member from Saskatoon Sutherland 

when he said, we paid down debt 40 per cent overnight. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, we’re sitting here and all of us . . . And I’m 

sure quite a few accountants had a good laugh at that one. So 

how could you pay down debt overnight 40 per cent if, as your 

leader says, the cupboard was bare? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly, if I was a lawyer I’d tell the 

defence . . . [inaudible] . . . today that I rest my case, that these 

guys don’t know what they’re doing. So on that notion, Mr. 

Speaker, I am very pleased to second the amendment to the 

Throne Speech as presented by my colleague. And I would ask 

the people of Saskatchewan to watch, to watch how the 

self-promotion will begin from the government opposite. 

 

And Halloween’s four days away, Mr. Speaker, and what I 

wouldn’t mind seeing . . . and if these guys want to go do a little 

bit of trick-or-treating, I don’t know what they’re going to dress 

up as, but they’d better do part octopus because they’re pretty 

good at patting their own backs, you know. And I don’t know 

what it’d look like, but it’s got to be part octopus, it’s got to be 

green, it’s got to be self-serving, it’s got to lack vision, Mr. 

Speaker, and it has to have no vision for the future. So limited 

thinking, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not sure what the 

trick-or-treater will look like, but I can tell he’s going to be 

godawful ugly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And the bottom line is, the bottom line is we don’t need a 

government full of PR, full of spin, full of fancy words that, in 

The StarPhoenix’s own words, clearly lacks vision. It’s 

frustratingly lacking in its vision, Mr. Speaker, and that’s really, 

really important. And on that note, Mr. Speaker, I will say to 

the people of Saskatchewan, this opposition is going to grow. It 

is going to grow. 

 

And what we’re not, what we’re not going to do, what we’re 

not going to do is start taking economic advice from the 

economic midgets across the way that yell, it was us that 

created it; it was us that created the economy. News flash again: 

it was not your government, it was not the Sask Party MLAs 

that created the economy, the growing population, and the 

money in the bank. It was the farmers. It was industry. It was 

the corporations. It was good royalties. It was a solid 

government. It was a dedicated people, and it was a united 

people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have an exciting plan that’s going 

to continue building over time, and it’s going to be called smart 

growth. And in that smart growth we will build a brave new 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There seems to be a lot of members 

trying to enter into the debate. Currently the member from 

Athabasca has the floor. I’m sure all members will have an 

opportunity to enter the debate. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And what I would 

point out, Mr. Speaker, is that we are going to build a brave, 

bold new economy that brings everyone together, that brings 

absolutely everyone together, Mr. Speaker. We’re not for the 

divisive politics of the current government. They’re six years 

old, Mr. Speaker, six years old, and they look old and tired 

already, Mr. Speaker — six years old. And I can’t figure out 

from the Throne Speech what their great vision or what their 

great plan is. I just simply can’t see it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that note I tell the people of Saskatchewan, stay strong. 

Continue building our province, as I asked all the different 

groups to do, and don’t worry. Divisiveness will not rule this 

particular Chamber nor our plans for the future. We will bring 

absolutely everyone together. 

 

And in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve been 

asking for is a simple, simple one-word effort from this 

government — respect. We want to travel on safe roads. We 

want our children to have a future through training. We want to 

have decent homes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan, I can tell you right 

now, as the member from Cumberland can allude to, we 

generate a lot of wealth for the province. We are sharing that 

wealth through our mining initiatives, Mr. Speaker. And people 

in the North are getting angrier and angrier as you kick out 

working families, as you ignore the northern road situation, as 

you ignore the suicide amongst the young Aboriginal people, 

Mr. Speaker, or the dilapidated schools, Mr. Speaker. As you 

continue to ignore that sector of the province before a number 

of reasons why the Sask Party are doing, the people of the 

North will eventually say, okay, if you don’t want to govern for 

us all, we’re going to govern for ourselves. We will work with 

the mining companies and we will use the resources that the 

mining companies generate out of the North to look after our 

own problems. 

 

Now does that build a united province? Absolutely not. But as 

long as this government continues to ignore certain sectors of 

people, certain geographical areas, Mr. Speaker, they do a great 

injustice to this great province whose motto, provincial logo, is 

“from many peoples, strength.” 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to second the 

motion on the amendment on the Speech from the Throne from 

my colleague, the member from Regina Rosemont. Thank you. 

 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3659 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is an 

honour to participate in this Throne Speech debate. 

 

Twenty-three months and three weeks ago the people of 

Saskatchewan asked the Saskatchewan Party to govern this 

province. At that same time, the people of Prince Albert 

Northcote hired me to be their voice and to bring their message 

to this legislature. This Throne Speech is a clear indication that 

their voice is heard and their message matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this position of governance cannot be done by 

oneself nor in isolation. There is a team behind each and every 

one of us. Therefore before I continue, I will take a few 

moments to thank just a few of them. Mr. Deputy Speaker, one 

person that has been unwavering in his commitment to me is 

my husband, Al, this man with the patience to see and 

experience, well maybe one or two of my strengths and oh a 

whole lot of, I’d like to call them less than stellar strengths but 

let’s just call them weaknesses. He chooses to stick by me. 

Thank you, Al. 

 

My children and their spouses deserve a great big thank you. 

They have never questioned my abilities nor my willingness to 

be a part of a team that is taking Saskatchewan into the future. 

As well, there is a team back in Prince Albert, in my MLA 

office, that keeps the office running smoothly with the 

day-to-day activities. Thank you, Trudy, Brent, and Donna. Mr. 

Speaker, one more thank you to my team of colleagues on this 

side of the House that helps me to be the best MLA there is for 

Prince Albert Northcote. Thank you for pushing and pulling me 

when needed and for accepting me as part of the team that is 

leading this province into the future. 

 

Two messages people consistently and continuously tell me are: 

keep the economy strong; be fiscally prudent. These messages 

are woven throughout this Throne Speech. 

 

Let’s hear what a few others are saying about it. For example, 

Wayne Mantyka says, and I quote, “This Throne Speech 

maintains the government’s focus on a growth plan [that is the] 

. . . as the province pushes forward with expanding the 

economy and dealing with the issues that growth brings.” 

Wayne Mantyka, CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 

Regina, October 23rd, 2013. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech is based on our 

government’s Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 and Beyond which 

sets a foundation for a future with a strong economy and a 

balanced budget. This is so very different from a province that 

was ruled by the NDP, an NDP that is stuck in the past. The 

foundation of our future is based on consultations with our 

constituents and clearly sets out our plan to ensure 

Saskatchewan continues to grow and that our government 

continues to meet the challenges of growth. This Throne Speech 

is another step towards our future. Mr. Speaker, we all know 

that setting a goal is the first step to achieving that goal. It is the 

implementation of action that actually achieves that goal. 

 

One goal we set in our plan for growth is, well, in a single 

word, it’s growth. For example, our government set a goal of 

1.2 million people living in Saskatchewan by 2020. Well, how 

are we doing? In just six years, we now have more than 100,000 

new citizens that call Saskatchewan home and, Mr. Speaker, at 

a rate that is unprecedented in Saskatchewan’s history. It sure 

looks like we are moving forward and achieving that goal. 

Contrast this with the NDP’s plan for . . . Well, a plan for 

nothing, no growth. In fact, when the Saskatchewan Party 

government set a goal for growth, what did the NDP say? They 

dismissed the forward-thinking vision and in fact one NDP 

MLA, on March 24th, 2003, said, and I quote, “Well it is so 

over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that it flies in the 

face of reality.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — That was an NDP MLA. No need to tell him 

because . . . Mr. Speaker, today we see a pile of NDP MLAs 

seated in this Chamber that wholeheartedly support that 

backward thinking. Well maybe there’s just nine of them. Just 

nine. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The negative nine. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — The negative . . . Let’s look at another 

contrast, and I will quote from page 2 of the Throne Speech: 

 

While most of this growth has been driven by 

Saskatchewan businesses, my government will continue to 

play its role by encouraging further diversification of our 

resource-based economy, marketing our province 

throughout the world and maintaining a competitive tax 

and regulatory environment that encourages new 

investment and new jobs. 

 

Let’s see, what did the leader of the NDP say? He says, and I 

quote, “To me, this Throne Speech is disappointing; it’s looking 

backwards.” Said on October 23rd, 2013. Mr. Speaker, to find 

something negative about our province at a time when we are 

moving forward and we have a goal that is an inspirational 

vision for the future, to find negativity is so typical of the NDP. 

 

The NDP continues to plan for, well, nothing, Mr. Speaker. No 

increase in the seniors’ income supplement for 16 years and no 

plan for assisting those with long-term and enduring disability. 

Let’s contrast this with our record. By 2015 the benefits under 

the seniors’ income plan will have tripled since 2007. Today 

more than 11,000 Saskatchewan citizens with a long-term and 

enduring disability are enrolled in the Saskatchewan assured 

income for disability program, or SAID, as we call it. These are 

just two of the many examples of how our government’s plan 

for growth is about improving the quality of life for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nearly 23 months and three weeks ago, through 

consultations with about 8,000 people living in Prince Albert 

Northcote, I discovered that the number one concern was crime 

and the desire to have a safe community. Mr. Speaker, we see 

on page 15 of the Throne Speech, and I quote, “Helping the 

victims of crime is a priority for our government.” This year the 

Ministry of Justice has allocated more than $3 million for 

police-based victims services programs which provide 

information, support, and referrals for victims of crime. As 

well, Mr. Speaker, there is a committed team of people in 



3660 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Prince Albert Northcote, and indeed in Prince Albert, that took 

the lead to the future where Prince Albert would be a safer 

community. They created the first of its kind in Canada called 

the Community Mobilization partnership. In P.A. [Prince 

Albert] we call it the Hub. This team of police, community 

organizations, government ministries, and human service 

agencies foster a closer co-operation among them to reduce 

crime. 

 

Our government financially supports this innovative initiative 

that leads, helps to improve the quality of life for our 

communities. As the Throne Speech points out, Mr. Speaker, 

there are some very impressive results from this innovative 

initiative. Since 2011 overall crime has fallen by 18 per cent. 

Violent crime is down by 38 per cent, and property crime is 

down by 20 per cent. One word can describe these results — 

impressive. 

 

This leadership role in getting at the root causes of crime is 

being followed by many communities all across Saskatchewan. 

The people of our province can hold their heads high because 

we have shown ourselves, our communities, and our province 

that working together is the best way to keep moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through continued consultations with my 

constituents, I heard, make it easier to connect to extended 

families and businesses in the North. Our government heard 

that message and then took action. As this Throne Speech 

indicates, the Crowns are partnering with the private sector to 

bring telecommunications infrastructure to the North. SaskTel, 

Huawei, and the Athabasca development corporation are 

partnering to bring four new cellular sites to the communities of 

Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, Black Lake, and Wollaston Lake. 

There are 566 kilometres of new fibre being placed to bring 

high-speed bandwidth to the North. This partnership between 

SaskTel, SaskPower, and Cameco is a clear example of doing 

things in the new way in our new Saskatchewan to improve the 

quality of life for all our people. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is a clear indicator of how our 

government is systematically working on the priority areas set 

out in our growth plan. However, Mr. Speaker, we know there 

are some challenges to growth. And I now will take a minute to 

quote from The StarPhoenix editorial on October 24th, 2013, 

and I quote: “To have the government commit in the second 

half of its mandate to address those challenges is perhaps the 

most responsible course it can take.” 

 

Talk about meeting the challenges of growth. Businesses could 

employ more, even more people. But as we all know there is a 

shortage of skilled labour. An educated workforce will help to 

produce that skilled labour and is key to help keep 

Saskatchewan competitive. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are working with educational institutions 

and employers to create 1,000 new training seats this year. Talk 

about success through working together. Crown corporations 

will also expand opportunities for apprentices and fund training 

seats at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] and the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies. People are seeing the opportunities available to 

participate in this new Saskatchewan and they desire to improve 

their skills. They have applied to the adult basic education or, as 

we call it, ABE program, in record numbers. To reduce the 

backlog, our government is adding 700 new spots to the 

program. This increases the total of the seats to 8,580. Note that 

that is a 46 per cent increase since 2007 and it is an important 

step towards eliminating the ABE wait-list. 

 

Housing is another challenge of growth that the NDP never had 

under their stuck-in-the-past plan for nothing. We have 

committed $344 million to expand the housing supply by 

12,600 units and repair or update about 24,000 units by 2016. 

Prince Albert continues to benefit from our eight-year housing 

plan. The latest renovation in Prince Albert Northcote and in 

Prince Albert, we will see the conversion of Pineland 

Apartments into safe, affordable housing units. 

 

Prince Albert is also benefiting in the area of health care. Our 

government is taking steps to reduce pressure on the long-term 

care system by launching new home care pilot programs in 

Saskatoon and in Prince Albert. The Pineview Terrace Lodge, 

with an increase in number of beds, is right in the middle of 

being built. We are amending The Personal Care Homes Act to 

allow for the public disclosure of inspection reports. In the 

months ahead, we will announce details of a program that will 

enable some seniors with complex issues to receive house calls 

from physicians, nurse practitioners, and other health care 

providers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as described earlier today, my colleagues from 

MLA Batoche and MLA Carlton and I celebrated the official 

opening of Highway 11. Now Regina and Saskatoon are 

connected to Prince Albert with a twinned highway. This 

improves the flow of goods, people, and services to Prince 

Albert. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there are challenges to growth, and we are 

meeting them head-on. This Throne Speech is a clear indicator 

of the steps we are taking to meet those challenges. 

 

The NDP are opposed to growth. That is clear when they voted 

against the plan for growth, vision 2020 and beyond. Today, 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have a plan for . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nothing. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Well nothing. Exactly. Nothing. 

 

Let’s compare month seven of each leader’s tenure. As we can 

see and hear, at month seven for the NDP leader there is no 

plan, a plan for nothing — no policies, no action, no plan. At 

month seven of our leader’s tenure — our leader who is now 

the Premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — at month seven 

our leader released an economic action plan and released new 

policy ideas, new policies such as reducing the small business 

tax, a policy that helps to create a business-friendly province. 

And now we see business owners looking for skilled labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on — should I go on? — about 

the excitement and innovation that the people of Saskatchewan 

are contributing to our province’s bright future. For example we 

have an accountable government, six balanced budgets. We’re 

introducing a new lobbyist Act. And we’ll establish an 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3661 

independent officer of the Legislative Assembly to oversee its 

records. 

 

This summer, Mr. Speaker, I attended the first opening of a 

provincial park for — how long was it, Mr. Minister? — about 

20 years, something like that. So now we have focused on 

creating the best experience possible for park visitors by 

investing 44 million in our provincial park system since 2008. 

Mr. Speaker, this is working well. As an example, we have a 

record 3.7 million visits to our provincial parks. 

 

We also have an artsVest program in the province. And, if you 

remember back to my inaugural speech, artsVest was launched 

in Prince Albert in one of the most beautiful buildings in P.A., 

the E.A. Rawlinson Centre, just prior to the election. Well we 

see that this program is . . . We are partnering with the private 

sector to provide $2.4 million to help arts, cultural, and heritage 

organizations. 

 

What else can I tell you about this wonderful Throne Speech 

that is looking forward? How about competitiveness? Is 

Saskatchewan competitive? Absolutely. We have one of the 

fastest growing economies in the country and the lowest 

unemployment rate. That sounds pretty competitive to me. We 

have infrastructure investment. We have housing investment. 

We have post-secondary education investment. We’ve a plan, 

plain and simple, a plan for growth. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’d think people would move here. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — I think people are moving here. We’ve got 

more than 100,000 people that moved here in the last six years. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker. I must say that it is so exciting to be 

part of a thriving province with a strong economy and six 

consecutive balanced budgets. Our people are resilient, 

determined, and optimistic, and can meet any challenges the 

future may bring. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion 

for the Throne Speech, and I do not support the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is also a pleasure 

for myself from Prince Albert to stand today and talk about our 

Throne Speech, and a great Throne Speech that it is yet again. 

It’s a visionary document planning for growth. 

 

I’m not sure what it would ever be like to plan for decline, but 

on the other side of this House, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure around 

that cabinet table and treasury board boardroom, for years they 

struggled with that question. How do you plan for decline? And 

you know what? I would have thought that, although in 

opposition with a new leader, their previous leaders under that 

party always had a vision at least to project a growth plan to 

give to the people in this province. It may not have been 

something I would have agreed with, to be sure, but it was a 

plan that people could look at, compare to, at the time, the 

opposition, which was the Sask Party, and then make a decision 

moving forward. 

 

Well here we are today, Mr. Speaker, with a visionary for a 

Premier who looks at the growth of Saskatchewan. We took on 

a challenge to raise the population of this province, and in six 

short years, we hit the mark — 1.1 million people, Mr. Speaker. 

Hopefully we have a plan for growth that shows 1.2 million 

people by 2020. Now, interestingly enough, I wasn’t around in 

this House back in the day when the NDP was in government, 

and I want to thank the members who endured those very long 

sessions as opposition members, listening to the rhetoric from 

this side of the House when they were in power. But I want to 

quote, interestingly enough, from an NDP MLA, former MLA, 

Mr. Harry Van Mulligen, who said in this House in March 24th 

of 2003: 

 

They [in reference to Sask Party] propose to increase the 

population of Sask Party by 100,000 over . . . I forget what 

number of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it is so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that 

it flies in the face of reality. 

 

I can’t understand how a learned man like that would even say 

that, Mr. Speaker. That was probably the reflection of the NDP 

caucus, ministers at the time, that how dare an opposition party 

back then, under a newly-minted . . . well a future-mentored 

leader, a future Premier, focused on talking about a plan for 

growth then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So after our Premier becomes leader of the Sask Party, what 

does he do? Does he sit around and complain, point fingers at 

the government of the day, criticize them on a regular basis 

without, without referencing a plan for the future, Mr. Speaker? 

Not a chance. In short order the leader of the Sask Party at that 

time, the current Premier, put forth an economic action-type 

kind of a paper which he published, released on the University 

of Saskatchewan campus, talking about his vision, the vision of 

this party moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now that’s what every leader should do. If you want to 

eventually form government and show to the population of a 

province that you have what it truly takes to be a Premier with 

the support of your caucus members and colleagues, you would 

think after losing an election and then getting a newly-minted 

leader that the opposition party would do the same thing. We 

would have seen in this tenure to this date some sort of an 

action document, a plan, a visionary paper of some sort, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I guess we have. When we look back at what the current 

leader of the NDP authored what we call the tree book, which 

was a policy paper, a policy paper just prior to the last election, 

Mr. Speaker, who some on the opposition side say that that was 

no way, shape, or form a document to be used as a jumpoff 

point for the election platform they developed after. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I find that difficult to believe. Because when a party 

authors a policy platform document, a policy forum document 

like that, that’s exactly what forms — or should form — the 

basis for your platform in the upcoming election. And in this 

case, we on this side believe it did. 

 

And what did the current leader pen, author, sign? A $5 billion 

spending spree, Mr. Speaker. A $5 billion spending spree, all 

based on NDP policy development, that would have driven this 

province, if they would have governed, into a massive deficit 

hole. 



3662 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

So I ask the Leader of the Opposition today and the members 

on the other side of this House, what would you do with the 

revenue of this province? What would you do if you were in 

fact going to be in power and be the government? Well nothing. 

To this day, nothing. In fact, as I understand it, that tree 

document is off their website. There’s no reference to it 

whatsoever anymore, Mr. Speaker. I would have to think if I 

was on that side of the House in opposition, Mr. Speaker, that I 

would be seeing what’s happening in this province and asking 

my leader, why is it we haven’t got our act together to show an 

alternative to the Saskatchewan Party? 

 

It’s fine to get up in this House and point fingers and criticize 

the government of the day for what they believe is a nonsense 

document, a backward-looking document, rehashing of old 

ideas — which I would have to say is completely false, Mr. 

Speaker. But then to say that and not put forth an alternative, 

it’s like having an argument saying, yeah, but. But what? 

There’s nothing to say against us. They want to talk about not 

messing it up. Don’t mess it up, Mr. Speaker. Well the member 

from Athabasca uses that quite a bit. He says, don’t mess it up. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Well I’d hate to see how he defines messing up. We see a 

province that’s grown by 100,000 people over six years, leads 

the nation in economic development. It’s top . . . We’re a AAA 

rating by S & P [Standard & Poor’s], Mr. Speaker. We are the 

envy of small countries in the world who would kill to have 

what we have here — for a balanced budget, for resource 

wealth, and for a leader who is on now the world stage talking 

about how to take a province that was never even close to a 

million people under the NDP, now we’re looking at 1.2 million 

for a growth plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t understand how the members opposite can stand there in 

their place and debate a Throne Speech that’s a visionary 

document. And we’ve had numerous throne speeches which 

were visionary documents, and every time a Throne Speech 

comes up, we have goals set. Ministers take on those 

challenges. And I’m very proud to say the ministers on this side 

of the House get those things done, Mr. Speaker. They get the 

job done. They see it, as well as we do in the backbench, that 

we see a province that’s growing. And they challenge our 

officials to hit the mark every time, and they do, Mr. Speaker, 

time after time after time. I want to thank the ministers for the 

job well done. 

 

So now we’ll get into more of a personal note for myself, Mr. 

Speaker. We talk about the potential for growth, the growth 

plan for this province. And I want to talk about two very 

important people in my life, my daughters Alyssa and 

Mackenzie, who I’m very proud to say are now in both in 

university at the University of Saskatchewan and doing very 

well. In fact they just finished mid-terms last week. And I was 

with them on the weekend, and they both feel very confident 

they did very well which is very . . . it’s a moment of pride for 

my wife and I as we talk to them about their future. Because in 

Saskatchewan right now, both of my daughters have the vision 

to stay in Saskatchewan. They believe fully that they have an 

opportunity to fulfill future obligations and goals and have a 

professional life in Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That wasn’t always the case. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — That wasn’t always the case. Thank you very 

much to my seatmate. Because when I decided to seek office 

and run for the nomination back in 2006, Mr. Speaker, I wanted 

to see a province prosper. I wanted to see a province where my 

daughters could in fact benefit from a government opening up 

opportunities, giving them chances like no other time before, 

Mr. Speaker. And I’m very proud that this government has done 

just that. 

 

We are giving opportunities to the young people in this 

province to stay, to raise a family, where for years they would 

graduate from university and technical schools and have to 

move out of Saskatchewan to get a job. In these last six years 

we’ve seen people come back to Saskatchewan to definitely 

help with that extra 100,000 growth over six years. 

 

 But we’re also drawing people from other countries to 

Saskatchewan to seek a future because they want to come to a 

place . . . although I’m sure that first winter is quite a shocker to 

quite a few of them that come from the very warm Asian 

countries, however, and the African countries. But they have 

opportunity that at no other time before in their lives, I’m sure, 

they can provide for their families. They have opportunities to 

do multiple different kinds of jobs in our province, and it’s ripe 

for the picking, so to speak — opportunities like never before. 

 

And now I go back to my daughters’ future. You know what? 

There was one thing that my daughters knew they would do in 

high school. They would go on to university. And there’s one 

thing about our post-secondary education plan since we formed 

government under the ministers and the Premier that we wanted 

to do a couple of different things. We wanted to give our 

students an advantage. 

 

So you know what, it’s an interesting dilemma to come into 

where you have a chance when you have resource revenue 

again. That has been a godsend to be sure. We take credit for 

setting the table for new policies and development to spur on 

business, to spur on growth. But we also never lose sight of the 

fact that we are a resource-blessed province, and we’ve 

benefited from those resources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We saw, since 2008, a $4.6 billion increase in investment into 

post-secondary institutions and students. That’s amazing when 

you look at my daughters’ future when they were in high 

school. Looking forward, they saw that they had an opportunity 

to stay in Saskatchewan to go to school. And now with the 

investment and the continuous investment in their education 

through the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, which helps, 

to be sure, when the parents are paying for the tuition. It 

definitely helps, but they will get it all back because they are 

going to stay in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, after they’re done. 

I’m going to remind them that that money should come back to 

their parents, but I’m not sure if it will, Mr. Speaker. I like it. I 

think it’s . . . Yes, I’m going to try. My members on this side 

are mocking the fact that maybe it’s a pipe dream, but I’m 

going to try. 

 

There’s many things that we’ve been able to contribute as a 

government, Mr. Speaker. We started off small. I remember 

being privileged and had the honour to be on treasury board 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3663 

when we first formed government. And I saw a lot of action 

plans, talking to the ministers who presented at the time, that 

were great news releases by the NDP. They were great news 

releases to encourage support for the 2007 election. Well you 

know what, Mr. Speaker, very few of those projects had any 

significant funding allocated for the future moving forward. 

 

So on that first two budgets that I was a part of in treasury 

board, we saw a very aggressive plan to put our platform, again 

supported by a policy document prior, into place, which we did, 

Mr. Speaker. Again a visionary document. Good public policy 

formed a platform for this party, which we took as soon as we 

formed government and assigned every minister responsible 

tasks to see those come to fruition before the next election. And 

you know what, Mr. Speaker? We saw many infrastructure 

projects in this province, highways specifically, that were 

short-funded, unfunded, or in fact when you have highways 

churned back into gravel, that again is I guess a party that was 

planning for decline. Heaven forbid you should refurbish or 

build new roads using pavement, thinking that your province 

might grow, might grow. But oh no, Mr. Speaker. They were 

chewing pavement up, putting in the gravel. And our Premier 

and our ministers of Highways and Infrastructure have done a 

great job in planning for that growth. 

 

Again it’s a visionary thing. It’s a living, breathing document 

that challenges ministers and officials and treasury board to 

fund all these different initiatives. But we don’t look at it for 

growth for growth’s sake. We invest properly in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, addressing the needs around some of the most 

aggressive, growing communities in the country. I look to 

Martensville and Warman, Saskatoon. That area is booming in 

such a way that I think in my lifetime I will see those 

communities join together. And I believe that the mayors and 

the reeves of the area and the mayor of Saskatoon are working 

on that whole regional plan, moving forward to ensure that 

dollars are invested properly. 

 

And it’s one of those things that this province is able to see 

happen because of a government, I truly believe, that looks at 

every measure possible to again encourage economic 

development, encourage growth, and then support it moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker, with a plan, again a plan. And I believe if 

you were to look back at the Premier’s paper when he first 

became leader of this party and took his vision at the time, 

moving forward today, you’d be able to say check, check, 

check, check, check. Been there, done that. 

 

And it’s one of those kind of documents, Mr. Speaker, that 

again is never just put away to gather dust. It’s looked at and 

referenced ongoing by the leader, by the Premier now. And it’s 

still one of those documents that has to be referred to as we 

move forward the next plan for growth — things we’ve done, 

things we look back on. And we don’t look back and pat 

ourselves on the back. We look back and thank the people of 

this province for supporting this province day in and day out, 

working hard every day, contributing to local economies, 

helping out in the local communities by volunteering. 

Saskatchewan has one of the best volunteer bases in the world, I 

believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One thing I find interesting is again this government has taken 

on the challenges of building for the future. We see our Crown 

corporations having to invest like no other time before to 

support the growth of this province. Again I look to the other 

side. Where was your plan for growth? Where was it? You had 

to be planning for decline because you failed to invest in the 

resource, in the Crowns to expand, thinking that this province 

would never grow. Again a burden placed on our ministers and 

the Premier but a job tackled and taken on by the presidents of 

the Crown corporations as well. And kudos to them and their 

staff for accepting that challenge and moving forward and 

seeing that we needed to build out on projects so we could 

support growth again. 

 

That ties into my next part of my speech about the SaskBuilds, 

the new organization that was just founded recently to pursue 

an advantageous mechanism for infrastructure dollars to be 

spent, developing an action plan to address our shortfalls, Mr. 

Speaker. Now we know that with our province growing, we’ve 

seen families come to this province. We’re seeing many 

families like my seatmate starting, which is great. Some of my 

colleagues are having many, many, many grandchildren. It’s 

helping out. I look to my colleague from Saskatchewan Rivers 

in that. Thank you very much to be a grandma all these times 

over. Tell the kids to keep up the good work. 

 

And one thing that we see and we’ve seen — and treasury 

board members can attest to this and ministers can as well — 

that it is costly to build projects. We recognize that, Mr. 

Speaker. We take on that challenge. We expect that the 

taxpayers of this province want to see value for their dollars. 

And we need to build schools. We need to put money to 

infrastructure. We need to expand our Crown corporations’ 

infrastructure as well. We need to put more roads into place so 

we can expand our communities and make it easier access for 

the economies of our province to reach a market. 

 

But on the issue of building schools, why not — and I challenge 

opposition members to stand up and debate this with me — why 

would you not look at every opportunity that’s been used in 

other places in this country and in the world to maximize your 

taxpayers’ dollars to develop a plan to address the ministries 

that have a need for infrastructure? We look to the schools. We 

see and we’ve seen in the first four years of government and 

now this next term, we’ve been funding new schools in this 

province. They’re costly measures, Mr. Speaker. So why not 

look at an opportunity to bundle schools, talk to industry leaders 

who’ve done it, talk to the people who are experts in the field, 

and look at private-public partnerships as an option? 

 

I’m a taxpayer like everyone else in this room is. My daughters 

will be taxpayers in the future. Why would I not want to see 

their future and their tax dollars spent judiciously? I don’t 

understand why the opposition members, especially the Leader 

of the Opposition, stands in this House and criticizes an 

opportunity that we see in this bundling concept moving 

forward with P3s to build schools, one of which, after 51 times 

standing in this House with petitions to actually ask for a school 

in his riding, it is going to get built under this model, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And now he stands here and he criticizes the government for 

using taxpayers’ dollars in such a fashion that we can build 

joint-use facility schools in not just one area in the city — in 

multiple areas, multiple ridings, multiple communities. I ask the 



3664 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Leader of the Opposition, if you have a better way to do it, let’s 

see it on your website. Publish a paper. Get up and talk about it 

somewhere. But today we hear nothing. We see finger points. 

We say it’s a bad idea where you need to put more eggs in more 

baskets. Well how do you do that? Let’s hear it. Let’s see it. 

Let’s have something tangible from the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would like to see — and I’ve always asked people who want 

to debate with me — an answer to your debate. You have a 

point. How would you solve that issue? You can’t say, yes but, 

and we’ll do it this way, but don’t have an absolute, positive 

way to get it done or an option. We’re losing that from the 

opposition side. We need to be pressing and he needs, as a 

leader, to show the people of this province if he truly wants to 

govern. If he wants to somehow in some way in the future be on 

this side of the House to govern as a premier, then you’ve got to 

step up and you’ve got to be a leader now. Where’s your 

document? Where’s the document from the opposition showing 

the future? 

 

If it was the tree book, it’s $5 billion of spending that we can’t 

afford in this province, Mr. Speaker, and the people of this 

province saw through that last election. And I know if that’s the 

same document that they want to publish again with that same 

frivolous spending spree, from a polished document into a 

platform, I’d gladly say, bring it on. And I will campaign on our 

record over a $5 billion spending spree. 

 

The people in this province want to see year after year a vision 

from a government. They want to see and talk about some plans 

that have worked, absolutely, because it’s the budget time for 

the government. It puts actions into plans — plans into actions, 

sorry. But we have to keep on moving forward. We want to 

keep on showing the people of this province that we have a plan 

for growth, which we do. We’re seeing again a Throne Speech 

outlining expansion of things started. We look at what’s 

happening in Prince Albert with the Hub, how, in Prince Albert, 

how they’ve got together with ministries and policing and law 

enforcement agencies to tackle the issues that happen in 

communities together, in a team approach. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Why would we not want to talk about what’s the success story 

and then model that moving forward in this year with another 

challenge for the ministries to look at expanding the hubs in this 

province? It’s a working model, Mr. Speaker. Why would we 

not want to say it’s a good thing to look back and say, our 

credibility lies in our success, therefore we move it forward. 

 

The opposition says we’re looking backwards. Well if that’s an 

example, I’m okay with that. I’m okay in looking backwards, 

looking at our success stories and then modelling that moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker. And this government has that as part of 

their action plan in the Throne Speech, to keep looking at 

what’s been working in this province and action that and move 

it forward to ensure that we can still support our communities 

with not just growth for the sake of growth. 

 

We recognize there’s challenges with that. But I, on this side of 

the House — I’m sure my colleagues agree — would prefer to 

. . . And I’ve heard it from a couple of my colleagues in media 

releases and during media scrums. I’d much rather have the 

opportunity to plan for growth than to have to plan for decline 

and to make choices that would be in the negative interest of 

my province if I was to be a government. I’m very happy to be 

on this side of the government and in this side of the House 

whereby every day it’s difficult, I understand, that for the 

members in government, for the cabinet ministers, members of 

treasury board to balance all these ideas and all these different 

challenges we have. 

 

But you can do that when you have a Throne Speech like we 

see presented by the Premier and the Lieutenant Governor this 

year, as other years. It’s a plan. It’ll be attacked. It’ll be 

addressed in the budgets as we move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think that when it comes to that issue, our government is 

well situated to prove to the people of this province that we 

don’t govern for government’s sake. We govern with a plan, 

taking advice and counsel from those around us at all times, our 

constituents, as the member from Northcote referenced, telling 

us what we’re doing right, what we’re doing wrong. And we do 

make mistakes and we’ll learn from those mistakes, Mr. 

Speaker. But I can tell you right now that I’ve heard from my 

constituents that we have actually done more for this province 

that they’ve seen than most of them can recall ever happening 

on the good side under the NDP government, which is 

interesting. 

 

On Friday I took part in the opening of the final stretch of the 

No. 11 Highway along with my colleagues from Batoche and 

Northcote. I could not believe how much positive media play 

we got from that story alone, and then around town this 

weekend, how people were so happy to finally have that last 

part of the highway opened up. And they did it in such a fashion 

they were happy because it brings safety to them. It brings 

safety to their families. I heard that on the weekend. 

 

Again I go back to my daughters. My wife and I . . . Oh and I’m 

remiss. I should have said to my wife, thank you for your 

support as well. I’ve got to tell you, without her — our spouses 

— none of us could do these jobs that we do. Without family 

support behind us, we could never do these jobs. So I’m sorry. 

I’m remiss on that. I want to bring that up again. Sorry, 

Charlene. I’ll make sure I get you on the record now. Thank 

you very much. 

 

And we’re both, we’re both very happy that the No. 11 

Highway is twinned so my daughters can drive back and forth, 

when they aren’t having fun in Saskatoon, to come see us on the 

weekends. And to my girls, we’d like to see you more often. I 

know you’re having fun, but we want to see you more often 

back in Prince Albert. Oh they’re working hard. They’re 

studying hard. 

 

The other thing that this Throne Speech does and provides to 

our province is that we are seeing a government where 

international players, international Crown corporations, other 

international governments, are asking ministers and the Premier 

to visit, talk about the ideas, how to best partner with our 

government and our province and our corporate partners in this 

province to be a part of this growth, this momentum, and to 

partner with us not so much to gain just financially but to have 

an opportunity to be a partner moving forward to ensure that we 

can actually sustain this growth moving on, Mr. Speaker. That’s 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3665 

what we’re after and now we have international engagement to 

the same point. 

 

And I want to thank the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership team who’ve worked diligently internationally, 

along with the ministries as well, and the officials who have 

gone on trade missions and other recruitment missions as well 

to bring interested corporate dollars and people back to our 

province to sustain us and to fulfill our obligations that our 

corporations are seeing now. Companies need staff. They need 

people to work, and that’s whereby they’re seeing the 

opportunities. 

 

But again the investment in our post-secondary education, more 

seats in our SIAST model of education, which is going to 

become a polytechnic institute, I understand, as well as part of 

our Throne Speech vision allows for more students. 

 

And I want to talk about the North, the SIAST campus in Prince 

Albert. I was part of a housing opening in our first term that 

was specifically built and designed around the northern students 

who could come to SIAST, spend time, get educated, and then 

most, I believe, went back up north to work and fulfill job 

opportunities in the mines. So why would, why would we not 

want to continue that kind of momentum, offer more training 

spots and more seats for our members . . . sorry, not our 

members, our citizens to take part in the economy of this 

province in any way, shape or form? And we’re going to foster 

that through . . . some have to have additional education — the 

adult basic education first — because they have a vision for the 

future. 

 

I spent last Tuesday afternoon in a university political studies 

class talking to the students about what we do as MLAs and 

ministers and what we do as a government. It was interesting to 

see half the class were mature students. That says something. 

And a couple of ladies there I know actually tackled the 

challenges of having to go to get their basic education, now 

were in university classes. They’re making a better life for 

themselves. One lady I spoke to is looking at a degree in 

psychology and she’s got an eye toward social work and it’s a 

great calling, great calling. But there again too, it’s because of a 

government that has already expanded opportunities and will 

continue to do so to meet the challenges and needs of a 

government of a province. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we don’t govern for the sake of governing. 

We recognize that there are needs that have to be met and this 

government will do that. And every year, year after year we do 

that through a Throne Speech and of course the budget that 

comes out in March from the ministers as well. 

 

There is a lot more to say, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to say, 

but we have many more members on this side — and I’m very 

happy to say that as well — many more members on this side 

that want to have a say on what’s going on and talk about the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

I guess in closing what I want to say is this, and I’ll repeat 

myself and hopefully the point will come across to the Leader 

of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure . . . I hope it will. 

Right after the Throne Speech he was very critical in my local 

paper that myself and my colleague from P.A. Northcote had no 

response prior to the Throne Speech to the reporter. And it 

didn’t surprise me. We had no vision. We had no future goal for 

Prince Albert and the area. And of course that extrapolates into 

the entire province by his own words and by his own actions in 

that paper article. 

 

I challenge him though to look at the article and anywhere in 

the article, anywhere in the article and anywhere since then 

where he has said, this is my plan for growth. This is how I 

would tackle the challenges of growth. This is what my caucus 

has agreed to. This is what our party has agreed to moving 

forward. And you know what? I’m sure there’s going to be 

something that comes up between now and the next election. 

But I challenge him to come out with it now. Because if you’ve 

got something good to say, why hold back? Bring it on. If 

you’ve got a plan for smart growth . . . I believe one of the 

members opposite criticizing our bundling plan says they would 

do the schools in a smart way. Well what’s the definition of 

smart way? Let’s hear it. It’s not . . . There it goes again. It’s, I 

would do something different, but . . . Well, but what? Let’s 

hear it. 

 

So I close my remarks today asking for another tree book. Let’s 

call it a blooming flower, maybe something that could be 

expanded upon in the future by the member opposite, by the 

Leader of the Opposition. Maybe a small, little seedling with 

some ideas. Give us an idea of what you want to do. You want 

to govern one day. Let’s hear it. Let’s have it in paper, Mr. 

Speaker, and I will gladly look it over. I’m sure that it’ll involve 

lots of spending, because for some reason they’re in tune with a 

big deficit budget plan over there and billions of spending, Mr. 

Speaker, with no real plan. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne 

Speech and I will not be supporting the amendment. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible] . . . rise in the House today and speak in regards to 

the Speech from the Throne. Before I begin to touch on some of 

the highlights of the speech of the throne, I would like to thank 

some very important people in my life: my husband Terry, my 

family who have been very supportive, ensuring that I have the 

ability and the time to do this job. I also would like to be able to 

thank my executive. They have been very supportive and have 

helped me ensure that I meet the needs of my constituents. And 

I’d also like to thank my constituency assistant, Kelly Zazula. 

Kelly does an absolutely wonderful job of ensuring that the 

needs and concerns of the constituents of Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley are brought forward to my attention. 

 

This past year I’ve been very busy meeting the needs of the 

constituents in Regina Qu’Appelle Valley and also attending 

numerous events throughout the city of Regina and also within 

my constituency. 

 

This past summer, along with my husband Terry, I had the 

pleasure of travelling and visiting a couple of very important 

sites to us in France. We went to Dieppe. We went to Juno 

Beach and Arromanches, where D-Day took place. The reason 



3666 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

why we felt it was very important, very timely for us is that 

there is a lot of talk about a condo project being built on the 

beach of Dieppe where the battle took place. And that is very 

important to us, in that my father-in-law, William Samuel Ross, 

was one of the young soldiers, Canadian soldiers, from 

Saskatchewan that was captured at Dieppe and spent the Second 

World War in a prisoner of war camp. And so for us it was 

really very poignant and very important to us to be able to go 

and see and experience the beach before standing, say, in a 

parking lot of a condo development saying, I wonder what it 

was like. 

 

So for us it was very important that we do this in a timely 

manner, which also brings to mind that when we visited the 

Canadian museum at Juno Beach, it was really very 

eye-opening for us in that I know, as a child always attending 

and participating in the Remembrance Day ceremonies, I 

always viewed the veterans as just old people. And you know, 

you’d see them wearing their uniforms, but you never, ever 

really understood that in fact, when we went to Juno Beach and 

we saw the film clips of the Second World War, these were 

young men that had . . . were full of excitement and full of 

optimism. And so it became very real for us in that respect. So I 

know that this year, November 11th, on Remembrance Day, 

will have that much more special meaning for us. 

 

A few highlights from the Throne Speech that I would like to 

discuss would be our health care. Health care is a very 

important topic that comes to people’s minds whenever we ask 

them, are we doing a good job? Is there something we could be 

doing different? They do bring it to our attention. And so that’s 

why in fact it was one of the first topics that was covered in the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

And this past summer our government, through the leadership 

of the Minister of Health, charged the CEOs [chief executive 

officer] of the health regions to go out and visit each and every 

long-term care facility. And I think that this really shows strong 

leadership in that, you know, a lot of times you can have 

administration passing back information, but in fact for our 

Minister of Health to charge the CEOs to go out and personally 

visit and see exactly what the status of our long-term care 

facilities, I think that that’s a real turning point. It also, you 

know . . . because we have made the commitment to build 13 

new long-term care facilities, but it’s important that we know 

exactly what the status of the existing ones were. And so I think 

that the only way we can make things better is if we have full, 

comprehensive knowledge because we know we have a 

changing population base in this province. We know we have a 

fairly large component of seniors coming along, so we have to 

in fact be ready for that challenge. And so I think that this 

showed a real strong leadership in finding out exactly where the 

status of our long-term care facilities are. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past spring my mother had the opportunity to 

be a resident of Josie’s house which is a long-term care facility, 

also palliative care, in the city of Yorkton. And I must 

commend the employees there who looked after my mother, 

Bertha Masurat, while she was passing away. The care and the 

attention that they provided her was just wonderful, and our 

family members really appreciated the kind of dedication that 

people who work in long-term care provide the residents. 

Because long-term care facilities are very different than 

hospitals. Hospitals we go in, we have an operation, we go 

home. For long-term care facilities, that’s their home. So it’s 

really incumbent upon us to ensure that our long-term care 

facilities are very comfortable and very welcoming, not to just 

the residents, but also to the family members who are providing 

the moral support and also the physical support for a lot of their 

family members. 

 

I also would like to talk about education. I think that our, again 

our government has really focused in on what’s important and 

education, and especially education in looking forward to 

building new schools. The city of Regina is absolutely thrilled 

to be the recipients of three new schools that are going to be 

built with our P3 program. And in fact, within my constituency, 

in the northwest corner of the city we are going to be receiving 

one of those new schools. 

 

From the last election to today, within Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley, we have 2,095 new homes that have been built. So 

when you look at that you realize, average of two point 

something people per household with children, it’s absolutely 

imperative that we address our education with new schools 

being built. So we are very fortunate and I think the city of 

Regina is very fortunate that we focused in on building schools 

to be able to educate our children, but to build them in a smart 

way, in that with the ability to save money, but also to build 

more schools in a timely manner. I think that shows a lot of 

leadership. 

 

And if we look at the title of the Throne Speech and we realize 

that it’s meeting the challenges of growth, well building new 

schools is meeting the challenges of growth. So like I said, 

we’re very fortunate in Regina northwest to be able to get one 

of the new schools. There’s another one going to be built in 

Harbour Landing and then also one in the southeast. So those 

are the corners of the city that are growing at a very rapid rate, 

and so it’s really important that we address that. 

 

Another thing that our government focused in on in this Throne 

Speech was anti-bullying. And one of the . . . The Legislative 

Secretary, there’s been a Legislative Secretary tasked with the 

very important role of doing the research. She’s gone across the 

whole province interviewing stakeholders to ensure that we can 

put together a plan that is real and that it resonates but that it 

also has some teeth, that it has the ability to make a difference. 

Because as we know anti-bullying, coming up with strategies is 

again not easy by any measures, but in fact it is something that 

we’re not afraid to address. I mean, we can make all the laws in 

the world, but if we don’t go out and put this into practice and 

we don’t have our schools put it into practice, then it’s just 

words. There’s no action to it. So I think that we should all be 

very proud of the work that our Legislative Secretary has done 

in that. 

 

This past summer the member from Wascana Plains and myself 

hosted a workshop for self esteem for young girls. And it was 

. . . The whole theme of it was building strong young girls so 

that they can grow up to be strong women. And that by itself is 

a step forward in coming up with strategies for anti-bullying 

because when we talk about strong girls growing up to be 

strong women, we have, again, focused in on how do we have 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3667 

safer communities. 

 

And so one of the things that we’ve done, and I think we can be 

very proud of, is that we’ve built another transition house in 

Saskatchewan, and it’s in Melfort. And again it shows a 

government that realizes there’s a need and goes forward and 

works very hard. We roll up our sleeves and we figure out how 

do we best meet some of the challenges that we have in our 

communities. And all of us — each and every one of us — want 

safer communities, and so I’m very proud that we have built 

another transition house for women and children in Melfort. But 

also our government has provided more funding for the 

transition houses in the other cities because again the sad part is 

there’s a growing need. With a population, a growing 

population, the sad part is we also have a growing need for our 

transition houses. 

 

Just this past weekend I had the opportunity of attending 

SOFIA [Support Of Families In Affliction] House’s 25th 

anniversary here in the city of Regina. It was a beautiful event, 

well attended, and it was a celebration on the hard work that the 

women and counsellors at SOFIA House have undertaken for 

the past 25 years. And so I felt very honoured and very pleased 

to be able to celebrate with them this anniversary. 

 

And one of the young ladies that stood up and gave a 

testimonial of her life before having to move into SOFIA 

House, and then the support that she received from the 

counsellors at SOFIA House, it was wonderful to hear. And you 

could just hear the strength within this young woman that she 

overcame a lot of . . . just a very bad situation. But in fact it 

made her stronger. So we felt very proud of her and also very 

pleased that our government was there to be able to help 

provide some of that funding for that kind of facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was a businesswoman for over 23 years, selling 

real estate in the city of Regina. And whenever I would meet 

with a client, we would, depending on what they were choosing 

to do, whether it was buy or sell, or what have you, in real 

estate, a lot of times we sat down and I gave them a to-do list. 

And that list helped them achieve their goals. That’s what this 

Throne Speech is. 

 

This Throne Speech is a to-do list; it’s a to-do list from our 

government. And there’s such valuable information. And like I 

said, it’s kind of our north star, as someone has said. It gives us 

the opportunity to say what’s important, where do we have to 

focus in, and how do we then govern for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Because as each and every one of us had the 

opportunities to go and spend time with our constituents, 

they’re more than prepared to share with us their hopes and 

their dreams for this government. And so that is the whole basis 

of where the Throne Speech comes from. Plus also our Premier 

has put together a plan for growth because this is a province . . . 

It’s a have province. It’s a province where we have a growing 

population. Our economy is booming. We have to ensure . . . As 

has been stated many times over and over by our Premier, we 

don’t want growth for just growth’s sake but rather in fact 

growth which enables us to provide for each and every one of 

our constituents, the people of Saskatchewan, a better life. 

 

So I will be, I am speaking and voting in favour of the Throne 

Speech and will not be supporting the amendment from the 

opposition. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although many 

members do this, I don’t take it lightly, is thanking the people 

of Yorkton and those that we work with for the opportunity to 

be here. Firstly, the people of Yorkton for the opportunity to 

serve them in this House. My office staff is I think second to 

none. We all have very good office staff. I’m very appreciative 

of the staff I have. They’re very skilled, they’re very dedicated, 

and their depth of knowledge is something to be rivalled, and 

the service that they give to the people of Yorkton is really 

commendable. 

 

Also one member of my office staff, Sarah, she’s a part-time 

girl. She comes in. Her and her husband, Dan, are doing a great 

job in trying to grow the province. They’ve had one little boy 

already, Casey. They’re expecting another boy very soon. In 

fact I phoned her this morning in the office to see how things 

were going, and no news yet. But pretty soon, we’ll be 1.1 

million and one because of Sarah and Dan. So thank you very 

much to them. 

 

I also have to thank again the staff of this building that help us 

every day with information, research, and all the duties that 

they fulfill for us here in this House, all the caucus staff, or all 

of our caucus as well, including the leader and the deputy leader 

and all of our ministers, and all the colleagues that fulfill so 

many different demands and jobs in this House. 

 

I really want to thank the Deputy Whip. The old Whip pointed 

out I better thank the Deputy Whip, which I do. The member 

from Dewdney is just a real big support metaphorically and not 

metaphorically. He’s a very big support, and very blessed to 

have him helping out with this job, which can be quite trying 

day in and day out. Did I point out how humble he is? 

 

I also want to join with the other members, and I know the 

member from P.A. Carlton, he sort of dropped the ball thanking 

his wife, but I really do have to thank my wife, Leone. She is 

always there, day in and day out, supporting me in this building, 

supporting me at home when there’s that need, going to events 

when maybe it isn’t the most, you know, the most timely thing 

to do. But always there for that support. I’m so thankful to her 

support and her love every day. Also my kids . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — That’s for sure — just a big hand for 

Leone. My two daughters, Katelin and Rayanne are just a great 

support as well. Katelin is taking her nursing in Regina here 

right now, the combined SIAST/U of R [Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology/University of Regina] 

course. So looking forward in the next couple of years — she’s 

well into her third year — looking forward to her becoming, I 

think will be one of the most caring and dedicated nurses in this 

province, just knowing her heart and her dedication to people. It 

really is commendable. And I really hope she does attain her 

dream of dealing with and serving especially medically fragile 

children who need help, I think, and a legacy to her brother and 

what she saw him go through. 



3668 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Also my daughter Rayanne whom I am happy to report is 

happily married. She just got married this last July 13th. We 

had a destination wedding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We went south 

of Yorkton for our wedding, all the way to Melville, 25 miles 

south, great little facility there which is . . . It’s I think an 

indicator of what this Throne Speech is about, you know, 

preparing for growth. The city of Melville, stagnant for many, 

many decades; Yorkton, in large stagnant for many, many 

decades. 

 

We were able to have the wedding in that facility there that was 

built just a few short years ago — the Melville convention 

centre — just a great little place, a beautiful arena with a 

walking track and facilities for exercise, a really nice little 

convention centre. In fact, it’s so beautiful, when they were, my 

daughter and son-in-law were challenged with a place to 

actually hold their wedding, they actually ended up — under 

my suggestion, I’ll admit — was in the entrance of the rink. It is 

such a beautiful facility, just an enormous amount of glass and 

stainless steel and tile. It really did make for a beautiful 

backdrop for their marriage this past summer. So I’m so 

thankful for that facility. I’m so thankful again for my 

daughters. And I’m also thankful for the new member of our 

family who has been around for a number of years already, 

Austin Krahenbil, my new son-in-law. So I’m really blessed to 

have all them in my family. 

 

Two very important people to me, my mom and my dad, I want 

to thank as well. My mom, I’ve had the opportunity to introduce 

her in this House and recognize her in this House before. I’ve 

never had the opportunity to introduce or talk much about my 

dad. And I’m going to choose this time to do a little bit of that 

right now. In large I am who I am today and I believe what I do 

believe today and my philosophies are largely from my mother 

and largely my father. He’s in fact one of my biggest 

supporters. He is one of my best go-to guys when it comes to 

valuable advice, and he always has been. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And not to say we’ve never had trouble. My dad, he’s a 

disciplinarian to be sure, and not that I never needed it. But I 

can’t say I have never got a . . . I never got a tune-up I didn’t 

deserve, likely, and I am so thankful for his love and guidance 

and what he’s contributed to me, and everything that I am today 

and in large who I am and why I’m here again. 

 

Their guidance example is, I think from my personal 

perspective, second to none. Again they’re not perfect by any 

stretch of the imagination. My dad was not perfect, but boy I 

tell you, I can never say anything but great things about my 

parents and my father. 

 

I’ve always tried to I guess glean positives from them. Again 

we all have negatives, but I always tried to glean the positives 

and try and make those as part of my personality and my beliefs 

and again my philosophies. I never recall a time or occasion 

when they told me to think a certain way or believe a certain 

way. Just you know, what you pick up from people around you 

— friends and relatives and again parents — really does I think 

impact any person. And I know it impacted me in large as a 

young child and as I grow through life and still have a very 

good relationship with them and see them as much as I can. 

For example, they taught me the difference between right and 

wrong, where many people today, I believe they don’t really 

think there’s a right and wrong. But I definitely got taught what 

was right and wrong. I got taught how to treat people, taught 

what respect was, work ethic, how to take advantage of 

opportunities, make opportunities for myself, but also create 

opportunities for others, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to take the 

opportunities to help others when you see them in need. And 

that I think is very important and again as it pertains to our 

government, as it pertains to our budget, as it pertains to our 

Throne Speech. 

 

I think what I’m getting at is there’s a lot of connection, there’s 

a lot of similarities between how I was brought up, what I 

believe, what our government believes, our policies, and some 

of the things, the initiatives we put forward. For example, by 

their example I soon . . . I think only now I can kind of describe 

what I couldn’t really describe as a youngster, but the difference 

between socialism and a social conscience. And I think so many 

people today, they have a real problem identifying that. So 

many people that are more socialist think that they’re the only 

people with a social conscience where, on the other hand, my 

experience, what I saw growing up in my own home, my own 

family, my own father was a strong business mind, a strong 

entrepreneurial mind, but someone with a strong social 

conscience, always willing to help somebody who needed help, 

always willing to give back to his community. And I think 

that’s one thing I’ve really tried to get from both of my parents, 

and I’ve tried to hang on to that. 

 

What I saw from my parents, my dad, was that, you know, how 

hard working and being successful can and usually does go 

hand in hand with having a social conscience and giving back. 

As I got older, again what I kind of attained from them was, you 

know, experienced life taught me that I could never, never 

personally be a New Democrat. And not to criticize members 

across. I believe everybody has their own choices in life. You 

chose to believe what you want, and that forms who you are and 

how you go through life and how you pursue life. But really 

early on and without, you know, them really mentioning 

different parties, different political views, just again from 

experiencing what I experienced through living with my 

parents, growing up under my parents’ guidance and family 

members’ really I guess formed me as a youngster. 

 

I can point to one story in particular, and if my dad was 

watching I think he’ll get a giggle out of this; he was right in 

the middle of this story. But again not to criticize members 

across, not to criticize anybody’s beliefs. And the reason I feel 

comfortable telling this story is because we went on a trip to 

Germany here a couple of years back, a CPA [Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association] trip. And I got to visit quite at 

length with the former member from Coronation Park, Mr. Kim 

Trew. And you know, some things that we talked about really, 

really struck me. His beliefs — although I might have been 

critical of them, and maybe I still might be possibly a little bit 

— but him telling me his story of growing up on co-operative 

farms and basically a socialist-type background, I got a good 

respect for him. I can understand where he’s coming from. I 

didn’t believe his philosophy. I don’t believe I would ever have 

the same philosophies, but I got an understanding of where he’s 

coming from and a respect. 

 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3669 

So keeping that in mind, I want to tell you a story about an 

experience my father had, would have been probably in the 

early ’70s. And what happened was my mom and dad, they 

were again quite entrepreneurial. They got . . . To try and own 

their first home in Yorkton, they bought a duplex. So half of the 

duplex was a rental property. And this individual and his wife, 

they were from Czechoslovakia under the former Russian or 

USSR [Union of Soviet Socialist Republics] rule. And they 

basically immigrated, or what they would term is they escaped 

from communist Czechoslovakia. So they ended up living in 

half of our duplex. 

 

And my dad would go out on the road with them every now and 

then. He was a veterinarian and his wife was a former 

gymnastics coach. And they would go out on the road, and they 

ended up visiting a family member who was strong New 

Democrat supporter back in those times and I think — well he 

was — right to the time that he unfortunately passed away. And 

what happened was they were there visiting. My dad was in the 

kitchen with his sister and all the children. I think five kids were 

still at home at that point. And my dad’s friend or our neighbour 

that was living in our duplex was in the living room talking 

with my uncle, and a very nice conversation that everybody 

seemed to be having. All of a sudden there was a turmoil in the 

living room. My uncle was very upset, and he threw this 

individual and my father out of the house. And there was no 

time to explain, no time to find out what exactly had happened. 

 

So as they’re driving down Highway 22, my father asked this 

individual, he said, you know, what the heck went on? It 

seemed like it was quite a good conversation. What went 

sideways? And what this individual said was, it impacted me 

quite a bit because what he said was, we were having a great 

conversation about family and life and life in Czechoslovakia 

and life in Saskatchewan and Canada, but when we started 

talking politics, he started describing his New Democratic 

Party. And all I said to him was, well I understand exactly 

where you’re coming from. We have the same thing in 

Czechoslovakia. It’s called communism. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, not to ridicule anybody but to point 

out that that statement that that individual said when I, you 

know, I got wind, I got to hear the story, even as a 9- or 

10-year-old boy it impacted me that, you know, for him to draw 

that connection from the 1970s New Democrats, which I don’t 

think are too far from away from now because I mean the 

manifesto is no longer on the website, but I mean they still 

follow, they adhere to a lot of those same beliefs and rules. But 

what that individual who escaped the life he was, and his wife, 

what they escaped out of Czechoslovakia to come here and 

draw those comparisons really made me question what this New 

Democratic Party was about. 

 

And you know, for that reason, it did strike me and it made me 

pay attention to politics I think even as a youngster. And as life 

went on, I paid more attention. I got involved in business, 

different organizations. I started looking really closely at how 

rule under the New Democratic Party had affected our province 

and how we were really held back. We didn’t grow in 

population. You know, we have far surpassed our goals of 1.1 

million in 10 years. We’ve done it in six. And not to say the 

Sask Party has done it, but the people of the province have done 

it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And you know, just to . . . All those stories, all those, you know, 

parallels that I could draw, that I have watched over the years, 

that I have drawn, just there’s no way I could ever, ever be a 

supporter or be a member of that party. And I’m very happy to 

be a member of this party and this leadership team and this 

government. 

 

And you know, when I look at again talking about philosophies 

and all the rest of it, it’s so easy for me to identify with this 

party, with these people. The leader, the deputy leader, I had a 

lot of great visits with him before I decided to run for the party. 

I had the opportunity to meet the leader, now Premier back 

then, and I could just identify so closely. So many similar 

philosophies. So many similar beliefs. Such a similar vision for 

this province, knowing that we could really attain so much more 

that I knew I was doing the right thing. And there was no going 

back once I really started learning policies, learning more about 

the members, and learning about what this party stood for, what 

the people stood for. And again I could never be anything in 

this province but a Sask Party member, which brings me to the 

2013 Throne Speech, “Meeting the Challenges of Growth.” 

 

And I’ve said this for many years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’ll 

probably continue to say it as long as I’m in this Assembly, is I 

understand there’s challenges of growth. I’ve experienced it in 

my own life, in our business. There’s challenges when you’re 

growing your company. Growing population, you need 

infrastructure and education and all the rest of it. But I’d said 

over and over again, I’d rather deal with those challenges of 

growth than the hardship of decline, and I think I’ll say that 

again to my last day in this Assembly. 

 

Again talking about some of my beliefs and philosophies and 

how I drew them from my parents, specifically my dad. My dad 

was a . . . He had a pretty tough upbringing. He actually left 

home. He was born in 1935 in the Grayson district south of 

Melville, if anybody knows where Grayson is. He left home at a 

very early age, about 15 years old. He left home, went into the 

workforce and, you know, worked a few odd jobs what ended 

up leading him to a stint in the navy. He served five and a half 

years in Her Majesty’s Royal Canadian Navy first . . . well for a 

time in Winnipeg, for a time in Churchill, and he did serve for 

about two and a half years on the minesweeper, Her Majesty’s 

ship, Fortune. 

 

And that’s a very interesting story in itself, Mr. Speaker. If 

anybody is not familiar with minesweepers, post-World War II, 

built specifically out of non-magnetic materials because, as 

many know, mines were magnetic. Some were magnetic, would 

be attracted to some of these ships’ hulls, so they had to have 

non-magnetic hulls to go out and either decommission or 

detonate some of these mines. So a risky job for sure but again, 

you know, putting others before oneself. And that’s why I see a 

lot in my dad, where over the years he has done that, whether 

for his family or for the community and even in his time in the 

Royal Canadian Navy on that minesweeper and serving around 

the world on that ship, again putting himself along with his 

shipmates in harm’s way for the better of others. 

 

He ended up, I think shortly after the navy or maybe he was just 

mustering out of the navy, he met my mom and they ended up 

. . . They got married. He worked a few different careers. For a 

time he was a milkman, and then he worked Dominion Bridge 



3670 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

at a union job for quite a while. And I think a lot of his 

experience in there sort of, you know, informed me a bit about, 

you know, that sort of thing — a labour-type environment, a 

union-type environment, and non-union-type environment and, 

you know, learning a lot of the ins and outs of that from him as 

well. 

 

He ended up . . . They lived in Regina back then. They had my 

brother, and 11 months later they had me. Must have been cold 

a couple years I guess, those winters. And eventually he wanted 

to get into business — he was, again like I said, very 

entrepreneurial — wanted to get into business, so we ended up 

moving to Weyburn and getting into a business with a partner 

for a short time, expanding into Yorkton and then eventually 

moving. We had I think the third — yes, the third — son was 

my brother Grant. He was born in Weyburn. Then we moved 

into Yorkton where we lived from 1969-1970 on, where him 

and my mom finally had my sister. 

 

You know, again they got into business in Yorkton — Yorkton 

and Weyburn. Moved their family to Yorkton in the early ’70s, 

ran both businesses in Weyburn and Yorkton for a time, then 

eventually just in Yorkton. And you know, one thing I . . . Not 

that he said in so many words, but looking back, really, really 

was what he would be teaching me was or I would be getting 

information from him is that he didn’t need government to help 

him out. He needed a government to be out of his way to be 

successful in business. 

 

And you know, they had many tough years where mom actually 

had to work a full-time job to pay men’s wages — again putting 

others before themselves. They wouldn’t, you know, wouldn’t 

have it any other way. They would do without themselves to 

make sure their men were paid. But you know, he showed me 

that work ethic again, investing in your business over and over 

again to build it up. So over a period of about, you know, two 

decades or so, worked very hard, built it up and built it into 

somewhat of a successful business before I took it over, and 

then my brother came on as a partner to help me out once he 

was done his professional hockey career. 

 

And again, you know, sort of the attitude or some of the 

information or, you know, the philosophy I would get from him 

I think is again reflective of our government, of our party, of 

our Premier. And the leadership on this side of the House is 

setting that environment for business and getting out of the way 

of business so they can just do the best they can and create an 

economy and create opportunities for those people in the 

province. 

 

You know, another thing I really learned from my dad, and I’ll 

probably get into it more in depth a little bit later, but looking 

out after those that have trouble looking after themselves. I used 

to see many times, you know, people that dad would hire on at 

our business were people that some would say were 

unemployable, but he would always give them the opportunity 

of a job and bettering themselves there. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 

stands recessed till 7 p.m. tonight. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3639 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3639 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3639 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3639 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3639 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3639 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3639 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3640 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3640 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3640 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3640 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3640 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Commitment to Our Shared Futures 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3640 

 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3641 

 Treaty 4 Flag Raised at Board Office 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3641 

 Prairie Football Conference Championship 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3641 

 Integrated Health Centre Opens 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3641 

 Twinning of Highway 11 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3642 

 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3642 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Issues Raised by Nurses 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3642 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3642 

 Combatting Bullying 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3644 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3644 

 Special Care Standards and Staffing 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3644 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3644 

 Provision of New Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3645 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3645 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Saskatchewanderer Program Expansion 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3647 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3647 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3648 

 Committee Membership 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3648 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3648 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3651 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3659 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3661 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3665 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3667 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


