




















































Hansard: May 16, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 65A  THURSDAY, MAY 16, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3587 

 May 16, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you in the west gallery, I’d like to introduce two very special 

people in my life. The first one is my best friend, my wife, 

Valerie. Valerie is my number one supporter in everything I do, 

which is very much appreciated. 

 

Along with her today is one of our five grandchildren, Sienna 

Doke-Poitras. As you can see, she’s there. She’s not very shy. 

She lives 10 miles north of North Battleford, attends 

kindergarten in North Battleford at Holy Family School. And 

she’s had a couple of special days. Yesterday was her first trip 

on an STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] bus. She 

came from North Battleford to here and really enjoyed that. 

And today she wanted to come to the castle where grandpa 

works at, so she’s here. So I would like everybody to welcome 

them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

features of the Cypress Hills constituency is that we are home to 

I think its about 20 Hutterite colonies. We have quite a number 

of them spread throughout the constituency, and some of them 

are very faithful followers of the political activities in this 

province. 

 

One of them is represented by Phil Entz from the Abbey Colony 

who is in our west gallery today. If he isn’t here, it doesn’t 

mean that he doesn’t know what’s going on. He’s a very astute 

follower of the political affairs of the province. And he has a 

colleague with him who, unfortunately because of my age, I 

can’t recall his name right now. But we’d like to welcome both 

of these gentlemen to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming Philip Entz from the 

Abbey Colony here today. Philip’s somebody that I’ve gotten to 

know over the past few years as well, as coming and going from 

this legislature and somebody who cares about the affairs of this 

province. And I’d certainly welcome John here as well today 

from the colony near Assiniboia. So I join with the member 

opposite and welcome these two fine individuals to their 

Assembly here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I would like to introduce Paula Steckler, my intern. She’s 

from Saskatoon, majoring in political studies, and she also 

works with the Women in the Legislature program. She was 

co-founder of that program. She’s been helping me, and I think 

she’ll be very valuable to the province. So I wish her all the best 

in her endeavours. And I ask all members, please welcome 

Paula in the Speaker’s gallery to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I’d like to introduce my intern, Jenna 

Orban from Regina who’s working towards a Bachelor of Arts 

degree in political science and a certificate in international 

affairs and diplomacy from the University of Regina. And she’ll 

be assisting me within the next few months on a few of my 

duties and will be travelling with me to some of our 

consultations. And in the short time she’s been with me, we’ve 

discovered a mutual love of musicals, which is great. I’m sure 

that we can get some show tunes on, you know, the radio when 

we’re travelling. And, Jenna, welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to welcome a 

group of 18 grade 7 and 8 students from Imperial Community 

School in the west gallery. Give us a wave. They’re not too shy. 

Excellent. 

 

Accompanying them today is teacher Jane Brundige and 

Gabrielle Uhrich-Chappell. Give us a wave again. I had the 

opportunity on this past week, on Tuesday, to spend some time 

in their classroom, and they’re certainly a very bright group. 

And I look forward to offering them some very awesome juice 

boxes a little later. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No Blizzards? 

 

Mr. Docherty: — No Blizzards. Sorry, no Blizzards. But I’ll 

look forward to having a discussion a little later here. And I’d 

like all members to help me welcome the group from Imperial 

School to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce to 

you the staff of the visitor services, seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. With us today we have Troy Smith, Daniel Fortier, 

Allyssa Bradel, Marie Digney, Emilie Chan, Francois Hawkins, 

Kristene Douard, Penny Forrest, Ted Forrest, Edith Seiferling, 

and Gabe Seiferling. In addition we have Kelly Liberet, Arnold 

McKenzie who is celebrating his sixth decade today — so 

happy 60th, Arnold; he can now safely be referred to as our 

senior information officer — Marianne Morgan, and Lorraine 

deMontigny. Please welcome them to the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 



3588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2013 

pleased and honoured to present a number of petitions here 

today since it’s our last day of the session. And these petitions, 

Mr. Speaker, I have presented petitions for a number of 

communities in reference to cellphone coverage for 

northwestern Saskatchewan. And people that have signed the 

petition are from all throughout Saskatchewan and are in full 

support of the expansion of cellphone coverage for northwest 

Saskatchewan. And the petition that I’m presenting today, Mr. 

Speaker, deals with the Dore Lake area. The people that have 

signed this particular petition are from Dore Lake, Big Island, 

and Beaupré Creek. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the northern hamlet of Dore Lake, 

which is located in northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better care of our seniors here in 

the province: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 

including creating more spaces and more choices for 

seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 

facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 

appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and 

providing more support to help seniors remain 

independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for reasonable funding so all 

Saskatchewan students can do well. And we know classes in 

Saskatchewan schools are growing so fast and many classes 

have well over 30 students in them, and many classes are now 

being taught in hallways and boot rooms. And in a time of 

economic boom, it’s only common sense that schools receive 

appropriate funding so that all students, including First Nations 

and Métis students, can achieve their full potential. The 

Government of Saskatchewan has chronically underfunded 

student support and their agenda must change to reflect the real 

priorities of Saskatchewan classrooms today. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

immediately increase financial support for all 

Saskatchewan students, including resources to limit class 

sizes, provide resources for students with special needs, to 

support English as an additional language, and to provide 

more support for Aboriginal education. 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to rise 

to present a petition to the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan on behalf of a few hundred people here. This is a 

petition regarding the Saskatchewan wildfire management 

policy, and it reads: the Saskatchewan Party campaigned 

aggressively in 2007 to change the let-it-burn policy here in 

Saskatchewan. The government has only made minimal 

changes for the upcoming fire season. The Sask Party 

government has reduced the five-person crews, changed 

firefighter testing requirements over the years, and eroded the 

capacity of fire crews. So I would like to now read the petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve the very best in protection services 

as it relates to forest fire policy; and in so doing cause the 

provincial government to immediately implement a full 

review of the Saskatchewan wildfire management policy, 

as it has been years since this program was last assessed. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this is signed by, as I said, several hundred citizens of 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Protecting At-Risk Bird Species 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Spring is here, and 

one of the hallmark signs of spring for me when I was young 

was the call of the meadowlark. Sadly that call is being heard 

less and less as their populations decline. Protecting this bird 

species as well as many others now at risk is so important, and 

people are taking notice. 

 

For example in late June, acclaimed author and conservationist, 

Margaret Atwood, is going to visit our community pastures in 

the company of international conservation advocates. Ms. 

Atwood said: 

 

The ecological value of these large tracts of unbroken 

prairie is internationally recognized. We have heard that 

16 at-risk bird species on Saskatchewan’s most critical 

grasslands may be losing their legislative protection and 

conservation management. That concerns us, as it should 

concern all Canadians. 

 

Ms. Atwood added that Saskatchewan’s prairie landscapes and 

rich bird life is a secret too well-kept: 

 

This is a chance to help celebrate Saskatchewan’s 

grasslands as a destination, so we will be using social and 

conventional media to highlight the beauty of Canada’s 



May 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3589 

publicly owned and managed grasslands. 

 

Ms. Atwood has extended invitations to Premier Brad Wall, 

Saskatchewan Environment minister Ken Cheveldayoff, and 

Agriculture minister Lyle Stewart to discuss protecting the 

species at risk on these public grasslands. I’m sure these three 

members of cabinet will make room in their schedules for this 

important visit and take the time to explore the beauty of these 

grasslands and learn more about these birds at risk. Mr. 

Speaker, have you heard a meadowlark lately? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Lakewood Manor Housing Co-operative 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I, 

along with the Minister Responsible for Sask Housing, had the 

pleasure of attending the 25th anniversary reception of the 

Lakewood Manor Housing Co-op, located in my constituency 

of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. I would like to take the time to 

thank the minister for accompanying me to this wonderful 

event. 

 

Lakewood Manor is an attractive place and a very active place. 

There’s always something to do, Mr. Speaker, from enjoying 

coffee with your neighbours to a competitive game of 

shuffleboard, dominoes, or cards. The members of this housing 

co-op are the kind of people that greet you with a smile, are 

quick to lend a hand, and strive to make sure that all new 

residents have a feeling of belonging. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we value our senior citizens and the contributions 

they have made to building this fine province. Our government 

is working to ensure the benefits of growth are being used to 

make life better for everyone in Saskatchewan. We cannot do 

this alone, Mr. Speaker. This is why it is important to recognize 

places such as Lakewood Manor that strive to create a better 

quality of life for all of its members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of this Assembly to join 

me in recognizing Lakewood Manor for its incredible 25 years 

and wish them many more years. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Norwegian Constitution Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 

Norwegian.] 

 

Tomorrow is Norwegian Constitution Day, and there are many 

people right across Saskatchewan who will be celebrating this 

constitution. 

 

Saskatchewan is the province that has the most Norwegian 

descendants of any province in Canada. There will be events in 

a number of places across the province, including Regina and 

Saskatoon, Birch Hills, Outlook, North Battleford, Frontier, and 

Prince Albert I think maybe even, and probably, Moose Jaw. 

But, Mr. Speaker, all of these people are very proud of their 

heritage. They’re very proud of the traditions that they bring to 

this province, and so this is one time a year when all Norwegian 

descendants can participate. 

 

[10:15] 

 

And so tomorrow I would ask that all of us here in the 

legislature celebrate Norwegian Constitution Day along with 

the members from Saskatoon Massey Place, Melville-Saltcoats, 

Regina Wascana Plains, Saskatchewan Rivers, 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, and Regina Northeast. So thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Hosts Memorial Cup Tournament 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

happy to rise in the Assembly today to recognize Memorial Cup 

week. The Canadian Hockey League championship, the 

MasterCard Memorial Cup, begins tomorrow in Saskatoon and 

runs until May 26th. This 10-day event will include a 

community-wide celebration showcasing alumni, concerts, and 

the CHL [Canadian Hockey League] awards. 

 

Originally donated by the Ontario Hockey Association in 1919, 

the Memorial Cup trophy was dedicated to the memories of the 

Canadian soldiers killed in World War I. The trophy has since 

been rededicated to honour all of Canadians’ fallen military 

personnel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m thrilled that this event is being held in 

Saskatoon this year, and I know that Saskatchewan’s fastest 

growing city — and best city — will be a great host. The 

hometown Saskatoon Blades have hosted the . . . Okay. The 

Saskatoon hometown Blades last hosted the Memorial Cup in 

1989. 

 

I’d like to give a special thanks to everyone who has helped 

bring the Memorial Cup to the city of Saskatoon and to this 

great province, and the army of volunteers who will help pull 

off this event. 

 

The first game will be tomorrow at 7 o’clock where our 

well-rested Saskatoon Blades will battle the London Knights. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join me in recognizing this 

great event in Saskatoon and thanking all those involved in the 

Memorial Master Cup. Thank you. Go Blades go! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Cadet Program Produces Well-Rounded Citizens 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in this Assembly today to talk about the 

Canadian cadet program and the positive influence it has on our 

youth. This program is quite active throughout my constituency, 

with programs in a number of my communities. We have Royal 

Canadian Air Cadet squadrons in Moosomin and Carlyle as 

well as cadet programs in Montmartre and on the 

Kahkewistahaw First Nation. 

 

The cadet program, which is sponsored by the federal 



3590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2013 

government, includes Royal Canadian sea, army, and air cadets. 

It is a national program for young Canadians aged 12 to 18 who 

are interested in participating in a variety of challenging and 

rewarding activities while learning about the sea, army, and air 

activities of the Canadian Forces. 

 

Cadets are encouraged to become active, responsible members 

of their communities. Cadets also learn valuable life and work 

skills such as teamwork, leadership, and citizenship. Not only 

does the cadet program have a positive influence on young 

individuals, it also has a direct impact on Canadian society as a 

whole. Mr. Speaker, there is a definite value in having 

well-rounded, community-minded, experienced young people 

who are ready to assume their places as tomorrow’s leaders and 

decision makers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

importance and value of the cadet program. And we want to 

thank the many volunteers that dedicate their time, ensuring this 

program is available for the young people across our province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Community Leader Recognized by Rural 

Municipal Administrators 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to congratulate a constituent 

of mine, Donna Strudwick, for being awarded the 2013 Lou 

Jacobs Award recipient last night at the Rural Municipal 

Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan’s 93rd annual 

convention. The Lou Jacobs Award recognizes outstanding 

service to rural Saskatchewan, and that certainly describes 

Donna’s career. 

 

Donna was raised in Edenwold, later moved to Balgonie, and in 

1982 Donna began her municipal career as a part-time secretary 

for the RM [rural municipality] of Edenwold, working her way 

up to becoming the administrator in 1988. During her time as 

administrator, she also served as director of division 2 of the 

Rural Administrators’ Association from 2001 until her 

retirement in 2007. 

 

Donna has given countless hours of her time to volunteer work 

for several groups, including being the chairperson of the 

Western Canadian Farm Progress Show, director of the Centre 

of the Arts in Regina, and working with the Balgonie rink board 

which oversaw the construction of a new rink. Among those 

publicly honouring Donna last night were the Minister of 

Government Relations and the president of SARM, Dave Marit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that Donna is instrumental in her 

community and her family. She has been successful in 

everything she does. Shortly after her retirement in 2007, she 

took on the job as campaign manager and even got me elected, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Genuine Debate and Real Scrutiny 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, how should I begin? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Well, well, well. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — During his leadership campaign, the current 

Leader of the Opposition stated, and I quote: “Genuine debate 

and real scrutiny are far too often lacking at the legislature.” 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the members opposite, we 

couldn’t agree more. 

 

Instead of genuine debate and real scrutiny, the Leader of the 

Opposition chooses to have half-truths and misrepresentations. 

First, he claimed that there was 47 patients stranded in the 

hallways of St. Paul’s Hospital. Wrong, Mr. Speaker. Next, the 

member from Nutana stated that we were privatizing fish 

hatcheries. Wrong, Mr. Speaker. Not to be outdone, the member 

from Athabasca, a former Highways minister, claimed that 90 

front-line workers had been fired. Wrong again, Mr. Speaker. 

Then the leader’s Environment critic, the member from Nutana, 

couldn’t get a single fact straight in regards to the automation of 

fire towers. 

 

And yesterday the Leader of the Opposition claimed that 65 per 

cent of new jobs created were held by temporary foreign 

workers according to the Canadian Labour Congress — wrong. 

Statistics Canada, who the NDP [New Democratic Party] leader 

says is his preferred source for numbers, says that temporary 

foreign workers cannot accurately be traced by the labour force 

survey the CLC [Canadian Labour Congress] is using as its 

source. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition has had many opportunities to 

elevate the level of debate in this legislature. Unfortunately 

what we saw is more of the same old NDP. Just like Dwain 

Lingenfelter, the new Leader of the Opposition says one thing 

but does another. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care for Seniors 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Health said that the current minimum standard in 

Saskatchewan seniors’ care facilities is just one bath per week. 

But then he went on to say, “We know that sometimes that’s not 

the case though. Sometimes it will be longer than a week, but 

that may depend in some cases on staffing.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the point we’ve been making 

through this legislative session when it comes to the care for 

seniors here in the province. Our grandparents deserve better 

than what they have been receiving because of the short-staffing 

situations that have been created by the Sask Party government. 

 

The government’s response, Mr. Speaker, are CEO [chief 

executive officer] tours to tour the facilities. But by the 

minister’s own quote, the minister’s own remarks yesterday, we 

know what the problem is. We know that it’s short-staffing that 

is causing situations where the level of care is not as high as it 



May 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3591 

needs to be. 

 

My question to the Premier: when the economy is doing well, 

why won’t he just mandate two baths per week for seniors? 

Why won’t he address the issue of chronic understaffing in care 

facilities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

thank the member opposite for at least using part of the quote 

that I gave the media yesterday. Mr. Speaker, there are times, 

because of certain situations, where the one-bath-per-week 

policy may be extended beyond by a few days, Mr. Speaker. It 

does not mean though that a person will go two weeks without a 

bath, Mr. Speaker. It may mean eight days instead of seven, or 

nine days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as well what the Leader of the Opposition 

may want to do before he brings up the case in Alberta and the 

example that Alberta has put in place with two baths, two baths 

according to Alberta policy actually means a combination of a 

stand-up shower, a bath, or a sponge bath, Mr. Speaker. So it 

doesn’t exactly mean two baths per week, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve 

said, in this work we’ll be looking at what other provinces are 

doing though. We’re interested in Alberta, but we do know that 

this already does happen in many cases in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister thinks it’s 

acceptable for a senior who is confined to the bed to have a bath 

every nine days, I think the Sask Party’s approach in seniors’ 

care is increasingly out of touch with what Saskatchewan 

people and families expect for their loved ones. 

 

We saw a report from CJME on April 24th, Mr. Speaker, and 

here’s what it had to say: 

 

Health Minister Dustin Duncan insists setting staffing 

standards is not something the government is currently 

considering. He says each health region gets a quarterly 

report on staffing from each care home and he doesn’t see 

reason for alarm. 

 

But then we have a reference yesterday, Mr. Speaker, where the 

minister clearly says that baths are not occurring because of 

short-staffing. In question period today we have the minister’s 

own admission that it takes, in some situations, nine days for a 

senior to get a bath, yet this is not cause for alarm. My question 

to the Premier: does he stand by the remarks that the Health 

Minister has made that the care for seniors in this province is 

not alarming in many situations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, let’s make sure that we’re 

clearly talking about the same issue, Mr. Speaker, whether or 

not we’re talking about a senior in residence, Mr. Speaker, that 

is placed within the bathtub, Mr. Speaker, which does happen 

typically once a week, Mr. Speaker. But there may be issues, 

perhaps because of infections and other cases, where they 

cannot actually be placed in water in a bathtub, but they will be 

sponge bathed, Mr. Speaker. That in fact happens very often 

within health care facilities, Mr. Speaker, within our long-term 

care facilities, Mr. Speaker, where they may have a bath once a 

week. But, Mr. Speaker, the staff do what they can in a caring 

fashion to make sure that residents are clean, Mr. Speaker, 

whether that be through a bath or a sponge bath, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, through whether it be family members of mine 

that have been in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, or family 

members that do today work in long-term care facilities, Mr. 

Speaker, I myself take this issue very seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s why I’m looking forward to the work of the CEOs 

over the coming months. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that short-staffing is 

causing problems for seniors’ care here in the province. That’s 

what individuals like Carrie Klassen have told us when they’ve 

come to the legislature. 

 

Throughout the session, Mr. Speaker, we have in many 

instances stood up and we’ve spoken out on issues where the 

government is off-track, when they’re headed in the wrong 

direction. And seniors’ care is one example of that, but we’ve 

also been constructive in our approach, Mr. Speaker, seeking 

ways to better the future, to better the situation for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And one example of that is the work that we’ve been able to do 

on Howard’s law. And though the Sask Party initially rejected 

and was not willing to support this legislation, I’m pleased that 

they came around to supporting it. And I do thank the Premier 

and I thank the government members for their support on that. 

 

I wish, however, that we would see that same co-operative 

approach on Howard’s law with respect to Bill 85 and the 

labour legislation that we’ve seen. We, as an opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, have offered to be constructive. We have extended an 

olive branch in actually working with the Sask Party to fix 

many of the deficiencies in the legislation and to allow the 

proper consultation with Saskatchewan people to occur. The 

government has rejected that offer, and now we look at the 

regulations. 

 

My question to the Premier: how will the Premier ensure that 

the appropriate consultation occurs with the regulations with 

respect to 85, especially with the underutilization of the 

minister’s advisory committee? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at least today the Leader 

of the Opposition obviously feels very strongly about Bill 85. 

It’s more than passing strange that they didn’t even take the full 

20 hours to debate it, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t even take the 

full . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, we know that the union leaders 

were ready to come to the legislature to protest Bill 85, but what 

they didn’t know was that the NDP had already voted it off 

together with the government.  

 



3592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, and what else is important here, Mr. Speaker, is 

that they voted it off on a voice vote. I’ve talked to veteran 

members of this House. They have never seen an opposition in 

this legislature not require a standing vote or at least a division, 

Mr. Speaker, especially on issues that are important to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has some explaining 

to do to the Meili camp, to union leaders, as to exactly why he 

didn’t fight for his position on Bill 85. Maybe it’s because, Mr. 

Speaker, the Labour critic, when asked by the media, couldn’t 

find anything wrong with it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Gay-Straight Alliances and Combatting Bullying 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier seems very 

concerned with process today as we talk about Bill 85. 

Everyone knows in the province that we have been fighting for 

a better way forward for Bill 85. We’ve been fighting for better 

transparency and for Saskatchewan workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also been constructive coming forward on 

the areas of diversity, equality, and human rights. And it’s for 

that reason, Mr. Speaker, after I was appointed leader that I 

appointed the member from Saskatoon Centre as our critic in 

this important area. And I also brought forward a suggestion to 

the government that they post some information on their 

ministry website about the benefits of gay-straight alliances in 

our schools and how this can serve to protect students and 

ensure that we have a healthy learning environment for 

everyone. 

 

And I hate the thought, Mr. Speaker, of a student who wakes up 

in the morning and is fearful to go to school because they are 

gay. That is simply not acceptable in Saskatchewan, and we all 

have a responsibility to ensure all students are safe. Although 

the Premier initially rejected the idea of putting it on the 

website, I am pleased that it is now on the website because this 

is simply the right thing to do. 

 

But I’m concerned about the Premier’s initial reaction when this 

was raised in the Assembly because he sought to exploit the 

divisions in the province, as opposed to considering the safety 

of all students. And I’m hugely concerned about the message 

that that sends to LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 

transgender] youth here in the province, especially those that 

are being bullied, especially those who are out in their schools. 

 

So my question to the Premier: having taken that initial 

approach that’s one of division, as opposed to safety for 

students, how does he intend to heal the divisions that he sought 

to exploit in his initial response? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s 

preamble spoke to the fervour with which they fought Bill 85. I 

think the question he just asked prior to this one, I think that 

was the first question he’s actually stood to ask in this 

legislature on behalf of those union leaders, on behalf of the 

Meili camp, Mr. Speaker, the very first question other than 

estimates. He has a labour critic who, when asked by the media 

what’s wrong with Bill 85, couldn’t actually point to anything 

in particular. Not a recorded division, Mr. Speaker, not a 

standing vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the issue on gay-straight alliances 

and information available, the change has been made on the 

website, and that notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

work with Nova Scotia on cyberbullying. We have a Legislative 

Secretary appointed, and the member for Saskatoon Fairview is 

going to canvass all of the issues because bullying goes beyond 

the issue that has been raised in terms of LGBT issues. Mr. 

Speaker, the gay-straight alliance information is now available 

on the website of the Ministry of Education but, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to go beyond that to fight bullying in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t find that answer as 

encouraging, especially to the youth who are concerned about 

the divisive approach that the Premier took. In Premier’s 

estimates when we brought this issue up, there was talk of 

uranium development. Today when I bring this up, he talks 

about Bill 85. There is a reluctance to address this issue head on 

and actually address the issue of what to do with the division. 

 

We want a healthy province, Mr. Speaker, for our children. We 

want a brighter future for our children. That’s what each of us 

wants as parents, as grandparents. That’s certainly what I want 

for my girls and for our community. In order to do that, we need 

a long term. We need a strategic and a smart growth plan when 

it comes to education in the province. But the consensus in the 

province when it comes to education, especially in the last 

budget, is that the Sask Party government is falling well short in 

the area of education. 

 

In response to the budget, the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] said it was “much ado about nothing.” In response 

to the budget, the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association] said, “The provincial budget fails to recognize 

education’s role in continued prosperity.” And we think of the 

situation in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, where the students 

were forced to learn in their coats because of the budget 

constraints and the pressures that the division had. 

 

My question to the Premier: when the economy is doing well, 

how on earth is it acceptable to have these situations here in the 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

is frustrated when I address points of his preamble. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s actually part of debate in the House, and so we 

invite him then, if he doesn’t want to address those particular 

issues, he should perhaps not reference them in his preamble. 

But he’s free to do it because we’re happy to discuss any of 

these issues, especially education funding, Mr. Speaker, where 

again when we took office in 2007, we found a huge deficit in 



May 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3593 

education capital funding in this province, a massive deficit. 

 

We found schools who hadn’t, frankly, received the renovations 

required that we have now worked to improve. And we have 

issues to deal with here in Regina and across the province. 

We’ve seen $600 million in additional capital for education, 

year-over-year increases on the operating side. And when there 

are growth pressures, as we know there are in Saskatoon, this 

government took the unprecedented step of actually in the 

middle of a school year, just after September, advancing 

another $6 million to those pressure points. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the best indicator of past behaviour is future 

behaviour. We say to the divisions, if there are growth 

pressures, this government will be there. And more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, there are growth pressures in Saskatchewan today 

that we must deal with because we have more people, because 

we have a growing economy. And that’s also something that is 

a little bit strange for members opposite to contemplate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen the Sask Party’s 

short-sighted approach when it comes to education here in our 

capital city. And we think of the situation at Sacred Heart 

School. We think of Elder Mike Pinay coming to the 

Legislative Assembly and stating how important it is to have a 

safe, a functioning school gym for the students in that school, 

students who are mostly First Nations and Métis in a core 

neighbourhood here in Regina. 

 

My question to the Premier: how is it when the economy is 

going well that the Sask Party government can’t fix the gym at 

Sacred Heart School? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, again it’s pretty important to 

point out the record of the government with respect to investing 

in school capital here in the capital city. In fact when we moved 

with respect to the Arcola School in the Regina Public School 

Division, I can inform the House that that was the first capital 

project in this city, the first major capital project in the capital 

city in 10 years. Mr. Speaker, that’s why the Leader of the 

Opposition lacks credibility, at least from the standpoint of the 

record of the party that he represents. 

 

But we do seem to have a new leader, but that’s very much, Mr. 

Speaker, the same old NDP, who like to talk about the issues, 

who are able to point out the problem, but when they had the 

chance for a very, very, long time, over a decade and a half, 

they let the school system down. They let it down in operating. 

They let it down in capital to the point where now we have 

major issues in infrastructure that we will deal with. The 

minister has said that challenge will be mitigated. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the problem is the deficit, the infrastructure deficit 

they left behind is so great that it’s going to take longer than six 

years to replace it. It took 16 years to create it under members 

opposite. 

 

We’re going to get the job done, Mr. Speaker, as evidenced by 

record increases in school capital, new schools being built 

across the province, and renovations taking place in the North 

and in the South, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Testing Standards 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we see the stubborn refusal of the 

Sask Party government to admit that they are falling short when 

it comes to education, when it coming to ensuring that our 

children have the best possible future in the province. 

 

It’s not just with facilities that we see the stubborn approach of 

the Sask Party government when it comes to education. We’ve 

also had extensive debate about their determination, their 

wrong-headed determination, to have standardized testing here 

in the province, here in Saskatchewan. Despite the vast majority 

of other jurisdictions in North America moving away from 

standardized testing, despite the fact that Alberta next door is 

moving away in many ways with their standardized testing, the 

minister time and time again has not been able to explain why 

they are determined to go down this path. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he listen to the parents, will he 

listen to the educators, will he listen to the academics, will he 

listen to the students who are all saying that the standardized 

testing approach is not the right one; the right approach is to 

focus on teaching? Will he listen to those people today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned with the new 

Leader of the Opposition that, just like the old leaders of the 

opposition, you’ve got to check the facts. You do, especially 

with respect to the preamble. We had to check the facts on the 

Oregon fire tower situation. We’ve canvassed some of these. 

We had to check his facts on the Canadian Labour Congress 

numbers which Stats Canada says are all wrong. We had to 

check the facts when the member raised 47 people getting 

hallway medicine at St. Paul’s. And now the hon. leader stands 

in his place and says Alberta is moving away from the thing 

that we’re doing in the province. 

 

Here’s the facts, Mr. Speaker. Alberta was pursuing summative 

standards-based testing in Alberta. What they’re doing now, 

what they’re doing now is moving to formative standards-based 

testing. Formative standards-based testing is exactly where the 

province of Saskatchewan is. And moreover, Mr. Speaker, I 

wonder if the Leader of the Opposition will explain to Chinook 

School Division why the balanced literacy program that has 

now seen an increase in grade level reading by 20 per cent of 

our students is the wrong approach. They think it’s the right 

approach. So do we. 

 

Will the Leader of the Opposition at least acknowledge the fact 

that this kind of standards-based testing, which Alberta’s 

moving to, is the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, from the teachers.ab.ca. website, 

the title reads, “Teachers herald end of provincial achievement 

tests,” Mr. Speaker. It’s not . . . We would think of standardized 



3594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2013 

testing; they’ve had so many opportunities to explain why this 

is the best approach, why this is a good approach, why this 

approach has merit. The minister has failed on so many 

occasions on doing this. Even when they bring out the academic 

references, Mr. Speaker, they can’t seem to have the right 

ammunition that they need to show that this is the smart 

approach. 

 

Of the 11 academic references cited by the Minister of 

Education, and supposed evidence in favour of this approach, 

they were not relevant to the issue of standardized testing. 

There was one in the general realm by Phelps about teaching to 

standards, Mr. Speaker, but that was about prescribed learning 

outcomes, not about the merits of standardized testing. You 

would think that the Minister of Education and the rest of the 

front bench would be able to get some evidence if they think 

this is the best way forward. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he listen to the teachers, to the 

parents, to the students who want the $6 million that he’s 

spending on a computer system for standardized testing put into 

the classroom to benefit students today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try, with great hope in my 

heart, I’ll try again with the Leader of the Opposition. Alberta, 

and he should check this, now — he can make a phone call; he 

hasn’t made enough phone calls this session, I don’t think, to 

check his facts — should check with Alberta and find out what 

they’re doing and find out if they’re not moving to the same 

approach to standards-based testing. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition says, well the government never 

makes the case. And then each time we do make the case with 

specific examples, whether it’s in the Regina Public Division, 

whether it’s in the Chinook School Division, whether it’s in 

Melfort, they ignore it and carry on with their questions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s what we want. We want what they have 

done in Chinook School Division, where they’ve taken 

standards-based testing and something called the balanced 

literacy program — supported by teachers now; supported and, 

frankly, defended today by teachers — and seen grade level 

reading increase by 20 per cent. That’s what we want for the 

province. What we want for the province is to export what 

they’ve done in Melfort with standards-based testing, 

something the teachers there support. We want what’s working 

there for the rest of the province. 

 

We want early years evaluation, which is at work here in 

Regina already. It’s working, Mr. Speaker. It’s supported by 

teachers, and we see grade level improvements, student 

achievement improvements. Why in the world would the 

Leader of the Opposition be against that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

First Nations and Métis Employment and Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the Premier, 

after question period, go to the Education minister, ask to sit 

down at a chair at the back there, and ask to see the 11 

academic references, the articles about standardized testing. 

Ask to see the evidence, and see that the evidence is not there to 

support that this is the right approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last 24 months, whenever we’ve raised 

the issue of First Nations and Métis employment and education, 

what the Premier has proudly talked about is the work of the 

task force that they created. On many occasions, members on 

those benches have talked about the importance of the task 

force and the good, the qualified individuals that are serving on 

it. And, Mr. Speaker, I would say that it is important work, and 

I would say that those individuals are indeed very qualified and 

have a lot to share. 

 

But last week we learned, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier will be 

ignoring at least one of the key recommendations from that task 

force, and that is the recommendation to provide interim 

funding to provincial school divisions to reduce tuition costs 

charged to First Nations educational authorities. By the 

Premier’s own remarks in Premier’s estimates, this would be a 

cost of $3.4 million. But in his remarks, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

been uncertainty as to whether or not the Premier actually 

understands the detail and what recommendation no. 4 means. 

 

So my question to the Premier: is he confused about the detail 

of this recommendation? Why is he rejecting it? And how many 

other recommendations from the task force does he plan to 

simply ignore? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, again I encourage the hon. 

member in his questions, but there’s nothing to get angry about, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a debate we had in estimates. We’ve had it 

through all the questions periods and now, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

having the same debate again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll take the Leader of the Opposition’s invitation 

to sit down with the Minister of Education if he will also sit 

down at the back of the room with Google to make sure that his 

facts are right before he stands in the legislature and presents 

them as the gospel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We take the issue of the gap in terms of First Nations 

employment very seriously in the province. We take the gap 

with respect to First Nations education achievement very, very 

seriously in the province. It’s referenced in the growth plan. 

That’s why there’s $22 million in this year’s budget. That’s 

why there’s $3 million specifically for initiatives in the joint 

task force; $4.3 million for First Nations- and Métis-specific 

initiatives in school divisions, so it’s not just the 3 million; 

500,000 for summer literacy camps; 500,000 for Community 

Literacy Fund; 600,000 in operating; and 1 million in capital for 

15 new pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces targeted at the most 

vulnerable three- and four-year-olds in areas where we know 

First Nations and Métis will use them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and significantly since we took office, a 48 per 

cent increase in funding for the Saskatchewan Indian Institute 

of Technologies, a partnership that has seen Aboriginal 

employment on the rise, a partnership that has seen Aboriginal 

engagement in the economy at levels certainly where they’ve 



May 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3595 

focused where they should be, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record of 

the government. 

 

We will be responding to the recommendations in JTF [joint 

task force], looking for ways to ensure that there’s action, that 

there is that greater engagement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Reporting of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Broten: — You know, Mr. Speaker, they put the words 

down on paper, but we see only $3 million with the task force. 

When we see the Premier unwilling to say which other 

recommendations he will be ignoring, that is not reassuring to 

Saskatchewan people, especially when they say the task force is 

so important. 

 

We’ve seen that same, similar dismissive approach on so many 

topics. It’s the track record of this government in this session. 

One of the most glaring examples are the government’s 

interactions with the Provincial Auditor, the independent 

Provincial Auditor. When the Provincial Auditor came out with 

the report saying that the government has it wrong in 

maintaining two sets of books, that they are hiding deficits, that 

they are masking the true amount of the debt, what do we have 

from the government? What do they say? Oh well, every other 

jurisdiction in the country has it wrong but we have it right. 

 

[10:45] 

 

And then we see their behaviour in committee, Mr. Speaker. 

We see the members of the government being confrontational, 

being disrespectful, and completely unacceptable behaviour 

with the Provincial Auditor. And the member from Moose Jaw 

is already heckling from his seat, just like he did in committee 

with the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I asked the Premier if he thought that behaviour was acceptable 

in estimates and he did not reply. Does the Premier condone the 

behaviour of his members? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we are practising a form of accounting that was 

practised by the NDP for many, many years, in fact supported 

by the NDP. There’s cabinet ministers there across way, former 

cabinet ministers that were very comfortable with it. 

 

And I think I know why they were comfortable with it, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s because summary financial statements were 

presented at the end of that particular administration and they 

are presented now, Mr. Speaker. Both sets are there for the 

public to see. Both sets are there to be reviewed. The good 

news, Mr. Speaker, is that the budget is balanced in both the 

General Revenue Fund and it’s balanced on the summary 

financial statement.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a great deal of respect for the taxpayer — 

well for the Provincial Auditor, certainly — and especially for 

the taxpayers of this province who voted in the last election 

against a $5 billion spending spree by Mr. Lingenfelter, 

informed by the new Leader of the Opposition’s tree booklet, 

Mr. Speaker. They voted against that $5 billion spending spree 

because they want balanced budgets. We have respect, not only 

for the auditor, but for the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Performance of Government  

 

Mr. Broten: — Continued dismissive approach when it comes 

to the Provincial Auditor, just like we’ve seen on so many other 

fronts. 

 

The worst example I think we saw of this dismissive approach, 

this disrespectful approach occurred when Jennifer Birns and 

Devon were here in the Assembly, when the Minister of Crown 

Investments went out into the rotunda, five, six feet away from 

Jennifer Birns and said that she wasn’t telling the truth. On that 

day, Jennifer Birns said that the minister’s actions were 

“disgusting.” 

 

She just recently sent me this email and it says: 

 

Not only was my family incredibly offended by the claims 

made by Ms. Harpauer in the rotunda, we felt disrespected 

and belittled. The conduct of Ms. Harpauer in the rotunda 

was unacceptable. However, when accountability was 

requested it was absent. My family no longer finds this 

surprising, given the fact that not once were our questions 

answered during question period we attended. I challenge 

the Wall government to take accountability, apologize to 

my brother and my family and, for once, just tell the truth. 

 

My questions to the Premier: will he apologize to Devon? Will 

he apologize to Jennifer and the Birns family? And will he 

admit the information that his government was spreading about 

the Birns family was not correct? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I can inform the House that 

the Minister of Social Services met with the family yesterday, 

the Birns family, and offered an apology if there was any 

concerns. And obviously there was. Mr. Speaker, that happened 

yesterday. 

 

I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition might also then 

apologize for bringing up other cases, one in specific that I can 

remember, on the floor of the Assembly where even after he 

knew the facts were wrong, and materially wrong, he never 

took the opportunity to admit to that or to perhaps apologize for 

that situation to those like Southwest Homes and even front-line 

staff in various offices that work so hard to provide that family 

the support they need. I think it is a two-way street. 

 

And even more important than that, Mr. Speaker, I think is this. 

When this government was elected, the minister of Social 

Services of the day presented the list of 440 people that had 

languished under the NDP, the social democrats, for years and 

years, lacking the dignity of a home, lacking, Mr. Speaker, the 

dignity of respite services. Mr. Speaker, that wait-list is 

eliminated. More are added and we eliminate those as we go. 



3596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2013 

Another 215 are helped, and we’re able to do that because the 

economy is growing under the circumstances of our economy 

today and hopefully with some help from the government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That’s the overall vision of this government — a growing 

economy so we can help those who need it most, Mr. Speaker. 

That is a choice that exists today in this legislature. And Mr. 

Speaker, I think the people of this province will side with that 

grand vision over what they’ve heard from the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

The Speaker: — Order. During members’ statements, the 

member for Prince Albert Carlton used the words, half-truth. 

The definition of the words half-truth is a statement . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Is a statement that mingles truth and 

falsehood with deliberate intent to deceive. You may not accuse 

a member of deliberately misleading or lying in this Chamber. I 

would ask the member for Prince Albert Carlton to withdraw 

that remark and apologize. I recognize the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the remark 

and I apologize. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 812 to 1,008. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

812 to 1,008. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Before asking for leave to adjourn this Assembly, I’d like to 

make a few comments. 

 

First I’d like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, this being the last day 

of session, for your patience and diligence in the Chair over the 

course of, at times, heated debates. So thank you very much for 

that. I want to thank the Clerks and the Table officers for the 

work that they do, the guidance that they provide to members in 

navigating the rules of the Assembly. Thank you for that. Also 

to the other building staff, Mr. Speaker — broadcast services, 

library services, Journals, Hansard — who are here till late in 

the evenings when we’re sitting at nights. So thank you to all of 

those folks for the work that they do. 

 

Thank you to the Sergeant-at-Arms, the commissionaires for the 

work that they do as well — it’s greatly appreciated — the 

building staff, the cafeteria staff, the Pages, the interns, tour 

guides for all that you do in making this building function 

seamlessly and making this Chamber function seamlessly. 

 

I thank the media for their role in informing the public about 

what happens in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And also I’d like 

to offer a very heartfelt thank you to the opposition House 

leaders, both the member for Regina Elphinstone, who we dealt 

with for about a year and a half, who I call a friend, and also to 

the new Opposition House Leader, the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana, for the very productive working relationship that we’ve 

been able to establish, which makes life easier for all of the 

members in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to thank as well our families that make it possible for all 

of us to do this job, that put up with long hours, absences from 

home, and I really want to offer them that acknowledgement 

and thank you. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving the following motion: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day, in accordance with the parliamentary calendar it shall 

stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 23rd, 2013, 

unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 

the government; and if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give 

each member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such 

date and time. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I too 

would like to take this opportunity to say a few words about the 

session and the work that’s been done here and offer a few 

thank yous on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

First of all definitely to you, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 

for your leadership and your sometimes colourful ways of 

reminding us how we should behave in the Chamber. And 

certainly we do need the reminder from time to time. So thank 

you for that, and for your support in me taking on this new role 

for the opposition. 

 

I’d also like to thank all the Table officers and the Pages and the 

Clerks and Mr. Clerk and all the people who’ve been very kind 

to me in helping me learn this new job as I take it on. I certainly 

want to extend a big thank you to the people at Hansard and all 

the Journals for getting the words that go in this Chamber out to 

the people in such a timely and efficient fashion. Certainly the 

audiovisual people as well who in this modern age of image are 

able to present what we’re saying to the people in a visual 

manner. The security, the commissionaires, all the building staff 

— especially like to give thanks to the head of the building staff 

for taking us on a tour last week of the dome. And I would 

certainly encourage all members to take opportunity to get up 

there and have a visit of the fourth floor and the dome of our 

Assembly and of our building. It’s a very interesting part of our 

history and of what this building is about. 

 

I’d also like to thank the library staff who are always there for 



May 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3597 

us, and efficient and quick with giving us information we need; 

the cafeteria staff; and all the staff of the Legislative Assembly. 

I’d also like to thank the people from the House of Prayer who 

are here watching over us. I think it’s very comforting for me 

when they’re here. I’d like to take a moment to thank them for 

the work that they do on our behalf. 

 

I certainly want to thank the press gallery for the work that they 

do and the hospitality that they showed us yesterday. So thanks 

for that very much. And although I don’t always agree with 

everything they say, I certainly appreciate the wise words that 

they put out to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In terms of House leaders, I too would like to thank the 

Government House Leader for his support and friendship and 

the opportunity to work co-operatively to make the House 

operate as best as we can with the opposition and the 

government. I’d also like to thank Graham as well, Graham 

Stewart who’s been so helpful in organizing committees, and all 

the hard work that he does. I certainly want to thank the 

government members, and particularly my own caucus 

members for supporting me as we’ve gone through this big 

change in the session in terms of our organization. Particular 

thanks and congratulations to our member for Cumberland who 

is turning 50 today, Mr. Speaker. So I want to offer him a happy 

birthday wish as well. 

 

I also want to make special reference to our caucus staff. As a 

small opposition, we have a small but mighty staff as well, 

headed up by Carolyn Rebeyka, our chief of staff. We have Erin 

in the media, along with Jason, Cheryl, and Jannet. We have our 

researchers, Eric and Kat and Deanna, our sessionals. But over 

and above anyone, I want to thank Kyall Glennie who is our 

researcher, who has helped me incredibly through this whole 

session. So I want to thank Kyall for sure. 

 

Final thanks going out to constituency assistants who have 

helped me through this session, and particularly Troy 

MacGillivray who has now moved away, but my new 

constituency assistant who I know is watching, Deb Aitken. So 

I want to thank them as well for keeping the home fires burning. 

 

And finally I think on behalf of our caucus, we want to thank 

our new leader, Cam Broten — oops, I’m not supposed to say 

his name — our new leader from Massey Place who has done a 

remarkable job on behalf of our party and shown great 

leadership and courage and forthrightness, and he’s leading us 

forward with purpose. So I want to especially thank Cam for the 

work he’s done in session . . . I did it again. My apologies, Mr. 

Speaker, for mentioning the name. 

 

Finally thanks to everyone’s family and friends and for being 

there for us as we do the important work for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I’d like to close with a quote from JFK, John 

Kennedy, and he says: 

 

As we express our gratitude, we must never forget that the 

highest appreciation is not to utter words, but to live by 

them. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to take this opportunity to thank 

everyone for their hard work this session. And since this is 

about the only time I get to give a speech, I have a few things to 

say. I have a pent-up demand for speaking and heckling. 

 

To the members, I would like to thank you for your many hours 

of service and the strong commitment to your positions as 

elected officials of the province of Saskatchewan, especially the 

Minister of Advanced Education for his unpaid advice which 

was worth what I paid for it. 

 

To the Clerk’s office, Greg Putz, Iris Lang, Ken Ring, and the 

staff of the Legislative Assembly, thank you for all your efforts 

in keeping us all on task and doing so to enable the democratic 

process to operate as smoothly as possible. 

 

I would like to acknowledge the Pages and the interns for the 

excellent job they do for us daily. And yes, also the Opposition 

Whip. Happy birthday. 

 

I appreciate your efficiency, your professionalism. And thank 

you to all of the LAS [Legislative Assembly Services] staff, 

personnel, behind the scenes who do their best to make us all 

presentable to the public. I would like to thank my staff, Sheila 

and Connie, and Peter, our summer student, for their hard work 

in keeping the office running smoothly — not an easy task, as 

you know, when dealing with the Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And I would like to thank the member for Estevan as well for 

reminding me of the times. I’d like to thank our constituency 

office staff in every office across the province and also our 

families that make it possible for us to be here. So have a good 

and safe summer, everyone. 

 

By leave of the Assembly, moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day, in accordance with the parliamentary calendar it shall 

stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 23rd, 2013, 

unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 

the government; and if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give 

each member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such 

date and time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the House 

to agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 



3598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2013 

a.m., October 23rd unless recalled earlier. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:01.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3587 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3587 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3587 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3587 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3587 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3587 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3587 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3587 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3588 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3588 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3588 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Protecting At-Risk Bird Species 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3588 

 Lakewood Manor Housing Co-operative 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3589 

 Norwegian Constitution Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3589 

 Saskatoon Hosts Memorial Cup Tournament 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3589 

 Cadet Program Produces Well-Rounded Citizens 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3589 

 Community Leader Recognized by Rural Municipal Administrators 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3590 

 Genuine Debate and Real Scrutiny 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3590 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care for Seniors 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3590 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3591 

 Labour Legislation 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3591 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3591 

 Gay-Straight Alliances and Combatting Bullying  

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3592 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3592 

 Funding for Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3592 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3592 

 Testing Standards 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3593 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3593 

 First Nations and Métis Employment and Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3594 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3594 

 Reporting of Provincial Finances 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 

 Performance of Government  

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3596 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3596 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3596 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3596 



 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3596 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3597 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


