




















































Hansard: December 03, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 23A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4357 

 December 3, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to introduce a group of officials, actually Ministry of 

Social Services officials who have joined us today. They’re 

seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they’re with child 

and family services unit. They do outstanding and essential 

work on behalf of the children of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce them to the members of the 

House at this time, starting with the supervisor, Darlene 

Walliser. Maybe they could just give us a wave as I introduce 

them. The assistant supervisor is Heather Yanko, and the child 

protection workers include Tess Charuk . . . And I hope I get 

these pronunciations right. Karen Wilson — I think I got that 

one right — Gwen Johnstone, Kerina Klassoff, Janelle 

Sebastian, Kim Schleede, Randi Obleman, and Lindsay 

Schroeder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these women do amazing work on behalf of 

vulnerable kids in the province of Saskatchewan, on behalf of 

the ministry. I wanted to introduce them as a way of saying 

thank you for that work and also I felt it was right because I 

photobombed their session on the stairs of the legislature and 

had a picture taken with them, and it was an honour for me to 

do so. We want to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

And just while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

members of this Assembly have met with the firefighters from 

across the province, and a number of them have joined us today. 

And I think the minister is going to more formally introduce 

them, from our side certainly, here in a moment. But there’s one 

in particular I want to point out, someone I’ve known since we 

were in high school together in the 1940s. He has been a 

long-time professional firefighter, serving our community. He’s 

a good friend and he raises great bison in southwest 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I want to welcome my friend 

Trevor Braun who’s also here with the firefighters today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition I’d like to join in with the introductions that 

have been made, first of all to say thank you to the child 

protection workers from the ministry who are here today. 

There’s perhaps no greater responsibility we have as a province, 

to look out for our most vulnerable. And we sincerely thank you 

for the work that you do on the front lines, recognizing the huge 

pressures that you face. And I want to say thank you for the 

work that you do on an ongoing basis in caring for the most 

vulnerable here in the province, and recognizing the huge needs 

that are there for resources as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the Premier. He’s 

correct. In all three galleries here in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

there are professional firefighters who have joined us from 

cities here across the province. I want to say a special welcome 

to the president of the provincial association, Kirby Benning, 

who is in attendance. But importantly, there are . . . Importantly, 

in attendance is the leadership and representatives from locals 

throughout the province who make a stop at the legislature as 

part of their annual activities in order to ensure that they are 

doing everything they can to care for Saskatchewan 

communities by bringing forward concerns that demand the 

attention of legislators. 

 

So I want to extend my thanks and appreciation to the 

firefighters for all that they do year-round to ensure that our 

families are safe and to ensure that our property is safe. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I’d welcome all these 

individuals to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming Kirby 

Benning and members of the Saskatchewan Professional Fire 

Fighters Association to the legislature. They met with the 

Human Services Committee earlier today, and this is their 

annual day to come to the legislature, meet with members of the 

legislature. It’s something that I think we’ve enjoyed a very 

positive and productive relationship with over the years. We 

have worked with them to make changes regarding the asbestos 

registry and to ensure that presumptions were included 

regarding Workers’ Compensation Board for certain cancers. 

 

We look forward to continuing that relationship, and we would 

like to not only welcome them today but would like to thank 

them very much for the good work that they do on an ongoing 

basis keeping our communities safe. They not only are the 

firefighters in the province but in most communities are 

members that are the paramedics and are often the first 

responders in the case of a major incident or an accident. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members of the legislature, 

we’d like to welcome them to their Assembly today and look 

forward to continuing to work with them. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join the Minister of Labour in welcoming the firefighters here 

to our legislature. It’s really important that we recognize the 

good work that they do because we all want to feel safe in our 

homes and our communities. And they do that 24 hours a day, 7 

days a week, and particularly now as this province is booming 

and there’s been so much investment in our province. So they 

do such good work. So let’s all welcome them to their 

legislature. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



4358 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

Speaker, to you and through you I’m very pleased to introduce 
three very articulate, empathetic, thoughtful, inspiring, and 
sincere leaders from First Nations University. These student 
leaders are the vice-president of communications, Mr. Brad 
Bellegarde; vice-president of finance, Ms. Katryna Smith; and 
Ms. Jessica Dieter, who is events coordinator among the student 
leaders. 
 
This morning we had a chance to meet. We spoke about a 
number of important and pressing issues. We spoke about the 
need for greater inclusion, including the need to continue to 
work on issues regarding overcoming issues of disabilities — 
that especially on a day like today. We spoke about issues of 
child care for students on campus. We also spoke about the 
importance of retention and student achievement. And these 
students have been very, very helpful in making sure that voices 
of students from right across the province have been heard. And 
we appreciate the spirit of constructive dialogue that really was 
present today and look forward to an ongoing discussion with 
these and other students. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 
members of this Assembly to join in welcoming these fine 
leaders at First Nations University to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming Brad Bellegarde, Katryna 
Smith, and Jessica Dieter from the First Nations University 
Students’ Association to their Legislative Assembly. And the 
minister’s taken a lot of good words to describe these people 
here today at their legislature, and I can confirm that all of them 
are quite accurate. 
 
The only one I’d add maybe, the only description I’d add 
maybe, Mr. Speaker, to what the minister has already said is, in 
the person of Brad Bellegarde you’ve got somebody who’s 
pretty handy on the microphone. And the work that he does as 
Brad Basic and InfoRed is a sight to behold and a sound to 
behold as well. And with Katryna and Jessica, you know, 
people that are well grounded in their community, in tradition, 
in culture, and not just in the past, Mr. Speaker, but carrying 
that forward as well. So it’s really good to see these great 
individuals here at their Legislative Assembly. Tansi. Ta wow. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
Assembly, Bill and Rob Craddock, business owners and 
operators of Inland Metal Manufacturing here in Saskatchewan. 
I’ll have more to say about them in my member’s statement. So 
please give them a warm welcome to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased today to introduce to you and all members of this 
Assembly a group of 29 grade 11 and 12 students that are 
seated in your gallery. They come from the Cupar School. 
They’re the history 30 class, Mr. Speaker, and I believe for 

many of them this is their first time to visit the Assembly. They 
are accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Murray Bruce who 
happens to also be the principal of the school, along with 
educational assistant, Mrs. Colleen Dinsmore, and their bus 
driver, Mr. Joe Brodner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, this is the first time for some of them, 
but there are a couple of students in the group that have been 
here before, a couple of my grandchildren. Owen, if you could 
give us a wave. That would be Owen Hart and Tenaisha Hart. 
They’ve both been here before on other special occasions and 
I’d ask all members to help me welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s a tremendous honour for me to introduce 
someone seated in your gallery here today, a community leader 
here in our city, in our community, and also right across the 
province. He’s also a fantastic hip-hop artist and his name is 
Curtis Adams. He also is known as Unkle Adams. That would 
be with a K. He’s also a past student of mine. I had the privilege 
of teaching Curtis at some point. I did teach him math, not 
spelling, with unkle with a K. 
 
And what I would like to say is that Curtis has taken his 
exceptional abilities, put them to use in our community as a 
community leader and for the greater good in an effort to end 
bullying in this province. And I thank him for that. And Curtis 
is joined as well by his parents, Dianna and Lawrence. It’s a 
pleasure to have them in the Assembly. I ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming this community leader and his 
parents to his Assembly. 
 
While still on my feet, certainly I’d like to welcome all of the 
students, all of the firefighters, but specifically a good friend 
and leader in this province, Brad Bellegarde. Thank you so 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to take a minute to welcome a former student of 
mine who I taught 28 years ago, from Prince Albert — one of 
the firefighters here, Lloyd Zwack. I want to welcome you 
particularly to your Assembly and I’m really glad to see that 
you made something of yourself. And thank you for all the 
work you do as a community leader and within your profession. 
So it’s a pleasure to welcome you to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
welcome a constituent of mine seated in the west gallery, 
Kristin Kutarna Gates. Kristin, give us a wave. 
 
Kristin is an enthusiastic entrepreneur as a creator, owner, and 
strategist behind the Chic Strategist, the go-to online coach to 
create intelligent, stylish business strategies for women 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4359 

entrepreneurs and small-business owners. 

 

She’s an active volunteer in her community, in giving up her 

time and volunteer time and expertise to help non-profit 

organizations to grow and prosper. She’s also an instructor at 

the U of R [University of Regina] as a strategist. She’s a proud 

mom to her three-year-old daughter, Maiella. 

 

Also seated with Kristin today is Leanne Persicke. Leanne 

works with us at the building and I would also like to welcome 

her back to the Assembly. Please welcome these two guests to 

our Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members today 

21 grade 10 students, the social studies 10 class from the 

Melville Comprehensive High School. Mr. Speaker, they’re 

accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Koskie, Ms. McFarlane, 

and Mr. Rondeau. And I’ll have the opportunity to meet with 

them shortly after question period. I would ask all members to 

welcome these students and their teachers to their legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to present a petition in support of anti-bullying initiatives. 

And we know that bullying causes serious harm and the 

consequences of bullying are devastating, including depression, 

self-harm, addictions, and suicide. And we know that this 

government is not doing enough to create safe places in our 

schools for gay and transgendered students or a student bullied 

because of their sexual identity. And this government must act 

so that students have simple, easy-to-understand information 

about gay-straight alliances in their schools or how to form 

GSAs [gay-straight alliance] and who they should talk to in 

order to form a GSA today. We know that bullying is a human 

rights issue, one of safety and inclusion. I would like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives 

of young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

because the leaders and residents of northern Saskatchewan are 

concerned about senior care in the North. The Croft report of 

2009 showed a serious shortage of long-term care beds for 

seniors, and the problem has gotten worse. Seniors have done 

their part for this province, and it’s time for the government to 

do their part. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to treat northern Saskatchewan senior 

citizens with respect and dignity and to immediately invest 

in a new long-term care facility in the La Ronge area. 

 

I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School. The undersigned petitioners wish to bring 

to the attention of the Assembly the following: that the gym at 

Sacred Heart Community School in north central Regina is now 

quite literally falling apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is 

no longer safe for students or staff. The petitioners are well 

aware that a temporary solution has been arrived at with the 

refurbishment of the old sanctuary at the old Sacred Heart 

community church, but they need a permanent solution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that Sacred Heart 

Community School is the largest school in north central Regina 

with 450-plus students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations 

and Métis. They point out that enrolment has increased by 

100-plus students over the last four years and that attendance 

and learning outcomes are steadily improving. And they point 

out that as a matter of basic fairness and common sense that 

Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym. Mr. Speaker, in 

the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to 

immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 

of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Sedley 

and Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Potash Workers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

morning we learned that hundreds of potash workers in 

Saskatchewan are being laid off. This is incredibly concerning 

news for those workers and their families, especially in the lead 

up to Christmas. Job losses can be devastating for families at 

the best of times, but they can be especially devastating during 

the holidays. 

 

So my thoughts are certainly with those workers and their 

families, Mr. Speaker. These potash workers have contributed 

significantly to our province’s prosperity, and we are grateful to 

them. And I’m certainly hopeful that all these workers with 

their various skills will find good-paying jobs here in 



4360 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remain optimistic about the future of all of our 

province’s natural resources, but stories like this are further 

evidence that it’s not in our province’s best interest to put all 

our eggs in the non-renewable resource basket. We need to 

diversify our economy more. We need to do everything we can 

to use today’s prosperity to ensure that our province is an 

economic powerhouse for decades and generations to come. 

 

In the weeks and months ahead, we’ll keep pushing the 

government on that. But today our thoughts are with the laid off 

workers and their families, and I’m sure all members join me in 

expressing our concern and support to them today. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hopes for a Peaceful Resolution in Ukraine 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday I addressed a rally of members from the 

Saskatchewan Ukrainian community who had gathered in front 

of the legislature, concerned about the recent turmoil in 

Ukraine. 

 

As you know, over the past 10 days more than 300,000 

demonstrators have amassed throughout Ukraine to voice their 

dissent about President Yanukovych’s decision to abandon a 

free trade agreement with the European Union. Rather, the 

president has chosen to seek greater economic ties with Russia. 

 

Last Saturday, Mr. Speaker, Ukrainian authorities used violence 

to disperse many of the peaceful demonstrators. The rallies that 

occurred in Saskatchewan were an opportunity to condemn this 

use of force and to call upon the Government of Ukraine to 

support a democratic society where its citizens have the right to 

express their views. 

 

Even though there was a failed non-confidence vote in the 

Ukrainian parliament, the Verkhovna Rada, today, President 

Yanukovych’s administration did issue an apology for the use 

of force against its citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hope for a continued dialogue between the 

government and the public and a peaceful resolution to this 

situation. It is important to the future of Ukraine and to the 

130,000 people of Ukrainian descent that call Saskatchewan 

home. Additionally, Mr. Speaker, a fair and democratic society 

in Ukraine is fundamental to our province’s ongoing 

relationship with that country. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Hip-Hop Artist Targets Bullying 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, many allies across the 

province are working to end bullying, and I’m proud to 

recognize the important work of one from my community. 

Simply, there’s too much hurt, too many tragedies caused by 

bullying. That is why I’m particularly thankful for a leader like 

Curtis Adams. Curtis is a former student of mine and a current 

constituent. He’s leading a charge to fight bullying in 

Saskatchewan’s schools. Curtis, also known as Unkle Adams, is 

a talented hip-hop artist. He wrote, performed, and produced a 

music video to support the I Am Stronger anti-bullying 

campaign. The video was shot in Thom Collegiate and has 

become a sensation, and therapeutic for many. 

 

Curtis has been in demand as part of anti-bullying presentations 

at schools across the province, sharing his song and his 

message. This included a stop in North Battleford where he 

presented an event to recognize the sad and tragic loss of Todd 

Loik. The chorus of Curtis’s song says this, and I quote, “I am 

smarter, I am stronger. I will take it no longer. I have feelings. 

I’m a person. I will live life with purpose.” 

 

And Curtis is definitely living his life with purpose. He’s 

sincere in his message. He relates and connects with youth, 

utilizing his talents and abilities for a greater good. He’s a 

powerful ally in the fight against bullying. 

 

I call on all members of this Assembly to recognize the 

important work and leadership of Curtis “Unkle” Adams, and to 

apply his important message to our everyday lives. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Saskatchewan Curlers at Olympic Trials 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this House 

today to draw attention to one of the top women’s curling teams 

in Canada, which also happens to have roots in the constituency 

of Rosthern-Shellbrook. Mr. Speaker, Team Lawton, comprised 

of Stephanie Lawton, Sherry Anderson, Sherri Singler, and 

Marliese Kasner, are off to a great start this season and are 

currently competing at the Roar of the Rings in Winnipeg in the 

hopes to represent our nation at the Sochi 2014 Olympics. 

Stephanie and Marliese were raised in Shellbrook and their 

family has for generations now been dedicated to competitive 

curling and promoting the sport. 

 

Team Lawton, which curls out of Saskatoon’s Granite Curling 

Club, qualified for the spot in the Olympic trials after victory at 

the 2012 Capital One Canada Cup last December in Moose Jaw. 

 

Each individual brings extensive curling experience and 

accomplishments to the team. Cumulatively the members of 

Team Lawton have won 12 provincial championships, three 

junior national championships, and one world junior curling 

championship. This is the third consecutive time the team has 

competed at the Olympic trials, and the valuable experience 

gained at the past two events will give them what it takes to 

become Team Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Team Lawton on their curling accomplishments 

and in cheering our Saskatchewan team on as they compete for 

the honour to represent our country in Sochi next February. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4361 

Regina Business Celebrates 60 Years 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to recognize Inland Metal Manufacturing’s 60 

years of business in Regina. 

 

Bill Craddock Sr. started the metal manufacturing and 

installation company, servicing the heating and ventilation 

industry in Regina and surrounding area, in April of 1953. In 

the spring of 1959, Bill Craddock Jr. who is seated in your 

gallery joined the company and oversaw the company’s growth 

to three locations, two in Regina and one in Saskatoon, which 

employs over 35 full-time and numerous part-time staff. Bill 

Craddock Jr. is now stepping away from this successful 

business which he oversaw for decades and is being now taken 

over by a third generation, Mr. Rob Craddock. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this family and business’s roots are deep in 

Saskatchewan and their future is bright. The company also took 

part in the most recent provincial recruitment drive in Ireland. 

 

This past summer I also had the pleasure of taking part in 

Inland’s barbecue where I witnessed their corporation’s 

citizenship and how well they were received as a company by 

its employees, the residents, and other businesses within the 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing Inland 

Metal Manufacturing’s 60 years of business and thanking the 

Craddock family for their hard work and their dedication, 

making Saskatchewan a better place to live. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Honours for Saskatchewan Physician 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise in the House today to recognize a constituent of Regina 

Northeast, Dr. Paul Dhillon, who received the Canadian 

Medical Association’s 2013 Resident Leadership Award and 

the 2013 Murray Stalker Award presented by the College of 

Family Physicians of Canada. Mr. Speaker, these awards 

represent the top honours in the country for medical leadership, 

and they went to a physician right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Dr. Dhillon studied medicine at the Royal College of Surgeons 

in Ireland and graduated in 2009. The following year, he earned 

a diploma from the Royal College of Obstetrics and 

Gynaecology in the United Kingdom and an International Red 

Cross certificate in health emergencies in large populations at 

Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. In 2011 he 

completed a certificate in surgical science at the University of 

Edinburgh and in 2012 he earned a master’s degree in disaster 

medicine in Italy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Dhillon completed his family medicine 

training at the Regina General and Pasqua hospitals. He is 

currently working as a locum GP [general practitioner] in 

southern Saskatchewan for the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association locum relief program. Over the past few months, he 

has been working in Weyburn, Esterhazy, Ituna, Melville, and 

Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

Dr. Paul Dhillon for receiving two of the country’s top honours 

for medical leadership and thanking him for choosing 

Saskatchewan to practise medicine. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

International Day of Persons With Disabilities 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in the House to remind all members that today is the 

International Day of Persons With Disabilities. Our government 

is pleased to join with jurisdictions across the world in 

proclaiming this day each year. This year’s theme, as chosen by 

the United Nations, is Break Barriers, Open Doors: For An 

Inclusive Society For All. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to making 

Saskatchewan the best place to live in Canada for people with 

disabilities. Today is an opportunity to remind ourselves of that 

commitment and to celebrate the many contributions that 

people with disabilities make each day in communities across 

our province. 

 

We’re working to improve their lives by developing a 

comprehensive, province-wide disability strategy. The process 

was launched this spring with a call for nominations to the 

citizen consultation team. The members of the team were 

announced in October. They have begun their important work, 

including planning the public consultation process that will take 

place next spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll work with our partners in the disability 

community to ensure that persons with disabilities are able to 

fully share in the opportunities provided by our growing 

economy. Working together, we’ll meet our goal of making 

Saskatchewan the best place to live in Canada for people with 

disabilities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Provision of Firefighting Services 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re joined today 

by proud members of the Saskatchewan Professional Fire 

Fighters Association. And we’re certainly grateful to them, Mr. 

Speaker, for the work that they do in keeping our families and 

our communities safe. 

 

One of the concerns that the firefighters have brought to the 

legislature today, and one that they want to see addressed by 

this government, is for this government to catch up and support 

the growth that our province has experienced. This is what the 

firefighters have to say: 

 

Saskatchewan has seen some impressive growth in 

population and industry, which means increased risk in our 

cities. But our fire services have not grown to keep pace. 



4362 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

They have instead seen their capabilities spread over a 
larger area, protecting more lives and property with the 
same resources. 

My question is for the Premier: why is this government not 
keeping up with the services that keep Saskatchewan families, 
Saskatchewan property safe? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the member for his question and recognize again the firefighters 
that have joined us and thank them for the services that they 
provide to Saskatchewan people every day. 

Mr. Speaker, it is Saskatchewan municipalities that retain and 
compensate for the firefighters that provide services . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member from Athabasca is 
objecting to this for some reason. I’m not sure why; it’s 
certainly the truth. And so, Mr. Speaker, the direct question 
from the Leader of the Opposition was, how are we as a 
government working to ensure that we are keeping up with the 
pressures of growth, Mr. Speaker, in the municipal sector as it 
would relate to this very important protective service? 

Mr. Speaker, the answer is very clear. From the day we formed 
the government, we have sought to establish and did establish 
an historic revenue-sharing agreement with municipalities. 
Revenue sharing to municipalities — who must make the 
decisions with respect to the complement of firefighters, and 
pay, Mr. Speaker — is up over 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what this government has done to ensure that 
municipalities can keep up with the pressures of growth. For the 
first time ever, and they asked for it under the New Democrats, 
for the first time ever though, they are now tied in their revenue 
sharing to revenues that come into the provincial government 
through one point of the PST [provincial sales tax]. 

[14:00] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the Premier’s 
rhetoric, the firefighters are saying that our fire services are not 
keeping pace with the growth of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
And the firefighters are concerned about that and Saskatchewan 
families will be concerned to hear that as well. At a time, Mr. 
Speaker, when our province is doing well, it doesn’t make sense 
for this government not to keep up with the services that 
Saskatchewan families need and that Saskatchewan families 
expect in order to stay safe. 

Firefighters are asking for a minimum of five fighters per 
response crew in order to better protect their safety and to better 
serve the public. And they’re asking for funding from their 
provincial government, Mr. Speaker, to support municipalities 
in the additional costs to offset the increased need for protective 
services under that model. Manitoba has done this, Mr. Speaker, 
and we’ve certainly seen this government do something similar 
to that nature with respect to police officers in the province. 

My question to the Premier: is he listening to the firefighters on 
this, and will his government respond to what the firefighters 

are requesting? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, municipalities 
pay for the cost of fire protection in our province. It’s the way 
it’s always been. And a pressure on municipalities in the past, 
prior to ’07, is the fact that they were downloaded upon by 
successive New Democratic governments. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve sought to change that. We’ve established a 
new revenue-sharing formula that has seen revenue sharing 
increase by 108 per cent so that Regina, which used to get 15.7 
million under the NDP [New Democratic Party], now gets 
41.068 million that they could use for protective services; 
Saskatoon from 17 million to 47 million. 

Well members are chirping, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 
Opposition said that this is rhetoric. This is not rhetoric. These 
are real dollars that have been invested at the municipal level. In 
Prince Albert, from 2.9 million to 7.4 million; 2.8 in Moose Jaw 
under them to $7 million; in North Battleford, 1.1 under the 
NDP, $2.9 million today. 

Mr. Speaker, we have provided the municipalities of this 
province with real revenue sharing for the first time in a very 
long time. They can choose to use these resources for protective 
services or for other operations of the respective municipalities. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the firefighters are asking for five 
individuals per crew in order to ensure that the right protective 
services are there. They’re asking for the province to assist with 
that, to step in as they have with respect to police officers with 
something similar. My question to the Premier: what is his 
position on five individuals per crew, and will he support it? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have no objection to that 
complement, and we’ve provided municipalities with historic 
revenue to ensure that that happens. Is it the position of the New 
Democratic Party that the government would fund, in addition 
to revenue sharing, these positions? And if so, does the Leader 
of the Opposition have a number that we can work with? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this dismissive 
approach by this government when concerns are brought 
forward, concerns brought forth today by the firefighters. 
Another area where we’ve seen the dismissive approach, Mr. 
Speaker, has to do with the changes to The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act and as it affects professional firefighters here 
in the province, in many communities including Swift Current. 

As a result of those changes, Mr. Speaker, firefighters in 
Weyburn, Yorkton, North Battleford, and Swift Current, 
firefighters who are already among the lowest paid within the 
country, Mr. Speaker, no longer will have access to interest 
arbitration in the same way that forest fires in Regina, 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert are able to access. 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4363 

Firefighters don’t think this fair. In fact they say this. On this 

they say that it is “. . . wrong and mean-spirited, and it must be 

remedied.” 

 

My question to the Premier: will he listen to firefighters or will 

he stubbornly dismiss the concerns that firefighters from these 

communities have brought to the legislature today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I note that the Leader of the 

Opposition did not have a specific request or remedy for the 

situation. Maybe he will after question period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say with respect to the specific issue of 

those municipalities, mayors and councils from those respective 

cities contacted the government and made this request, Mr. 

Speaker, to the government for the change of which he’s 

speaking. Mr. Speaker, as we consider the essential services 

piece, which will come back to the legislature, we’re going to 

have to deal certainly with this issue, and we will. And we’ll do 

it in concert with those municipalities, but we’ll also do it in 

consultation with the firefighters of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — My question to the Premier. In his response, he 

just talked about consultation and discussion that will occur. 

Why did such consultation, why did such discussions with 

firefighters not occur until it was simply sprung on them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, with respect to the 

direct question from the member opposite, we heard from 

municipalities on the issue. We knew that it was being 

discussed as well at the local level. Municipalities were pretty 

clear, and frankly they were concerned about long-term 

sustainability of their respective career departments, Mr. 

Speaker. They were concerned about it because of what was 

happening as a result of arbitration. Mr. Speaker, I think, as I 

had indicated myself to individual firefighters, I think there was 

a concern that if these settlements went on unabated, what 

would happen to the complement of career firefighters we have 

in the province now if municipalities were forced to make 

certain decisions? 

 

Mr. Speaker, changes were made as a result of input from 

municipalities concerned about the long-term sustainability of 

their career departments. We shared them, Mr. Speaker. I would 

note that essential services changes are coming, Mr. Speaker, 

and we ought not to preclude some adjustment that might in fact 

meet the needs as has been expressed by the member. 

 

But again, back to the issue of the number of firefighters in the 

province, the complement, I want to be very clear. This 

government has provided municipalities with historic revenue. 

They can choose to increase protective services. That might be 

police officers; that might be firefighters, Mr. Speaker. That 

also might be other operations. Mr. Speaker, we encourage 

municipalities to make their own decisions. They’re certainly 

independent and able to make those decisions. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Labour Market Agreements With the Federal 

Government 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government has 

cut its funding for labour market agreements with the provinces. 

Here in Saskatchewan that will hurt people who are looking for 

skills training, unemployed and underemployed workers, and it 

will hurt First Nations and Métis employment opportunities. 

 

Labour force challenges are a major issue for Saskatchewan 

businesses and our economy. The Premier told the media that 

the way the grant is structured won’t get great uptake in 

Saskatchewan. As a result, the province will have to backfill 

because the feds have said, use it or lose it. That could cost the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan millions of dollars. My question is, 

why is this government not standing up to the feds and 

demanding changes to the program so it actually meets 

Saskatchewan’s needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. This is a very important point. We are in negotiations 

and discussions with the federal government. The provinces are 

unanimous in the position that we feel that the market 

agreements are something that is very important. We want to 

make sure we get this right with the federal government. That’s 

why there has been numerous meetings, both telephone 

conference calls and face-to-face meetings, with the provinces 

and also with Minister Kenney with respect to this important 

issue. And the Prime Minister’s been engaged on this as well, I 

understand. 

 

So this is something that’s important. We’re in communication 

with the federal government on it. I believe that there’s going to 

be a submission going forward. I believe it’s at the end of this 

week, I think Friday, and we are optimistic of the outcome with 

the federal government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s concerning because to 

date that advocacy suggested by that government certainly 

hasn’t had much of an impact. The day after the Premier talked 

to the media, federal Minister Kenney said, “Obviously the 

provinces are always going to just demand a blank cheque from 

the federal government to spend as they please.” That’s quite 

the attitude, Mr. Speaker, especially since the Premier met with 

the minister earlier this month. 

 

To the Premier: did he demand changes to help the programs 

that helped train Saskatchewan people, and is he simply going 

to sit back and take the use it or lose it attitude we’re seeing 

from the federal government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue to 

work with the other provinces and territories with respect to this 

very important question. We have had long discussions about 



4364 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

this as provinces and territories. We believe that we have a 

position that is responsible. We believe it is . . . meets the needs 

of the labour market across the country. And that is precisely 

the reason why we continue to work along with the federal 

government, and will be presenting to them on Friday of this 

week, a counterproposal that we hope the federal government 

will accept. We believe that this is an important issue and we’ll 

continue to work therefore. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the feds have made it clear 

they won’t tailor the program to meet Saskatchewan’s needs. So 

Saskatchewan is losing out on federal training funding, and we 

will be stuck to fill in the gap, potentially, once again from 

downloading of the costs from a federal government. 

 

When businesses are facing a major labour shortage and they 

need certainty in these programs and workers deserve nothing 

less to ensure we’re building opportunities for Saskatchewan 

workers, we need all levels of government working together to 

increase skills training and opportunities. 

 

To the Premier: since the federal government doesn’t look to be 

moving from its position, what actions is this government 

taking? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, and I would say with respect 

to the member, if you’re aware of something that I’m not, 

please bring it to the attention of the Assembly. 

 

The fact of the matter is we are still in discussions with the 

federal government with respect to this. There has been no 

decisions taken with the federal government at this point in 

time. That’s precisely the reason why we continue to have a 

dialogue with the federal government. That’s why the provinces 

are unanimous. That’s why the provinces are unanimous, 

including NDP Manitoba, with respect to this whole process 

that we’re going through right now. 

 

We will present a counterproposal to the federal government, 

and we will be happy to bring it to the attention of the 

Assembly once that agreement is concluded. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Mental Health Services 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that this 

government is undertaking consultations about mental health 

and addictions. Listening is important, and this government 

does not do enough of it. So I am pleased about the 

consultations. But I share the disappointment of many families 

who want this government to act on what it already knows to 

implement life-saving measures now. To the minister: why is 

this government waiting to take meaningful action on 

something as vital as mental health care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, through the human services ministries as a part of this 

government — Health, Social Services, Justice, Corrections, 

Education, Mr. Speaker — we as a group felt it was important 

that the province put in place an action plan for mental health 

services and addiction services within the province, Mr. 

Speaker, an action plan that we don’t have up to this point. 

 

We’ve hired, Mr. Speaker, a commissioner to do consultations. 

I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that as of a couple of weeks 

ago we’ve already had nearly 2,500 submissions to the online 

portal, the online consultation tool, Mr. Speaker. That’s going 

to be done in conjunction with the face-to-face meetings of the 

commissioner, Mr. Speaker, which will ultimately deliver an 

action plan for this province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, our work doesn’t begin when the 

commissioner makes her report. We are taking action, Mr. 

Speaker. Our mental health budget has gone up 33 per cent in 

the last six years. We’re seeing good work by regions to 

streamline their services to be able to provide more timely 

services, Mr. Speaker. And we have some great examples even 

right here within the capital city, in Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region, Mr. Speaker. And we look forward to the ultimate 

recommendations of the commissioner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already said, I welcome 

the consultations. Listening is good. But how many more 

budgets do we need to wait for before this government will do 

something meaningful when it comes to mental health? 

Life-saving measures can be implemented now. They need to 

be implemented now. 

 

Three years ago, Mr. Speaker, a report from the Ministry of 

Health and Prairie North Health Region acknowledged “. . . the 

lack of adequate mental health facilities and community 

resources for persons with severe psychiatric illness and/or 

persons considered to have high and complex needs.” That 

report recommended 40 new intensive residential support beds 

and 80 step-down beds in four health regions. 

 

To the minister: when can we expect some meaningful action 

on those recommendations back from 2010? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we have undertaken action, including moving forward 

with the new Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford, Mr. 

Speaker, which is in the planning phases. We look forward to 

making future announcements on that important project for this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t lost sight of those 

recommendations from three years ago in terms of that 

residential support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the action plan, it was just on April 

30th of this year, Mr. Speaker, in committee where the former 

Health minister, the member for Lakeview asked, “When will 

we see a mental health strategy for the province of 

Saskatchewan?” Mr. Speaker, we’ve had Dave Nelson from the 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4365 

Canadian Mental Health Association who has said, “We have 

been asking for a plan for mental health and addictions for 

many years,” when we launched it in May of this year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there are actions that are taking place now to improve 

services. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the member to 

wait even a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, for the further part of 

this House. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I was at the minister’s 

announcement about the online consultation process. I spoke to 

a mother who was invited to attend that event. She was 

disappointed by the announcement. She thought the government 

was going to announce some kind of support or improved 

services for people with mental health issues. So she was 

devastated, and she is not alone. So many families want to see 

action. They want government to put in place life-saving 

measures now. 

 

To the minister: when will this government create new intensive 

residential support beds and step-down beds? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, over the last number of years we have made 

improvements in mental health and addictions services within 

the province, as I’ve mentioned before — a 33 per cent increase 

in the budget for mental health services in the last six years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’re also working with health regions, Mr. Speaker, to put 

forward a province-wide plan in terms of suicide prevention 

supports, Mr. Speaker. I believe Sun Country Health Region 

was contracted by all of the health regions to produce a 

document to be distributed across the province particularly 

around youth suicide prevention. We have significantly 

expanded a partnership with the Schizophrenia Society of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and increased their funding 38 per 

cent over the last six years. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I think something very important for this 

province is to have a dialogue in terms of how we improve the 

services and the timeliness of those services through the action 

plan, Mr. Speaker, something that has been called for by the 

CMHA [Canadian Mental Health Association] and oddly 

enough, Mr. Speaker, the member for Lakeview. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Design of Children’s Hospital 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since this 

government approved the proposed detailed design of the 

children’s hospital six months ago, we’ve been hearing a lot of 

concerns from nurses, doctors, and families. 

 

My question is to the Premier: why will the children’s hospital 

have fewer maternity beds than RUH [Royal University 

Hospital] currently has? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

working with a committee that was put together that involves 

the Saskatoon Health Region, the Ministry of Health, as well as 

those that work in maternity services within Saskatoon Health 

Region, Mr. Speaker, they developed the footprint for the 

building in terms of the numbers of delivery units that would be 

available, Mr. Speaker, knowing that the way that . . . with the 

patient experience is different than many years ago when we 

were planning hospitals in terms of the length of stay and those 

types of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, this group has done some extensive work looking at 

other children’s hospitals like Seattle, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the flow of the patients and the mother and child during and 

after delivery, Mr. Speaker. They’ve come to a number. They 

have a group that is working to ensure that that is the proper 

number to be put in place before construction. And we look 

forward to, Mr. Speaker, getting on with the construction and 

opening the new children’s hospital in a couple of years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I understand through the 

consultation process and the planning there were some good 

ideas that were brought forward and that we’ll see in the design, 

Mr. Speaker. Even with those good ideas though, Mr. Speaker, 

people have questions and have concerns how it is common 

sense and how it is a good idea to have fewer maternity beds in 

the new children’s hospital than the existing RUH. 

 

Between 2008 and 2012, the number of births per year went up 

8 per cent. Yet the number of maternity ward beds, Mr. 

Speaker, will be cut by about 15 per cent when the new 

children’s hospital opens. Cutting the number of maternity beds 

at a time when the province’s population is going up and the 

number of births is going up, Mr. Speaker, simply doesn’t make 

sense. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is this government proceeding 

with a plan that will have fewer maternity beds in the new 

children’s hospital? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the group that has been put 

together to put in place the plans for the children’s hospital 

included front-line workers, Mr. Speaker. It included families, 

Mr. Speaker, that would use the services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we know today is that in terms of the design 

of, for example RUH, where children would be born, Mr. 

Speaker, where delivery would take place in one part of the 

hospital and then the mother and baby would recuperate in 

another part of the hospital, Mr. Speaker, that’s changing. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to a design where the delivery will take 

place in the room where the family will recuperate after the 



4366 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

birth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That being said, the region and the foundation acknowledge that 

good news, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing increasing numbers of 

births in Saskatchewan. And they want to be confident in the 

numbers in terms of those rooms that they’ll have in the 

hospital, and that’s why they’ve set up this group to re-evaluate 

that number and make a decision before construction begins. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, even if we have a change in 

process where moms and families are stayed in the same room 

from assessment to labour delivery to post partum, Mr. Speaker, 

it doesn’t change the fact, Mr. Speaker, that at a time when we 

see births going up by 8 per cent, we see a decrease in the 

number of beds in the new children’s hospital by 15 per cent. 

To me, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t sound like this government is 

planning and ready for growth. To me, Mr. Speaker, it sounds 

more like they’re planning for decline. 

 

And it doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker, why we would be 

taking this approach when we have a new children’s hospital 

coming to serve families. Nurses and doctors are concerned 

about this, Mr. Speaker, as are families, what this means in a 

situation where families and staff are already stretched thin. 

They’re telling us that this will be a concern. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he ignoring the concerns of 

front-line health care professionals who say the reduction in the 

numbers of beds is not a smart approach? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we are 

including front-line workers. We’re including staff. We’re 

including patients and families in the design of the children’s 

hospital. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I was at the report out from the 

design and the room was full of families and front-line workers 

who were involved in the design, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to give, I think, a news flash to the Leader of the 

Opposition, we’re building a children’s hospital. We’re not 

planning for decline under this government, Mr. Speaker, unlike 

the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a children’s 

hospital in this province. We’ll ensure that the numbers are 

appropriate for the growing province, Mr. Speaker, and the 

growing population, something the members opposite never had 

to contend with. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, with the construction of a new 

children’s hospital, it’s important to get it right. And when we 

see, Mr. Speaker, when we see births going up and we see the 

number of maternity beds going down, that’s not a common 

sense approach, Mr. Speaker. That’s not something that makes 

sense to nurses, not something that makes sense to many health 

professionals, and doesn’t make sense to families, Mr. Speaker, 

because they’re concerned what this can mean for their care. 

 

As things are stretched thinly, Mr. Speaker, and as the reduction 

of the number of beds, many families are concerned that they 

will be pushed out of the hospital sooner than they’re ready and 

sooner than they ought to be. With the province growing, Mr. 

Speaker, with the number of births going up, yet this 

government is planning for a smaller maternity ward in the 

children’s hospital. 

 

To the Premier: how does this make any sense? What assurance 

can he give to the moms that they and their babies will not be 

pushed out of the hospital sooner than they need to with the 

lack of space? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well you know, it’s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the same question four or five times asked. It 

was answered the first time by the minister, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of gauging stakeholders on an ongoing basis throughout 

this process, Mr. Speaker, and even coming back to the question 

of the size of the ward. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

make sure that the hospital is right sized. And most importantly 

of all, we’re going to make sure that children’s hospital is built 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I remember lots of promises from members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. And I remember the opposition just prior to the last 

election, including the Leader of the Opposition, going around 

Saskatoon and making mischief — Mr. Speaker, do you 

remember that? — when the NDP would go to families in 

Saskatoon and say, ah the Sask Party said they’d build the 

hospital, but they’re not going to build the hospital. Mr. 

Speaker, this happens again and again and again. We have the 

negative nine over there, Mr. Speaker, casting a pall over 

projects, whether it’s in health care or education or the future of 

the province. 

 

The bottom line is this: this province is growing. And by the 

way, notwithstanding some current developments today that 

were absent from members opposite’s questions, this province 

continues to grow. It is diversified, Mr. Speaker, and because of 

that diversified strong economy, we are investing in health care, 

including a right-sized children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 127, The Mental Health Services 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved that Bill 

No. 127, The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4367 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair for the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report that it has considered 

certain supplementary estimates and to present its fourth report. 

I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on the Economy: 

 

That the report from the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman for the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 

considered certain supplementary estimates and to present its 

fourth report. I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Human Services: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman for Crown 

and Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee of Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 

considered certain estimates, present its fourth report. I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee of 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair for the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report that it has considered certain supplementary 

estimates and to present its fifth report. I now move: 

 

The fifth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Chair of the 

Standing Committee on House Services. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 



4368 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report that it has considered certain supplementary estimates 

and to present its sixth report. I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of the 

Standing Committee on House Services: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 210 to 215. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 210 to 215. 

 

[14:30] 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of Finance to order. The 

business before the committee is a resolution by the Minister of 

Finance, and I call upon the minister to move his resolution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, I’ll move the following, no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2014, the sum of $113,847,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2014, the sum of $113,847,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Chair, I move that the committee rise and that the Chair 

report that the committee has agreed to a certain resolution and 

ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. The committee is adjourned. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Committee of Finance has agreed to a certain resolution, has 

instructed me to report the same, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolution be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolution 

be now read the first and second time. 
 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the resolutions. 
 

The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 131 — The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4369 

Bill No. 131, The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 131, The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

by leave of the Assembly and under rule 75(2), I move that the 

bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Leave is granted. It has been moved 

by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 131, The Appropriation 

Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read a second and third time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 

reading of this bill. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

on behalf of the Minister of Justice to move second reading of 

The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 

(No. 2). Members will be aware that The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Act, 2009 represents a balance between ensuring due 

process for individuals who may face an allegation of holding 

criminal property and ensuring that criminals do not benefit 

financially from their criminal activities. This bill will establish 

an administrative seizure process in the Act as a further option 

for the seizure of criminal property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will authorize the administrative seizure 

of cash or personal property with a value under a prescribed 

amount; allow the director to issue a notice of administrative 

forfeiture proceedings directly to interested parties regarding 

property that the director has reasonable grounds to believe is 

either the proceeds of crime or an instrument of unlawful 

activity; where no notice of dispute is filed by an interested 

party, provide for the seizure, forfeiture, and distribution of the 

property; provide that if a notice of dispute is filed, the director 

must instead proceed to apply for seizure through the court 

process or decide not to seize the property; allow an interested 

party to file a notice of dispute within six months after the 

deadline if they can show they had a reasonable excuse for 

having failed to respond to the initial notice. 

 

The present system requires extensive legal document 

preparation to bring forfeiture applications before the courts, 

either by notice of application or statement of claim. 

Unfortunately the same amount of work must be done, 

approximately 15 hours of document preparation, even if 

ultimately the respondent entirely fails to respond to the 

application or whether the application seeks forfeiture of 

$100,000 or just $100. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the introduction of an administrative forfeiture 

regime will improve efficiency and reduce workloads for police 

witnesses. In an administrative system, the preparation of court 

documents would not be necessary until it is known that a 

respondent is opposing the application. Therefore document 

preparation would be focused on those applications that will be 

challenged in court. Mr. Speaker, under this process, 

applications that are unchallenged will result in forfeiture to the 

Crown at an earlier stage. We estimate that approximately 20 

per cent of forfeiture applications are contested. This number is 

consistent with findings in other provinces. 

 

As noted, this new process would be limited in the regulations 

to the seizure of cash or personal property under a particular 

value, such as $75,000, and could not be used for larger cash 

amounts or for real estate seizures. An estimated 80 per cent of 

seizures in Saskatchewan would fall under this dollar threshold. 

 

Under these amendments, the rights of individuals with 

potentially legitimate property interests are protected. After 

receiving notice of the intention to forfeit the property to the 

Crown, an interested party would be able to file a notice of 

dispute, which would then return the issue of forfeiture to the 

courts for determination through the same process that the 

current regime provides. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the Act, all seized funds are retained in the 

Criminal Property Forfeiture Fund to support police operations, 

or the Victims’ Fund. Following the payment of the costs and 

expenses of seizure, funds seized through the new 

administrative seizure process would be subject to the same 

process. 

 

We remain committed to this program and are confident these 

amendments will assist our officials in continuing to use this 

legislation, as intended by this Assembly, to prevent 



4370 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

profiteering through criminal activities. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to move second reading of The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Justice, the Attorney General, 

that Bill No. 121 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, moved by 

the House Leader that Bill No. 121, The Election Amendment 

Act . . . I’m moving ahead quickly here. It has been moved by 

the Government House Leader that Bill No. 126, The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be now read 

the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand in my place today to present our initial 

thoughts on Bill 126, Mr. Speaker. And obviously when we 

look at the name of the bill, it talks about quite frankly the 

options of Justice to seize criminal property. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I think the people of Saskatchewan generally are very 

supportive of any activity that the government may undertake to 

protect citizens and to ensure that not only are their children and 

their families are safe but their property as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective as the official opposition, 

there’s no question that we do support swift and orderly justice 

to those that have criminal activity. And, Mr. Speaker, one of 

the points that I would raise to folks that are listening to this 

debate on Bill 126, the legislative changes are talking about 

when you look at seizing criminal property, is that when the 

courts or the police officers get involved with somebody that’s 

doing crime, and I guess the most, the quickest example I would 

think about that comes to my mind here is somebody that might 

be running drugs, somebody that might be selling drugs, that 

they’re using their vehicles to transport the drugs and the police 

stop them, Mr. Speaker, and obviously they seize the vehicle, 

they seize the cash, and they seize the drugs. And generally 

people in Saskatchewan obviously want to see a very quick and 

swift justice being undertaken in those cases because drug 

activity certainly hurts a lot of families and hurts a lot of 

communities. 

 

So I think overall the people of Saskatchewan wouldn’t want to 

see any unnecessary delays when we’re talking about 

prosecuting the criminals and certainly taking the proceeds of 

that criminal activity and using it not only for police work but 

to look at the Victims’ Fund support systems that are there as 

well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the bill itself, we do have 

some questions. Because obviously, as I said at the outset, 

anything to ensure that we have the administrative and due 

process attached to seeking out criminals and certainly 

penalizing criminals, certainly the opposition is in support of 

that. And I want to really emphasize that. The opposition, as our 

leader has indicated, we don’t want to stand in any way where 

changes are common sense and they help the people of 

Saskatchewan. Our directive from our new leader is that we’re 

going to do that kind of supportive effort and to ensure that 

Saskatchewan benefits overall. 

 

Now I understand from the changes, Mr. Speaker, that when 

they do have the seizure of property when somebody’s involved 

with criminal activity overall, that there is an onerous process 

on the courts to fill out all these forms to say that they’ve seized 

this property, and then they have to do all that type of work. 

And then they have a second process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what I understand from the bill is that there’s up to close to 

80 per cent of the people that get stopped by the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] or involved with the commission of 

crime that really don’t appeal or they don’t argue the fact that 

their vehicle was seized or their asset was seized or cash was 

seized, that they simply know that they got caught doing this 

illegal activity. And yet the police or the people that are 

arresting the criminals are needed to do all this extra work. 

 

What the measure is today is really to eliminate that extra 15 

hours of document preparation that the minister alluded to. So 

from that perspective, if close to 80 per cent of the folks that get 

caught doing criminal activities . . . And the best example I 

would use is, say for example they’re selling drugs, and the 

police stop them. They seize the drugs, they seize the vehicle, 

and they seize the cash, and I think the amount that’s identified 

in the bill is 75,000, to a maximum of 75,000, and then of 

course that gets seized by the police. And if 80 per cent of them 

don’t argue that point, they’re simply going to wait for their day 

in court, then why do all that extra work? Why do all the 15 

hours of preparation if the people aren’t going to fight that 

particular charge right then and there, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[14:45] 

 

There’s a number of things that I think that people of 

Saskatchewan would probably like to see, and of course the 

premise being that it’s got to be orderly justice. Because that’s 

in a sense what’s really important, is that if we attempt to bring 

forward a solid justice system in the province, we must ensure 

that we’re just ourselves. So it’s important to allow due process, 

orderly process. But at the same time, it’s also important that 

we kind of vet out unnecessary administrative processes 

because these handcuff the RCMP or the police officers in 

many ways. And certainly from our perspective, the common 

sense perspective, it appears that this particular bill is going to 

help the police again in their fight against crime, gives them 

another tool in their tool kit to be able to address what a lot of 

people in the province know as problems of an overcrowded 

courthouse and a lot of administrative work that ties up the 

justice system for hours on end. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this 

bill is one step in the right direction and certainly from our 

perspective we would be supportive of that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a couple of questions on this 

bill at the outset. Obviously when you look at the criminal 

activity perspective, and the issue that I used was selling drugs 

where the police can seize your vehicle and cash if you’re found 

to have been doing anything illegal, the other question I have on 

this particular bill is under the impaired driving issue. If you’re 

impaired driving, if you’re above .08, is that considered a 

criminal activity? I would assume it probably is a criminal 

activity from the interpretation of law. So does that mean that 

that vehicle is also seized, Mr. Speaker? And nowadays there’s 

a lot of vehicles worth more than 75,000. Does this Act apply to 

those that have been caught with impaired driving above .08? 

These are some of the questions that we need to know. 

 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4371 

How about if a parent or grandparent or aunt or uncle 

unwittingly knowing was not properly advised at the outset that 

if you simply loan their family member a vehicle and that 

family member was doing illegal activities with that vehicle, 

and they were totally oblivious to that, what rights do they have 

on reclaiming their property? What’s the process there? 

 

So these are some of the initial questions we have in relation to 

this bill. And we certainly want to be able to talk to some of the 

legal firms that we have contact with, some of the lawyers that 

we also have contact with to see if this bill really does exactly 

what we think and hope it does and that is to ensure that there is 

a swift, orderly dispersal of criminal handling of many of the 

people that get involved in that particular activity. We want to 

make sure that this bill does exactly that. So I think it’s 

important that we ask those questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other note I would certainly point out is that under the 

Victims’ Fund . . . Because I understand that when you do seize 

assets, when you do seize property such as a vehicle and the 

people that take the vehicle away from them, the police take the 

vehicle away from, they don’t argue the fact that the vehicle 

was seized. And of course they would still have their day in 

court. The minister made reference to, in his bill in the 

explanation notes the fact that some of the proceeds would go to 

the Victims’ Fund; some of the proceeds would go to police 

operations. How does the breakdown of revenues to each of 

these funds work? Is it 50/50, is it 60/40? 

 

These are some of the questions that we would like to know 

because obviously if you’re using the proceeds of criminal 

activity to fund police work, that’s almost sweet justice in itself. 

But you’re also doing a collaborative effort to support the 

Victims’ Fund, victims of crime and, Mr. Speaker, that’s also 

sweet justice. But we need to know what the breakdown is in 

terms of having the cost breakdown as to what percentage goes 

to the Victims’ Fund and what percentage goes to the police 

operations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the 15 hours that you 

would save in preparing the court documentation to be able to 

seize these assets, that is from our perspective again a good way 

to deal with this criminal activity in a quick way. But where’s 

all these issues, where’s all these assets stored? Is it in a private 

storage facility? Is it in a police compound? And what kind of 

experience has BC [British Columbia] and Alberta had in terms 

of all the assets that they might seize? Like how do they store 

these assets and how long does the court process take? What are 

the costs attached to storing all these assets, and how long do 

you have to be able to be responsible for the storage of these 

assets? Because some of the court cases, as you know, Mr. 

Speaker, can drag on for months and months. 

 

So you look at the bill itself. There’s quite a few questions that 

we have. Obviously the premise of a good justice system is due 

process, that you have to have due process. I understand that 

part of the law. At the same time, you needn’t have needless 

administrative procedures if they’re not effective in the delivery 

of that justice system, all the while knowing that due process is 

important. So administrative processes that are unnecessary are 

also an impediment in the due process of law. 

 

So I think it’s important that we look at all those aspects to 

ensure that we’re doing this thing properly and that we’re doing 

what the people of Saskatchewan want, and that’s a swift, 

orderly justice system. And, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective 

as the opposition, we don’t want to stand in any way to things 

that make sense and things that make good common sense for 

the people of the province. 

 

So I understand, again looking at the bill itself, the questions I 

obviously have is again obviously those that might be involved 

with drug dealing, it’s a pretty straightforward case for people 

to understand that the vehicle that they’re using, the police can 

seize that vehicle. Does this bill go into the area of impaired 

driving above .08? We don’t have that question today. And we 

need to be able to ask those questions because many of us are 

not lawyers. We’re not trained to understand that there is a 

different . . . the different sections of the Criminal Code, and 

which applies to where. We don’t know, but we need to find 

those out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s an amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 

fact that the two, my two colleagues that spoke and participated 

in the Traffic Safety Committee, they brought up the issue of 

the impaired driving option of having people’s vehicles 

impounded for up to three days if they’re above .05. And it’s 

amazing that this government has decided to not implement that 

particular part of the bill. We still don’t know why on this 

Assembly because obviously on the one hand, the minister 

alluded to BC, Alberta doing these kinds of things under this 

bill. And then they refused to recognize under BC and Alberta 

and the Traffic Safety Committee hearings that they could 

impound the vehicle if it’s anything above .05, and that saves 

up to 50 per cent of the lives lost on Saskatchewan highways. 

 

So it becomes a conflicting message here within the Assembly, 

from our perspective. And so we sit here and we watch one bill 

come forward, such as Bill 126, and we say well 

administratively if it makes the court system and the police 

service more efficient, why wouldn’t we support that? And 

that’s my point I made earlier. Obviously there’s some good, 

good common sense approaches to, you know, to doing that. 

 

But in the same token we look at the traffic safety council 

where we’re talking about impounding vehicles that have 

people who’ve been drinking and driving with these vehicles 

above .05, that they actually save lives. Well all of a sudden this 

government isn’t doing, isn’t touching that. So it gets kind of 

confusing from our perspective as to what the government 

wishes to do when it comes to justice. And that’s the question 

that I automatically instinctively had: does this particular bill 

impact those that have had an impaired driving above .08, as is 

that considered criminal activity? Obviously it is, but does it 

apply under this particular Act? 

 

These are some of the questions that we need to know, Mr. 

Speaker, because if it does apply under this Act and the people 

of Saskatchewan ought to know, there ought to be some 

awareness campaigns to make sure we tell those that are 

drinking and driving to not do this. Here’s another tool that we 

could implement if you do so. Not only if you’re running drugs 

out of your vehicle but if you’re impaired driving, driving down 

the highway, this could also apply to you. These are the 

questions that we really need to know. 

 



4372 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

The other attached questions that I have, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

spend a bit of time on the Victims’ Fund and the police 

operations fund from this that are attached to this bill. We 

wouldn’t mind hearing how the Victims’ Fund is replenished 

every year. Is there some government contribution to that fund? 

Is there some services attached to that fund, as opposed to just 

cash being handed out to some of the victims? Is there 

counselling attached to that fund? These are some of the things 

that we need to know. 

 

And of course the police operation, once they seize any kind of 

asset as a result of the criminal activity attached to this bill, then 

obviously we’d like to know what the history is in Alberta and 

BC in terms of dollar value and how the police services use the 

proceeds over there. What’s the most effective way to use those 

proceeds? These are the questions that we don’t know. 

 

Obviously when it comes to Saskatchewan versus BC, they 

have a greater population than ours, but what kind of revenues 

can we expect under this particular initiative given the 

population difference? People can certainly figure out what we 

can anticipate. And again the questions we have between the 

Victims’ Fund and the police operations fund, how is the 

breakdown going to be when you do have successful 

prosecution in court? Were you able to sell these assets and use 

the money to fund both of these entities? We wouldn’t mind 

finding out (a) the history of these funds, (b) how they’re being 

funded from the intent behind this bill, and (c) what kind of 

services or cash are available on an annual basis now, and 

what’s the anticipated income as a result of this bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we want to be very thorough and effective in 

some of our analysis of this bill. I know I have more learned 

colleagues — a couple of them are lawyers — that would really 

give a good perspective on how this bill would make the court 

system and the justice system more efficient overall. So those 

are some of the folks that I think would have a lot to say on this 

particular bill. 

 

And this is the important part that we also want to point out is 

that there are those out there — law students or lawyers in 

general, law firms — that wish to offer their advice on how we 

could interpret the meanings behind this bill. Mr. Speaker, this 

is the opportunity to do so. And this is the reason why we are 

always opening up the door and the venue and telling people of 

Saskatchewan that if you wish, if you wish to participate in 

analyzing this particular bill, you’re more than welcome. The 

opposition is willing to meet with you and to hear your 

concerns on this bill. You could email us, you could do . . . you 

could write a letter or fax a letter. I think some people 

sometimes still use the faxes. So it’s important that we offer 

that invitation to all the people that are out there. 

 

So again, the bill, a brief wrap-up. From what I understand, it’s 

allowing the government to seize assets, which they would 

normally do in the course of police work. They would seize 

assets, and once they seize those assets they don’t have to waste 

a lot of administrative time — up to 15 hours per case — to do 

all the preparation of documentation if somebody is not arguing 

with the action of the police. So if that means that the justice 

system is more efficient, more effective, then as an opposition 

we would certainly support that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s still the court process to go through. 

We understand that. And once the court system is complete, 

then obviously if the criminals are found guilty, then the assets 

that were seized are obviously sold and the revenues from the 

sale of all these assets, whether it’s just straight cash or whether 

it’s a vehicle, then obviously those monies would go to two 

sources of funds for police work and for the Victims’ Fund. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective, it certainly does make 

sense at the outset, but we need to ask more intricate questions 

as to how this impacts a number of situations. And certainly a 

number of people that would have information are also asked to 

participate in giving us advice on this bill. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it could be a solid step in the right direction. 

As I’ve indicated, if it’s common sense, it helps the people of 

Saskatchewan overall, it means they’ll get better administrative 

process for the justice system, these are things that the 

opposition could live with. Mr. Speaker, we just simply want to 

ask a few more questions on a few more fronts so we’re 

comfortable with what we know about the bill, so we’re able to 

explain to people as we travel as MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and as legislators. So, Mr. Speaker, on 

that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 126. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 126, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 121 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 121 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise during the debate on amendments to The 

Election Act, Bill No. 121. At the top of my remarks I’d like to 

state a word of thanks to the Minister of Justice and Justice 

officials that gave an advance briefing to the member from 

Saskatoon Centre and myself as to the contents of this bill that 

will be coming forward. I’d also like to go on record as 

thanking the Government House Leader for ensuring that that 

happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 121, of the items contained therein, there 

are items that are certainly worthy of support. And there’s one 

item in particular though, Mr. Speaker, where the proof will be 

in the pudding as to how it goes. And we’ll see whether or not it 

has merit over the long haul or not. But in terms of the number 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4373 

of the measures contained in the Act, first off the removal of the 

mandatory requirement for the CEO, the Chief Electoral 

Officer, to appoint an assistant chief electoral officer. Mr. 

Speaker, this response to the request of the Chief Electoral 

Officer brings the Saskatchewan Act into line with best 

practices in other jurisdictions for election management bodies 

throughout Canada, and that would seem to be worthy of 

support. 

 

The measure that amends the deposit refund provisions to 

ensure that they are not an unconstitutional deterrent to smaller 

parties, smaller political parties, or independent candidates, 

again responding to the Figueroa decision at the Supreme Court 

of Canada. Again, Mr. Speaker, that would seem to be a fairly 

common sense measure. 

 

In terms of removing the uncertainty as to what agencies of the 

government are subject to advertising restrictions by a better, 

more clear definition of government ministry and assigning that 

to those meaning ministry and any other government institution 

as defined and listed under The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act — again a fairly straightforward 

proposition. 

 

The exclusion of routine advertising by government ministries 

for employment or the procurement of supplies, from the 

advertising and publication bans prior to an election, again, Mr. 

Speaker, fairly straightforward and fairly workable. 

 

And then finally, the provision that the 28-day minimum writ 

period be reduced to 27 days allowing the Chief Electoral 

Officer to avoid having to issue election writs on a holiday such 

as was the experience in our province this past election, Mr. 

Speaker, where the writs were issued on Thanksgiving Monday. 

Although we’ll see if, when the next election takes place 

because of course if it’s the fall of 2015 or April of 2016, still 

an open question. But we’re hopeful that the indications made 

by members opposite that April 2016 will be the date. We hope 

that is as good as the Premier’s word. 

 

So on balance, Mr. Speaker, we think that there is some good 

measures in this bill, but the one that we’ve got, I think, 

significant misgivings, Mr. Speaker, about out of the opposition 

benches are the changes concerning how government 

advertising is counted for the ban that members opposite have 

brought forward concerning government advertising. 

 

And you know, I’ve been around long enough to have heard the 

different allegations that members opposite made about the 

approach to government advertising and the reason to bring 

forward the ban. So I guess now that they’re coming forward in 

terms of a change in terms of how that ban is calculated and 

measured, we’ll be very interested to see how that plays out. To 

the most sort of, I guess, alarming way to estimate the actions 

of members opposite is that the way that this is now being 

calculated opens it up to easier manipulation on the part of 

members opposite.  

 

So there’s one way to prove us wrong, Mr. Speaker, and it’s to 

not use the new means of calculating what goes towards the 

government advertising ban in an obviously partisan way or an 

unduly jacked-up manner in the years leading up to the election. 

 

The proof will be in the pudding, and how this government 

advertises in the period of time before the election and how they 

then calculate their average, that will tell the tale. And I guess, 

Mr. Speaker, if past is indeed prologue, or if the best indicator 

of future behaviour is past behaviour, as you know, some of us 

are fond of saying in this House, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see how 

that works out. 

 

And again, we hope to be proven wrong in this regard. But I 

think just of the situation with SaskPower right now, Mr. 

Speaker, where they’re coming forward with a pretty significant 

rate increase request. Last night I had the opportunity to sit in 

committee with the member from Nutana as the supplementary 

estimate was brought forward to increase by $350 million the 

borrowing activity of SaskPower this year, a 60 per cent 

increase over what was initially budgeted, raising it to nearly $1 

billion of borrowing activity. Again, Mr. Speaker, against that 

backdrop we’ve got a fairly significant $700,000 ad campaign 

being run by SaskPower. 

 

So communicating with ratepayers, communicating with the 

province, that’s one thing. But there are some things that this 

government does, Mr. Speaker, that it’s hard not to get beyond 

the smack of propaganda. But that I guess is the best that we’ve 

got in terms of how members opposite carry themselves 

forward with this change to the legislation. And we will be 

vigilant in watching how that works out, and again we hope to 

be proven wrong, but time will tell the tale. 

 

On balance though, Mr. Speaker, and as well in conjunction 

with assurances that have been afforded to us as the official 

opposition that other pressing changes that are needed for The 

Election Act, Mr. Speaker, as regards the establishment and 

then implementation of a permanent voter registry, that that 

might proceed in a timely and cost-effective manner, Mr. 

Speaker, and in a way that better assures individuals in this 

province access to the electoral process. Assurances have been 

made in that regard. Assurances have also been made that work 

will be brought forward concerning better access for those with 

disabilities to the electoral process. And again, Mr. Speaker, we 

look forward to those being, those undertakings, being made 

good on. 

 

And it is at that juncture, Mr. Speaker, that we are willing to 

have an expedited process for The Election Act amendment, that 

it might proceed in a way that enables those important changes 

around a permanent registry to come and better accessibility for 

those with disabilities to our electoral process to come as well. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks 

on Bill No. 121 and turn matters over to those opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

that Bill No. 121, The Election Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



4374 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 121, The Election Amendment Act, 2013 be 

committed to the Committee of the Whole and that the said bill 

be considered in Committee of the Whole immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 

of the Whole. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY ON BILLS 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Chair: — I call the Committee of the Whole to order. The 

item before the committee is Bill No. 121, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2013. Clause 1, short title, is that clause 

agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Is there any debate on this bill? Seeing none, 

clause 2, is that agreed? 

 

[Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

Clause 6 

 

The Chair: — Clause 6. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would move that: 

 

Clause 6 of the printed bill 

 

Amend section 277.1(1) of The Election Act, 1996, as 

being enacted by Clause 6 of the printed Bill, by striking 

out “28-day” and substituting “27-day”. 

 

The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved an 

amendment to clause 6. Do members agree with this 

amendment as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is clause 6 as amended agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. 

 

[Clause 6 as amended agreed to.] 

 

[Clause 7 agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 

follows: Bill No. 121, The Election Amendment Act, 2013. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that the committee report the bill with amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee report Bill 121 with amendment. Is 

that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. The committee is adjourned. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 121, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2013 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the amendments be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the amendments be now read the first and second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4375 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read the third time? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that 

the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave for Bill No. 121, The Election Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that Bill No. 121, The Election Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 107 — The 

Wildfire Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an honour to 

rise in the House today to have an opportunity to speak to Bill 

No. 107, The Wildfire Act. And of the various bills that I’ve had 

an opportunity to speak to this session, Mr. Speaker, this is one 

that actually reflects a fairly substantive change and some new 

policy that’s being put into legislation. So it’s a good 

opportunity to be able to actually get up and speak to a bill with 

some substantial changes to it, and I’m thankful to have the 

opportunity to do that. 

So what we have from the Ministry of Environment here is 

basically a rewrite of the old prairie and forest fires Act from 

1982. And as you read through the former Act or the Act that’s 

currently in place, you can see that it is one from a number of 

decades ago, and certainly a rewrite I think in this circumstance 

is appropriate. It’s 30 years old, and there’s been a number of 

amendments to it over the years. But at this point in time, it’s 

appropriate and I think a good move on the part of the ministry 

to update and modernize not only the language in the previous 

Act but also the activities, reflecting the changing nature of 

activities in the forest fringe here in Saskatchewan after 30 

years. 

 

We see a number of measures being introduced in the bill, and 

I’ll speak to a few of them individually, Mr. Speaker. Overall 

we know that there has to be careful balance in the management 

of the forest resources in Saskatchewan and the industrial 

activity that takes place in the forest, and also to protect and 

ensure that wildfires don’t destroy. As we know, wildfires can 

be very destructive and indeed can spread quickly and over 

boundaries that we may not recognize. For example fire can 

start in the national land, either in DND, Department of 

National Defence, land or on a First Nations reserve or in the 

national parks. It could spread into the provincial Crown land 

and even into rural municipalities. So there’s quite a few ways 

for forest fires to be managed, and certainly the province has a 

big role to play in that. 

 

I think there’s some major changes that need to be talked about 

in this bill, and they are represented in some ways under 

different parts of the Act that are now being presented, different 

parts of the bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we have I think one of the first ones I wanted to talk to is 

part VI of the new bill. It’s called industrial or commercial 

operations. If you look in the old Act, it’s mostly found around 

section 21 of the Act that’s currently in place. And you will see 

if you go through that, that it’s a very short section. And there’s 

actually three sections under the existing Act, sections 21, 22, 

23, and I guess 24, that are dealing with industrial activities. 

 

This portion of the Act has been considerably expanded, and I 

think what’s notable for many in the province, and particularly 

those who are conducting activities in the forested area of the 

province, the responsibility now for industrial or commercial 

operators to do a heck of a lot more than they had to do in the 

existing Act, Mr. Speaker. And I think the most important thing 

for people of those types of industries and commercial activities 

to note is the requirements under section 20 of the new Act, 

sections 21 and 22 and then 23 and 24. So this is all under part 

VI of the new bill. 

 

Section 20 is a very, very substantial change, and it’s something 

that people need to take note of because what it requires is that 

any industrial or commercial operator in the forested area, or 

what they call designated lands under the Act, are required now 

to prepare and submit to the minister for consideration a 

wildlife prevention and preparedness plan. So not only are you 

out there conducting your business — and I’ll get into detail of 

who these people are in a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but 

anyone who’s conducting these activities as defined under the 

Act are now required to prepare and present a plan. The plan 

has to be approved by the minister or his designate. And there’s 



4376 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

a number of things that can happen if that individual or that 

operator doesn’t follow the plan or if they refuse to submit a 

plan and continue with their operations. 

 

One of the interesting pieces of the timing of these plans is that 

these preparedness plans have to be submitted, under 20(1)(a), 

before the start of a wildfire season. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

do you know when the wildfire season starts? Do I know when 

the wildfire season starts? This is something that is prescribed 

by regulation. So any operator in the province who’s operating 

in these designated lands now has to seek out in the regulations 

when the wildfire season is about to start. And if they start their 

operations before the wildfire season, they still have to submit 

their plan. Or if they start after the wildfire season, they still 

have to submit a plan before they can start to conduct their 

activities. 

 

Now I just want to talk a little bit about the definition of 

operator and industrial and commercial activities. If you go to 

the definition section in the new bill and look under industrial 

or commercial operation — that’s section 2(l) — you will see 

that: 

 

“industrial or commercial operation” means: 

 

an activity carried on in connection with forestry 

operations . . . 

 

I’ll just stop there for a second, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Forestry 

operations can include a wide range of activity. And we’re not 

exactly sure if this will apply to people that are cutting firewood 

for their own personal use or perhaps selling firewood, small 

operations like that. Will it include berry pickers and people 

who harvest different types of edible materials from the forest? 

Are they required to submit a preparedness plan and follow all 

the rules we see?  

 

If I go on the list here, the types of activities, it continues on by 

saying “. . . mining, oil and gas operations, mineral exploration, 

road construction and maintenance, the operation of public 

utilities, outfitting, peatmoss operations, the operation of 

institutional camps and railway operations.”  

 

And it goes on in the next subclause to say “any activity or 

development, other than one mentioned [above] . . . that is 

prescribed in the regulations or the code.” Well that’s a very, 

very broad definition, Mr. Speaker. And my concern, I think 

those people who conduct activities in the forest fringe or in the 

forest itself will really need to pay attention to whether or not 

they fall under this definition. Because if they don’t and if they 

don’t prepare the plan and submit it before the start of the 

wildfire season . . . So we’re talking about some fairly remote 

operations that won’t have easy access or knowledge of 

regulations passed defining when the forest fire season starts. 

They won’t have ready access to how to fill out these forms and 

these plans. And there’s a lot I’ll speak more about in terms of 

how these plans must be prepared. 

 

So I think there’s a chance that . . . There better be . . . I’m 

really hoping the ministry has an education program in place 

that will really inform people and ensure that they have easy 

access to these forms and access to help filling them out and 

access to education on how to prepare a preparedness plan that 

meets the ministry’s requirements. 

 

I think most of these people that are operating these kinds of 

smaller operations in forested land are very, very aware of 

forest fire and the significance of forest fire protection and 

prevention. And I mean they live up there; they understand it 

carefully. But if they haven’t had any expertise designing plans 

that meet ministry requirements, I’m suggesting that the 

ministry will need to provide considerable assistance and 

support to those types of people in order to ensure that they 

don’t fall under the penalty clauses. 

 

And I’ll note, just on that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that under 

part X of the new Act, the penalties have actually been doubled. 

So an individual can now receive a fine up to $500,000 instead 

of $250,000, and a corporation could receive a fine up to $1 

million for each day that they’re in violation, and that’s up from 

$500,000. 

 

So certainly the ability of an individual to meet all the 

requirements under this new part of the Act is something I think 

is going to require some education and assistance from the 

ministry in order to ensure that people don’t fall foul of the law 

without realizing that they’re doing so. And as I say, these are 

folks who are very, very aware and knowledgeable about forest 

fires and how they’re started and how important it is to ensure 

that they’re prevented. 

 

Another thing about the definition that’s not entirely clear to 

me, we have outfitters being included in the definition. There’s 

so many outfitters in the North that have been operating for 

decades and in some case centuries and millennia in terms of 

trapping and hunting in the area. And this requirement for a 

wildfire prevention preparedness plan and that has to be in . . . 

This is section 20(3) which says, “The wildfire prevention and 

preparedness plan must be in a form and contain the 

information prescribed in the regulations or the code.” 

 

So these outfitters are going to have to read the code and the 

regulations. They’re going to have to access the form. And 

they’re going to have to ensure that it’s submitted in time for 

them to begin their operations or before the wildfire season, 

which again is being prescribed in regulations. So this is 

something that I think is going to be very onerous for people 

who have been operating in the forest for many, many years. 

And I’m really hoping — the minister didn’t speak to this — 

but I’m hoping that he and his officials are going to ensure that 

people have the tools they need to meet the requirements of this 

new plan. 

 

I mean, certainly we know that the larger industrial operations 

— mining, oil and gas activities and even, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

activities of public utilities and railways — are being included 

in this. That makes sense. It totally makes sense. Those people 

are conducting activities in the forest area. They need to be able 

to file these plans, and they have the resources and the 

wherewithal, I would suggest, to ensure they meet those 

requirements. But it’s for the smaller operators and smaller 

individuals in the outfitting area, or as I say, berry picking, 

mushroom picking, all those types of people will fall under this 

Act, but they may not realize that they’re required to do so, and 

they could be subject to fines. So I’m hoping the education 

process will be well thought out. 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4377 

The minister talks about a code that’s forthcoming and 

regulations that are forthcoming under this Act. It’s difficult to 

speak in the abstract, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’ve mentioned 

this before. But certainly we’ll want to have an opportunity to 

look at this code, look at the regulations to see if they meet the 

intentions that he’s stating this bill is achieving. So again we’re 

just going to have to wait and see and have a look at them when 

they come out. So we’re not sure how that’s going to work. 

 

We also know that under section 20(4), the minister can 

delegate any of his powers under this section to a ministry 

officer or an enforcement officer in The Parks Act. So a lot of 

folks in the field are going to be given the responsibility of 

reviewing these plans and enforcing them and making sure that 

they’re being submitted. So there’s going to be a pretty onerous 

task I think for some of the ministry officials as well. So it’s a 

big change. And I know we’re hoping that it’s properly staffed 

and that the minister ensures that his own officials are given the 

tools they need to help the operators comply with these plan 

requirements. 

 

Section 22 is a fairly long section that talks about orders that 

can be made by the minister if the operator doesn’t prepare this 

plan. And the minister will have some very, very powerful . . . 

well some great powers to stop that activity, which is 

appropriate I think if necessary and people are defying the law. 

It certainly is something that we want to know that the minister 

can do. There’s a number of things under that Act that I won’t 

go into detail. But certainly there’s some strong powers here for 

the minister to ensure that people are submitting and preparing 

and submitting proper plans. 

 

And there’s, going on from there, Mr. Speaker, there’s a section 

on railways, which as you can imagine, there’s fire hazards in 

relation to the operation of a railway. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The other part I wanted to talk about is the part VIII which talks 

about new developments on designated lands. And there’s a 

new buzzword I guess, if you want to call it, that the minister 

and the officials have included in this section, and it’s called the 

interface wildfire hazard. And there’s a rating and an 

assessment that is being used. Now what’s going to happen here 

. . . This is for new developments on designated lands. When 

we talk about designated lands, those are Crown lands. They’re 

not within an RM [rural municipality] but they’re Crown lands. 

But as you can imagine, there is a lot of activity going on in 

Crown lands in the forested area in Saskatchewan, and this is a 

whole new regime for new developments. 

 

So this is part VIII of The Wildfire Act, proposed wildfire Act, 

and it’s called new developments on designated lands. So 

there’s something called an interface wildfire hazard, and what 

we’re going to see is that for the purposes of this Act . . . This is 

section 29: 

 

For the purposes of this . . . [Act and] subject to the 

regulations, the minister may undertake or cause to be 

undertaken an interface wildfire hazard assessment of all 

or any designated lands to determine the . . . hazard rating 

for . . . [that] land. 

 

And then under subsection (2), there is a requirement here. 

“Subject to the regulations and the code, an interface wildfire 

hazard rating must establish design, construction and vegetation 

management requirements for any new development.” 

 

This is a very significant change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the 

current Act. So this is again something that will require a fair 

bit of education and I believe working with people who are 

doing development in the designated areas. And so this is 

something that we’ll be looking for some additional information 

on as we go through this new regime. 

 

Section 30 is called requirements for new developments, and 

under that section, “No person shall undertake a new 

development on designated lands except in accordance with this 

Part, the regulations, the code and the interface wildfire hazard 

assessment mentioned in section 29.” And we don’t have a lot 

of information at this point on what those assessments will look 

like and how they will be designed. Again we have to wait for 

the regulations and the new code that has been promised in 

order to fully assess this. 

 

Another section that isn’t new that I think is just of interesting 

note is section 45, powers regarding terrorist activity. And I was 

interested to see this clause. It was introduced originally in 

2003, so you can see it was a response to some of the 

happenings in the world at that time but that we do have . . . and 

it’s been kept whole in the new Act regarding powers regarding 

terrorist activity. So interesting to see something like that in the 

Act, and it’s a historical reflection of things that were going on 

12 years ago. 

 

In part X I talked earlier about the hiking up of the fines. We’re 

now doubling . . . The fines are doubled from the previous Act. 

What we also find in this part X, which is called offences, 

penalties, and administrative penalties, we find additional 

powers of the court. So the court has several new powers that 

are available under section 47, section 48, and section 49. 

 

Under section 47, the court, if they’ve convicted somebody, can 

make a number of orders now. They could prohibit the person 

who’s convicted from doing anything that in their opinion 

would result in a continuation of the offence. They can direct a 

convicted person to pay to the Crown an amount of money as 

compensation for all the costs that were incurred for things like 

controlling, extinguishing the fire, but it goes on to say, “the 

costs necessary to rehabilitate or reforest the land,” and to 

replace costs for any Crown property or equipment that was 

damaged or destroyed. So there’s a number of orders that the 

court can now do that were not in the old Act. 

 

We can also, under section 48, we see the minister can now 

apply for a compliance order. So here the minister can go to a 

judge and get an order compelling that person to comply with 

the Act or with a wildfire prevention or preparedness plan. So 

you may file a plan, have a business, sell your business. The 

new owner comes along, and if he’s not following that plan, the 

minister can get an order from the court requiring him or her to 

follow that plan. And there’s a number of other types of things 

that the minister can apply for in terms of ensuring that people 

comply with the Act and with their plans. 

 

Another new section — and I think this is an interesting one — 



4378 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

is a section regarding vicarious liability. So this means that 

people, even if you’re not physically present but if you should 

have known that whatever was happening on that area that you 

have control over in some way, is that you can be also 

convicted of the offence. So I think it extends quite 

appropriately responsibility for fires even though if people 

should have known or ought to have known that fire was likely 

in terms of the activities that were going on, then they can also 

be held liable and be prosecuted of an offence under this Act. 

So I think that’s appropriate and something that certainly will 

place responsibility where it’s due. 

 

Under part XI we see that the inspections and investigations 

section has been greatly expanded. And again I think this is 

appropriate. As I mentioned at the onset, that the modernization 

of this type of Act has to reflect the types of activities that are 

going on in the forest fringe. 

 

We see in part XII, under the general part, we now have a First 

Nation being included in the ability of the minister to enter into 

a fire control agreement with. And my only issue there is in 

terms of the definition itself. We have the definition using the 

word band as the defined term, and really in this day and age it 

should be First Nation. Although we know that they’re still 

referred to as Indian bands within the Indian Act, I think the 

general use these days is to just define them as First Nations. So 

that would be something that really probably should be fixed. 

 

We see under the regulations section — there was obviously a 

regulations section in the old Act — this one is greatly 

expanded as well. There’s a much larger description of the 

types of regulations that could be passed under this Act. And I 

guess those are the main changes. 

 

I think one of the most important clauses though, that I’m 

pleased to talk about in terms of this bill, is the responsibilities 

of rural municipalities when fires occur within a municipality. 

And we know that many rural municipalities were very 

concerned earlier this year about responsibilities for Crown land 

fires that occur within the RM boundary. And the original 

proposal from the ministry was that the government may come 

in and handle the fire if the RM couldn’t handle it, but that the 

RM would have to pay. We know we heard from a number of 

rural municipalities that were very concerned about the onerous 

cost that would be imposed upon them if this went through. 

 

And in fact we re-raised the concerns in the middle of April 

here in this legislature about what we were hearing from RMs 

and the unfairness of the proposed changes. And I note with 

interest that by the middle of May, a month later, the province 

indicated and the minister indicated that he was going to back 

off of that proposed change. And we certainly appreciate that 

the minister heard the people and was listening to what we were 

raising here in the House and that he saw fit to back off on that 

proposed change. 

 

So what we see now is in section 11 which is titled, “Rural 

municipality responsible for all fires within the municipality,” 

that it has a list of all of the things they are responsible for. And 

it includes private land and occupied Crown land, lands within 

an environmental reserve or public or municipal reserve, roads, 

rights of way, any structures, vehicles, landfills, transfer 

stations, and waste collection sites, and they’re responsible for 

controlling the fire and paying the cost associated with that. 

 

But the big clause I think that’s very important to the rural 

municipalities in the forest area is (2) which says, “If a wildfire 

originates within that part of a wildfire management area that is 

in a rural municipality, the minister is responsible for 

controlling and extinguishing the wildfire.” And I think that’s 

something that certainly many, many rural municipalities in the 

forest fringe area will be pleased. And certainly there was an 

article in the Northern Pride in Meadow Lake indicating that 

this was something that was indeed welcomed when the 

minister agreed to back off on that change. So we were very 

pleased to see that, Mr. Speaker, as part of the rewrite here for 

The Wildfire Act. 

 

And at this point I think, Mr. Speaker, that that pretty much 

wraps up my comments at this point in time. I look forward to 

having an opportunity in committee to examine some of the 

questions we have in more detail and get some more answers 

from the minister and his officials. So that concludes my 

remarks on Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 

Minister of Environment that Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 111 — The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise to Bill 111, The Personal Care Homes 

Amendment Act. I think before talking a little bit about this bill, 

I think it’s important to discuss what a personal care home is 

versus a long-term care home, or which is otherwise a special 

care home, in some parlance a nursing home, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So a personal care home is privately operated, although it is 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4379 

regulated by the provincial government, so regulated and 

monitored, as opposed to a long-term care facility which is 

mostly publicly funded, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this response, 

this personal care homes amendment Act is dealing specifically 

with the privately run personal care homes which generally deal 

with a lower level of care. The individuals who are living in 

personal care homes generally require a lower level of care than 

you would find in a long-term care facility, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

This bill in itself will . . . The legislation put forward is to allow 

the opportunity for inspections of personal care homes to be 

placed online so the public has access to this in order to be able 

to better choose which personal care home they or their family 

members may end up residing in, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do 

know my two colleagues here, who are both lawyers, have both 

pointed out that they’re not sure why this legislation is 

necessary in terms of being able to put these reports on personal 

care homes online. I know the minister has said that. But I 

know my two colleagues have raised that as a possibility that 

legislation may not have been necessary to be able to do this. 

 

The minister in his second reading speech points out that this 

change, this need to have more accessibility to information 

about personal care homes, comes directly from a 

recommendation from both the Ombudsman and the Provincial 

Auditor. So both the Ombudsman and the Provincial Auditor 

have in fact called for increased transparency around 

inspections and monitoring of these facilities. 

 

So again though, I do have two colleagues who have raised the 

question of whether or not the legislation is necessary. I am not 

a lawyer myself and, not knowing the intricacies or the ins and 

outs of this, I am not sure myself. But we do have this Bill 111, 

The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act before us. 

 

I do think, in the larger picture of things, we’ve been talking a 

great deal this last six to eight months or so about care for 

seniors here in Saskatchewan. I know Carrie Klassen was here 

in the spring and raised some very serious concerns. I guess one 

might say she sounded the alarm about concerns in long-term 

care with seniors. She flagged the gross understaffing in many 

cases of many long-term care facilities, the ones that are 

publicly funded. 

 

And following many questions in the legislature, where initially 

the minister had said that there was no cause for alarm, the 

minister did agree to embark upon a CEO tour, checking out 

some of these long-term care facilities and reported back. Well 

the report was done in the summer and I know we didn’t have 

access to that at that point. It wasn’t a public document. But the 

opposition had done a freedom of information request, and 

coincidentally enough in the fall, just a couple of months ago, 

the report was released the day of or the day following the due 

date of the freedom of information request, Mr. Speaker. So it 

took that information request to dislodge this report from the 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And it did raise some very alarming concerns. Seniors, 

continent seniors being left to soil themselves because there was 

nobody there to be able to get them to the toilet. It showed 

stories of seniors who were being woken up at 5:30 in the 

morning because there wasn’t enough staff to be able to get 

them up at the appropriate time, at their desired time. Just 

because you’re in a long-term care home doesn’t mean you 

should have to get up at 5:30 because there’s not enough staff to 

help you when you’re ready to get up, Mr. Speaker. It speaks to, 

well, a serious lack of . . . understaffing, but in essence a lack of 

rights. 

 

When seniors become residents in long-term care homes, by 

and large they seem to relinquish some of these rights that you 

and I have — the right to dignity and a good quality of life. Not 

because staff aren’t doing the very best that they can. You hear 

story after story from seniors who speak very highly of the staff 

that are there, but they speak of the serious understaffing in 

many of these long-term care facilities. 

 

It’s interesting. The government just two years ago quietly 

removed the reference to sufficient staffing in regulations, so 

totally watered down the minimum care standard in these 

long-term care homes. It used to be two hours and that was 

removed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I know that the minister’s 

gotten up and said, well it’s really important to have 

individualized or personalized care, which is absolutely true. 

But the point of a minimum standard is that the care can’t drop 

below that bar, that every person is entitled to at least this 

quality of care, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the point about having a 

minimum level of care and having a minimum care standard. 

 

I know the minister in question period has talked about people 

in long-term care. I think actually he used the words, 20 

minutes. Perhaps there are some people in long-term care who 

only need 20 minutes of care here in Saskatchewan, but I would 

question that. Long-term care, by the time you reach long-term 

care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve been assessed at a very high 

level of care. So to think that a senior or anyone living in a 

long-term care facility would only require 20 minutes of care is 

hard to accept. It’s possible, perhaps, but I would say that it is 

doubtful. People who are long-term care are assessed at what 

used to be level 3 and level 4, much higher care level needs than 

others, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We have heard cases. Sylvia Phillips who was waiting for a 

long-term care bed who sat in a hospital, an acute care facility, 

for seven weeks waiting for long-term care. She had suffered 

from some dementia and had some trouble taking care of 

herself, and staff again had been run off their feet. And her own 

family used up all their vacation days — they weren’t from 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and they ended up having to hire 

private staff to come into the hospital to ensure that their mother 

got to the washroom and got fed. I think that that story around 

eating and nutrition has been one that’s repeated itself. The Law 

Reform Commission actually speaks to that, food and nutrition, 

being a huge issue in long-term care. 

 

So we think that the government had proposed a $10 million 

emergency action fund to deal with the difficulties in long-term 

care, but the reality is one of the largest health regions in 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatoon Health Region, the CEO of that 

health region actually identified that in fact this $10 million is a 

drop in the bucket. A good percentage of that $10 million 

would go to ensuring that every resident in long-term care there 

would receive two baths, and that’s just scratching the surface, 



4380 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. That this $10 million does nothing to 

address understaffing. It’s a one-time fund. It doesn’t do 

anything to add to the complement of staffing. This is about 

fixing infrastructure. 

 

So I know that this is what the CEO, Maura Davies, has said. 

She’s talked about the problems in the Saskatoon Health Region 

around long-term care, and some of the issues are specifically 

understaffing and infrastructure. And this fund is just scratching 

the surface, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I know, I think that’s the 

broader issue here is that seniors’ care in Saskatchewan is in 

crisis, and we do have reason to be concerned. 

 

I’m the daughter of two aging parents, 80 and 81 years old, who 

are thankfully still in their own home. And I hope that with five 

siblings all still in Saskatoon that we will be able to ensure that 

our parents stay in their home for as long as possible. But it is 

worrisome to think about the state of long-term care, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I worry very much for my parents and their 

friends, that they will not have what they need. 

 

And again, I know that staff is working incredibly hard. And 

it’s all kinds of front-line staff. It’s nursing staff. It’s special 

care aids. It’s LPNs [licensed practical nurse]. It’s cleaning 

staff, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When Suzanne Stewart, a retired registered nurse who had 

worked here in Saskatchewan for a very long time had 

approached us, she had had the occasion to spend some time in 

a Saskatchewan hospital. And she had said that her time for her 

surgery in the hospital had shown her that things in health care 

had gotten far, far worse. She talked about feces on the 

bathroom wall and vomit on the floor, and cleaning being a 

very big issue. And coincidentally enough, in the CEO report, 

that was flagged as an issue as well. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the big issue here is around long-term 

care, around seniors’ care. Not just around long-term care but 

around home care. I know the government has put some money 

into a pilot project in Saskatoon and Prince Albert, adding to 

what they’ve done here in Regina, which is good. 

 

But I know there are many seniors who are still in acute care 

facilities in hospitals who are waiting for a long-term care 

placement, and unfortunately they will not be going home. 

Home care is not an option for them at this point in time, and 

they don’t have any place to go. And so this is not just about 

long-term care; this is about the whole continuum of care and 

making sure that our seniors have what they need. 

 

So again, I know the minister with Bill 111, The Personal Care 

Homes Amendment Act, will be putting up inspections of 

personal care homes in order to be able to provide individuals 

and families with information about different personal care 

homes in the province, which is positive, but I think ultimately 

the bigger picture here is about ensuring our seniors have 

dignity and quality of life in their latter years, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So I will conclude my remarks here and I know that we will 

have further questions when we get to committee, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So thank you for the time to speak to this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 111, The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 112 — The 

Accounting Profession Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter discussion as it relates to Bill No. 112, The 

Accounting Profession Act, here today. 

 

Certainly I look forward to putting a few comments onto the 

record here in this Assembly, but what I really look forward to 

is certainly being supportive of the good work of the accounting 

professions and designations in this province and making sure 

that this legislation is enabled and getting it into committee to 

do just that, to make sure that we are co-operative on that front. 

 

Certainly as it relates to accountants in this province and the 

designations, this is an important piece of legislation. There’s 

over 4,000 members, almost 1,000 students, and of course 

accountants in the accounting firms play an incredibly 

important role to Saskatchewan communities and to 

Saskatchewan businesses, to our economy as a whole. 

 

It’s those accountants that, in many ways, are there managing 

risks within organizations, managing risks within government, 

ensuring proper accountability for whether it’s taxpayers or for 

shareholders or for the investments that are placed. And really 

it’s accountants and their planning and their management that 

certainly assist in fulfilling a lot of the business and 

entrepreneurial opportunities within our province. 

 

So accountants are very important to this province, whether 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4381 

they’re fulfilling a role in the public service, whether they’re 

leading roles and managing risk in providing opportunities in 

business, or whether they’re in CBOs [community-based 

organization] and organizations across the province. 

 

What I recognize that’s important for this piece of legislation is 

that what I’ve heard from the three designations that are going 

to be amalgamated into one, that there’s support for these 

changes and in fact that those designations have driven these 

changes, that they’ve been involved in these changes, that 

they’ve directed these changes, as they should, Mr. Speaker, 

because these changes are arrived at in a democratic fashion by 

way of the members of each of the designations, whether it’s 

the chartered accountants or the certified general accountants or 

the certified management accountants. They’ve all gone through 

their respective processes for some time and democratically 

arrived at this position, this amalgamation, and they’ve decided 

democratically that this is in the best interest of the profession 

and in serving the people of this province. 

 

This also provides an opportunity for our accountants and for 

our firms to participate in potentially a broader way in an 

international perspective with new business opportunities, and 

certainly we want to enable that. 

 

And certainly to those leaders within their respective 

organizations, I simply want to say thank you to them for their 

voice in making this happen, for representing their members 

and for seeing this process all the way through to drive 

legislation that meets the needs of their members. We’ll have 

some questions in committee moving forward, but I have had 

the opportunity to sit down with the accounting designations 

and to discuss this Act and to discuss their opportunities that 

they are pursuing, and certainly I understand that those 

designations are supportive of these changes and, as I say, 

thankfully have driven these changes. The accounting 

professions designations have submitted a letter of support for 

the new joint venture, for the self-governing body that’s been 

created as the CPA, the chartered professional accountants, and 

we’ll certainly discuss these pieces moving forward. And we’ll 

be touching base as this bill proceeds to ensure that the 

accountants who have been involved in this process all the way 

through are engaged in there until it’s passed in a way that 

meets their needs. 

 

So at this point in time, I say thank you to all the accountants 

across this province, those that have engaged in this process. 

And certainly it’s important for us as a legislature to act in their 

best interests and to understand the democratic will that they’ve 

exercised and to be able to put these professions or this 

profession into a footing that allows it to engage from an 

international perspective. And I would like to say that because 

of the leadership of Saskatchewan’s accountants and their 

designations, that they have actually provided leadership that 

will allow Saskatchewan potentially to be one of the first 

provinces to have successfully and democratically achieved this 

new designation and this amalgamation. And certainly 

leadership is something that we know Saskatchewan people are 

always willing to provide. So I thank them for that leadership, 

look forward to future discussions, and I look forward to 

engaging in committee. 

 

That’s all I have to say at this point in time as it relates to Bill 

No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 112, The 

Accounting Profession Act, be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . shall this committee 

be referred to? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 109 — The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Glad to be recognized to join debate today on Bill No. 109, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation 

that we’ll be consulting on quite vigorously, Mr. Speaker, quite 

diligently, perhaps even more so than might otherwise be the 

case. 

 

From this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we watched this last 

budget come forward and the changes that were made 

impacting the different labour-sponsored vent cap vehicles in 

this province with a great amount of interest. And we’ll be also 

interested to see, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the limitations and 

the changes that were made at that time, to see how far down 

the line this particular piece of legislation goes to fixing some 

of the problems that were set in play this last budget, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Certainly venture capital is something that’s hotly sought after 

in any economy, but it’s particularly the case for the 

Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of the 

importance of venture capital to get those dollars into the hands 



4382 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

of the entrepreneurs to turn ideas into actual innovation within 

our economy and to in turn diversify our economy, Mr. 

Speaker, those are some very helpful, very important things that 

a government can do, working with the private sector and with 

venture capitalists, to ensure that that is the case. 

 

So again what happened last budget, Mr. Speaker, we watched 

with great interest, and we’re quite interested in this piece of 

legislation as it comes forward here today. 

 

In his second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

referenced the fact that the legislation will be amended to allow 

for the following: 

 

the Act to prescribe in regulation that a percentage of 

pooled funds annual net capital must be invested into 

innovation type investments. The minister will set the 

form by which tax credits will be issued to investors in the 

future and other housekeeping amendments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see here is again something that we think 

is an emergency tendency on the part of this government 

wherein they are moving powers that are previously held within 

the legislation into regulation. And the sort of accountability 

and transparency that is involved in the legislative process, Mr. 

Speaker, being shifted into the regulatory side of legislation, 

generally it takes away from the ability to be able to rise in this 

Assembly and say on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and 

to do that consultation with the stakeholders when changes 

come forward, that of course this opportunity that I’m availing 

myself of right now is not any longer possible. It becomes a 

much more closed thing in terms of the whims and caprices of 

the government of the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in terms of taking things out of the plain light of day that is 

available in this Legislative Chamber, moving powers into 

regulation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it diminishes the ability of the 

people of Saskatchewan to see very clearly what that 

government is up to. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, with the measures that came forward 

in last year’s budget and the impact that they had on the 

labour-sponsored venture capital funds in this province and the 

way that it put what had been a very successful approach to 

providing venture capital on a bit of a disadvantaged footing as 

compared to other jurisdictions, again that came forward in 

something as high-profile as the budget. But moving powers 

such as the determination of which pools must be invested in 

into the regulatory side of government activity, it diminishes 

that ability of people to hold this government to account and to 

plainly understand what’s being attempted in different 

legislation. So we look at that with great interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again going through the legislation and the sort of context 

in which this is happening, we also see now that the federal 

government is backing off on some of the tax incentives that 

have been in place for a number of years for labour-sponsored 

venture capital funds. Again an interesting development from a 

government that proclaims itself interested in growing business 

and working in a responsive and co-operative manner with the 

business sector. Mr. Speaker, interesting to see that coming 

forward. 

 

We see the minister outlining the intent being to increase 

investment in what the innovation type investments are, but 

wanting to ensure investments are properly managed and that 

the funds are carefully invested in local businesses and 

traditional Saskatchewan enterprises. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, how the minister came forward at budget 

time, I know it took a fair number in this sector off guard. So 

again in terms of that due diligence that any government should 

be doing but that is . . . In terms of the job of the official 

opposition, working to hold the government to account, we will 

be definitely, vigorously, and diligently going out to talk to the 

folks that this is not just a . . . that this is their livelihood. This is 

their daily occupation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So without much further ado, I think I am ready to move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act. I so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 108 — The 

Athletics Commission Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise today and enter into debate on Bill No. 

108, An Act respecting the Athletics Commission and 

Professional Contests or Exhibitions. 

 

It’s a very interesting piece of legislation we have before us. 

And of course we’ve heard so much about these kind of things. 

And I don’t know if others have been lobbied for movement on 

this type of thing. I know I have been over the last few years. 

 

And so it will be an interesting thing as we move this forward 

and we hear more. I hope we do hear more from the people 

involved. Quite often I mean these folks will contact the 

government, but it’s important to contact us too because it helps 

us to understand. Because so often we get our information from 

the media. And I can just tell you that, you know, I’ve been 

actively watching and following the acquired brain injury folks 

and what they do and their concerns, and we’ve not heard 

anything from them on this. And that’s a big, big issue, you 

know. 

 

And I know SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] has 

been actively involved in that. And we often think of acquired 

brain injury as something that comes from accidents, but 

ironically we’re seeing more and more that it’s coming from 

sports. And you know, we’ve heard of two big lawsuits in 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4383 

professional sports, one of course in the professional football 

arena with the NFL [National Football League] and the 

settlement of that in terms of concussions. Now we’ve just 

heard now that a group of NHL [National Hockey League] 

players have put together a lawsuit in a very similar fashion, 

talking about brain injury through concussions and the impact it 

has on the sport. 

 

So that has not really been addressed here, and I hope that we 

will hear more about that. And I’m going to take a minute to 

review the minister’s comments on this. And while I think it is 

an important area to actually have a position so we can have 

that discussion, hopefully he’s landing on the right spot on that. 

 

And I know that I don’t have all the information I would like to 

have on this to feel confident in saying yea or nay. I understand 

there are commercial interests of course that drive this, partly 

because there is a lot of these things going on across the country 

in terms of UFC [Ultimate Fighting Championship] and in 

different . . . boxing or different kind of fight type of things. 

And I think that it’s important that we have a good, frank 

discussion on that. 

 

But is this the right way to go? That’s something we’ll have to 

determine. And we hope that it is, that the government is not 

creating a situation where there are unintended consequences, 

particularly when it comes to health.  

 

And you know, we are dealing with a situation where, you 

know, as we do age more, and we have seniors and we have 

more and more seniors, that people are living longer, that in fact 

if there is an unintended consequence from creating this kind of 

athletics commission for professional contests or exhibitions, 

and what are the . . . We know what the intended consequences 

are: to regulate it. And the government’s very clear, it’s not to 

promote it. But the fact of the matter is that once you’ve opened 

the floodgates and we’re going to have this kind of licensing, 

that it will happen. It will happen, and then it becomes an issue 

of safety. And that’s really truly the issue here, isn’t it? And it is 

one that we would like to hear more about, we would like to 

hear more about. 

 

And I’m wondering, have they done a full set of consultations 

with everyone who could be connected to this? Obviously there 

are the people who are in the pro camp, those people who see a 

lot of value in this. And clearly they do, whether they’re the 

different sport organizations or whether they’re the sport 

tourism organizations who say, this kind of thing would be 

good for our cities and we could fill the hotels. We could fill the 

arenas. Fair enough, fair enough. But are we creating a situation 

that we might regret 10, 20, 30, 40 years down the road? 

 

You know, I think that I find it interesting. And we all heard the 

news of the big, big Rogers contract last week and what might 

be the future of Hockey Night in Canada. And it is an 

interesting thing, you know, when you listen to . . . I listened to 

CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio on Sunday on 

the way down, people talking about what hockey meant to them 

in the good old days. It is a sport. I feel it’s a sport. For many 

people though, for many people they feel it’s entertainment and 

the game doesn’t really start until the first fight starts. And I 

feel that’s relatively . . . That’s very sad. It’s really sad, you 

know, because it’s much more than that. There’s so much skill 

involved in hockey, and it’s a great sport. 

 

But what does it mean for smaller markets? What does it mean 

for cities like Saskatoon, was at one point hoping to land an 

NHL franchise. And now with these huge broadcasting rights 

and the package that came along with it, $5.2 billion over 12 

years, what does that mean? What does that mean? 

 

And of course this is all kind of related to the same question: is 

it sport? Is it entertainment? Is it entertainment, and what are 

the limitations around that in terms of quality of life? We’re 

promoting a certain thing, you know. It was interesting on 

Saturday, TSN [The Sports Network] had the 10 top hits, 10 top 

hits and they meant physical hits. And it was really interesting 

to see some of the brutal hits that hockey players were taking 

and some of the ones who were knocked out like Paul Kariya 

when he got hit, Eric Lindros. And they showed that video over 

and over again, and I couldn’t believe it. I couldn’t believe it, 

that hit. You know, but it ended or shortened a career, shortened 

a career. 

 

And folks were saying, well it’s part of the game. People 

should’ve known, people were aware of it. Yes but, you know, 

when you have such finesse players as Paul Kariya, you know, 

and others that you can go on and on. And I may be wandering 

a bit from the topic at hand when I’m talking about hockey and 

I should be talking about boxing, but boy, you know. What’s 

that old joke? Went to a hockey game and a boxing match 

broke out, you know. And so this is, I don’t know if it’s a sad 

commentary or just a commentary on sport in our world now 

that we, on one hand, emulate skill and finesse and a bit of risk. 

A bit of risk, I think that’s always part of sport. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But at the end of the day, you know, when you’re watching 

Montreal and Toronto on Saturday night and Montreal was up 

2-0 and of course then Toronto starts a fight, you know. And it 

sort of changes the gears, and you can see the people in the 

stands very happy about the fight, you know. But it does change 

the momentum, and we see that in junior hockey. 

 

And I just have to say, when we’re talking about sport and this 

kind of sport, then really I have some concerns. I have some 

concerns because how do you make sure that truly it is a sport? 

 

And it is interesting that, and as I read the legislation, it talks 

about, you know, well it has definitions. And of course it does 

talk about, talks about professional athlete, person who 

participates as a contestant in a professional contest or 

exhibition. I mean, that’s interesting because it doesn’t really 

talk about what a . . . You know, I know what it means to a 

professional teacher, it talks about decision making, about being 

paid, that type of thing. So you’re a professional athlete just 

because you sign up? That doesn’t sound like a really 

well-thought-out . . . He’s very aware of the decisions, the risks 

involved in the sport. I think that’s kind of a different type of 

definition. 

 

I was hoping that you would have a more fuller definition of 

what it means to be professional. Just somebody who 

participates — hmm, that’s it. And a professional contest or 

exhibition means a contest or an exhibition of professional 



4384 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

boxing, mixed martial arts, or any other prescribed sport. So we 

were kind of leaving that open, and we’ll have that in 

regulations. Maybe the next one will be hockey, you know. I 

just, I’m worried about where this may go. We need to know 

more information about this.  

 

But the point I wanted to say was part II talks about how the 

commission is set up, you know: 

 

Commission established 

3(1) The Athletics Commission is established. 

 

(2) The commission is to consist of an employee of the 

ministry who is to be appointed by the minister and who is 

to serve as chairperson of the commission. 

 

So that becomes, in a sense, the commissioner. So is that going 

to be something that somebody’s going to do off the side of 

their desk, or are they going to be quite actively involved? I 

would hope that in some ways that it could be someone who 

knows the area of the sport. So are now we going to create a 

position? And this is somewhat ironic that a government that is 

so keen about lean is setting up a commissioner. That’s an 

interesting concept, that we’re going to have a commissioner of 

sport here, a commissioner of the Athletics Commission. Either 

that person’s going to do off the side of their desk, or are they 

going to be a full-time commissioner? I don’t know. 

 

Is it going to grow into being a full-time commissioner? And 

will that person be hired as an athletics commissioner? So we’ll 

see the ad in the Leader-Post, The StarPhoenix, or The Globe 

and Mail: come to Saskatchewan and become the athletics 

commissioner for the province of Saskatchewan. That will be 

interesting, Mr. Speaker. And how do we rate that person? Is 

that person equivalent to an executive director, a deputy 

minister, or will we have to pay them some exorbitant wage 

because these people may be paying a lot of money in other 

provinces? We understand that seven other provinces have 

commissions, so what does a commissioner make in those 

provinces? Is that what we’ll be paying our commissioner here? 

 

When we see that discontent among, you know, public 

employees — and I’m thinking particularly of teachers — now 

will principals be comparing themselves to athletic 

commissioners? So I mean we’re getting into some grey area 

here, but I think that this Act opens up a lot of questions about 

what road we might be going down when we start to do this. So 

we don’t know, and we need a lot of questions about this, a lot 

of answers. We have the questions. There may be even more 

about this kind of thing. 

 

So I am really curious about this though because when you start 

a new sport, and particularly when you get the government 

actively involved . . . And it may be an honourable thing and 

the right thing that we do have our foot in the door; we have our 

finger on the pulse because we have the commissioner working 

out of the ministry. But really, is this an appropriate thing? Will 

there be a conflict of interest because we’re promoting the 

sport? We’re promoting the sport. You know, will the 

government then, because it’s got this high-priced 

commissioner, want to make sure that it actually succeeds? Or 

will there at some point have to say, you know what? We didn’t 

do our due diligence. We jumped on a bandwagon, and we 

should have got more information. This should have been more 

well thought out. 

 

So it would be interesting to know if other commissioners 

actually work for the provinces or the municipalities, what kind 

of background do they have, or do they do it off the side of their 

desk? Now we often see this government does a lot of things off 

the side of their desk, and so maybe this might be just that kind 

of thing, you know, off the side of the desk. And then we’ll see 

what happens from there. 

 

So I think there’s a huge responsibility for the commission and 

the commissioner, and I think this might have been the time 

where you wanted it to be arm’s length. I think it would have 

been quite appropriate to have somebody who, from the 

government, be on the commission. That’s reasonable. But to 

be the commissioner, I don’t know. I think that’s an interesting 

dilemma that we have. 

 

So will they be responsible for promotion? I’m not sure. Will 

the government in effect become, you know . . . And it is 

interesting, you know. And I just found out that, you know, the 

NHL lawsuit now has grown to over 200 players are involved 

and had 10 players at the beginning. 

 

So are we now opening up a lot of liability because the 

commissioner is an employee of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and in a sense that we may be the ones who will 

be on a hook for future liability. Now I don’t know if the 

government’s thought that through. They should of probably 

had this commission be arm’s length, but it’s not arm’s length 

because specifically it’s a function of this government. And I 

mean, will they consider it to be an agency of the government? 

Is this another Crown corporation? It would be interesting to 

think of that as that, you know. 

 

But the liability and all of that . . . you know because it does 

say, right, powers of the commission: issues licenses, events, 

and all of that in terms of this Act. Conduct any investigations 

and that type of thing. Collects data, conducts research, do the 

reports respecting professional boxing, martial arts, other 

prescribed sports, and what that might be, or professional 

contests or exhibitions and any other duties that may be 

designated by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. And do any 

other things the commission considers advisable or necessary 

for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Act. 

 

So you know, I do think that it is, this Act is something that is 

timely, though as I said, because there’s a real pressure to deal 

with this. But is this as well thought out as it might be? I’m not 

sure. Because I can just tell you, I’ve been thinking a lot about 

this, particularly when it comes to concussions and the 

emphasis on violence in sport and how does that play out. 

Because we know that while there’s some . . . And I have to tell 

you that boxing in so many ways can be a fine sport, but when 

it gets to . . . in a very unprofessional way. And this is what 

alarms me about this definition, it doesn’t define professional. It 

just says whoever shows up is a professional. I think there 

should be a little bit more to it than that. You know, you sign up 

or you participate in an event and all of sudden you’re a 

professional boxer? That doesn’t make sense. You know I think 

you need a little more rigour than that. So maybe, maybe there’s 

more to this than meets the eye, but it should really be in these 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4385 

documents that we’re examining today. 

 

So I want to take a minute to take a look at what the minister 

had said about this. And this goes back to November 18th, and 

he introduced this. And I know that there were in fact many 

people, in fact I think the day before, a couple of days before, 

he had people who were in the audience, in the gallery who 

were interested in this. And I can understand that they’re keen 

to see this move forward. I know that this was back on 

November 5th when people came to see and support the 

creation of a provincial athletics commission to oversee 

professional boxing and mixed martial arts events here in the 

province. 

 

And I’m just reviewing the minister’s introduction, and he talks 

about Pat Fiacco, former mayor of Regina and currently the 

CEO of Tourism Saskatchewan. And he is the current president 

of Boxing Canada. And I know he’s an outstanding referee and 

he’s travelled around the world. And he seems to be able to 

bring that . . . You know, it’s a physical toughness. It’s a mental 

toughness. And I think Pat Fiacco embodies all of that. And 

I’ve seen that. But there’s also the sense of fairness, a sense of 

sportsmanship, and so you know, it’s good to see that he’s 

involved. 

 

There was Anthony Scales, head of . . . Brazilian jiu-jitsu 

instructor and co-owner of the Complete Martial Arts and 

Fitness in Regina. Other folks were here as well. Malcolm 

Eaton, mayor of the city of Humboldt, was here and I 

understand representing SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association]; and Randy Fernets, who I know 

quite well, director of industry development and sports tourism 

for Tourism Saskatoon. And so they were here, and they were 

wanting to see the introduction of this bill. So clearly the sports 

side has been, and tourism side has been consulted. 

 

But I don’t know if they had invited the folks from the acquired 

brain injury group to have a conversation about allaying any 

fears or concerns they might have. I think that’s very clear that 

we have to make sure that when we are promoting . . . or 

regulating — and I know the minister is very clear — it’s not 

promoting. But when you’re regulating, and it’s out there, you 

know, and taking it out from the underground, which is a good 

thing, bringing it from the underground . . . Because then it is 

clearly even more dangerous. But I think we needed to . . . The 

government really should have cast its net further in terms of 

the consultations. 

 

It’s so clear that, you know, in a world where you can have a 

$5.2 billion media package for 12 years for one sport that kids 

are watching, families are watching, but then this ugly side 

comes out. And I would really hope that we can do a very good 

job here. But I have to tell you that, you know, even when my 

son watches some of these fights on TV I go, I can’t believe 

what we’re watching here. This is not sport. But this is I guess 

just many . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well just because you 

say it’s a sport doesn’t make it a sport. And it’s like 

professional boxing. Just because you’re a boxer doesn’t mean 

you’re a professional boxer. You’re a boxer. And I think we 

need to pay more attention to this. We need to pay more 

attention. 

 

And I think that if in our province we do this well — and I think 

we can do it well — that’s a good thing. But if we do it poorly 

and we do it off the side of our desk, it doesn’t help anybody. It 

doesn’t help anybody at all. 

 

But I want to just review some of the things that the minister 

talked about. And you know, he talked about how it’s a new 

Act respecting the Athletics Commission, professional boxing, 

mixed martial arts and exhibitions and other things. And we’re 

one of the only three provinces that haven’t taken the necessary 

steps to sanction the professional combative sports events. 

 

And I know this government is not alone, is not worried about 

. . . You know, I mean I always find it interesting when they 

bring up, we’re going to be the last, or we want to be the first, 

and they seem to be really inconsistent. But today it seems that 

they don’t want to be the last one to have an athletics 

commission. I think the problem is though, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is we want to do it well. We want to do it well. So we 

have a lot of information from the other seven provinces, and 

that’s what we’re really curious to know. And I’m hoping that 

the minister can share that with us. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And the one area that I really do have some questions about is 

the role and function of the commissioner. When the minister 

says it’s going to be an employee, is it going to be like the 

person who inspects the elevators? You just sign, and he’s very 

silent. You never see the person who inspects the elevators, and 

you have that little card up on the elevator. Is that the kind of 

role that person is? Or is it going to be a very public person? A 

very public person, and one that may have come out from the 

. . . up through the ranks in say boxing and understands what it 

means to be a professional boxer, what it means to have trained, 

what it means to have the different levels of fights. Or is it 

going to be a bureaucrat, as I said, who may sign those 

inspection certificates, and you never see them again? So I’m 

curious about that. 

 

So one of only three provinces that haven’t taken the necessary 

steps to sanction professional combative sports. And they’re 

concerned that many of these . . . what’s driving this is, in fact, 

that there’s been many unsanctioned events and they hold them 

without appropriate standards or safety precautions that help 

protect participants and spectators. And I think that’s a huge 

concern. And we often raise this issue around safety, and of 

course this would fall into that whole issue around occupational 

health and safety. And I think that’s a really critical, critical 

concern. 

 

And as I’ve talked about the fact that we’ve seen this both in the 

NFL and the NHL where the NFL had a very . . . the players 

had a very successful lawsuit around concussions and safety. 

And we’re not sure if that’s the end of it and that’s all, but that 

involved I believe several hundred million. I’m not sure of the 

number off the top of my head, but it was several hundred 

million, and how that was divided up amongst the players and 

ensuring that actually concussions are taken seriously. So if this 

is part of this, this is huge. This is huge. 

 

And if we can grow from the previous experience of the 

previous seven provinces and their rules and their regulations, 

that’ll be some of the questions we will want to know. And as I 



4386 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

said, it’s not just a matter of doing it off the side of the desk but 

really, really benefiting from the seven provinces and what 

they’ve done to protect participants and also spectators. 

 

Now it’s interesting to include spectators. We don’t often think 

of spectators, and I’d be curious to know what kind of dangers 

spectators would find themselves at these kind of exhibitions or 

events that would be different than a regular hockey game or a 

baseball game or a basketball game. I know sometimes 

particularly hockey fans can get out of hand. Maybe that they’re 

thinking along those lines already, anticipating that fans will get 

too, too engaged. 

 

Now I’ve not been to any of these kind of events, so I don’t 

know what fans do at these kind of events. Maybe they really 

get into it and it’s a dangerous thing, and how they’re going to 

protect the fans from the professional participants or how the 

participants are going to be protected from the professional 

fans. Now I don’t know. This’ll be the question. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Proof is in the pudding. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Proof is in the pudding. But that could be a 

dangerous thing. That could be a dangerous thing. This proof 

could be dangerous. I appreciate the engagement because I 

think this is what we should . . . this kind of debate. And so 

proof will be in the pudding. But I think it will be a danger, 

could be potentially a dangerous thing. 

 

I’m not sure I want to be one of those fans who will be 

experimenting and going to one of these events just to see how 

it goes. I think that . . . I don’t know if I’ll be up for that. 

Definitely, I will not be one of those participants. I would not 

recommend myself as a professional boxer or anything that 

would say . . . Yes, I might be talked into watching, but I don’t 

know about them. 

 

But he goes on to say this legislation is not about promoting 

mixed martial art as a sport, but as regulating it, and as 

regulating this sport, we help eliminate fights putting athletes, 

in some cases, children at risk. So I’m curious about that, that 

statement there about children. Are we talking about . . . Now I 

do think that he refers to an age limit in this. Now maybe I’m 

not sure what the . . . if there is an age limit. So that’ll be again 

another question because he does talk about children and what 

that means and what we see in that area and what kind of . . . 

particularly if there will be a lot of research done on that. 

 

And again it will be growing from the experience of the other 

seven provinces. Do they have age limits? And what does that 

mean? And again, I don’t know if this is discriminatory in terms 

of youth and older, but I think the . . . This is one that will be 

interesting to do this. 

 

And it would be interesting to know, Mr. Speaker, how many 

illegal fights? What has been the trend here in Saskatchewan 

around illegal fights, you know? And so what . . . Has this been 

really a problem here in the province? How many fights have 

there been? What’s been the situation behind them? Is it 

something that the police are calling about and saying, listen, 

we’ve got to, we’ve got to do something about this. There’s just 

too many fights on the weekend. I mean I know there are fights 

on the weekend, but whether they’re this kind of fight, I don’t 

know. But this is the question we have. 

 

You know, I live just off of Idylwyld and I know right across 

the street, in the bars across the street, there’s the odd fight. 

Now I don’t know if we’re talking about that kind of fight . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I only hear about them and I don’t 

go out there to check. Again as a spectator, it’s not wise to go 

out after midnight to check out what’s happening in the parking 

lot across the street. But, Mr. Speaker, I hope we’re not mixing 

up apples and oranges in terms of illegal fights here. But again, 

it’s important. 

 

So he talks about the Criminal Code and legalizing the sport of 

mixed martial arts across Canada and that there has to be some 

sort of provincial athletics commission or similar established 

body. And that’s important. And so that we have the vehicle 

and we can do it now, and that’s really clear. So there’s some 

clarity and an opportunity to put this forward and make sure. 

And again the minister keeps coming back to this point that we 

don’t have participants put at risk for serious injuries. 

 

Again this would be the case where I would like to know how 

much . . . How many fights are there? What kind of situation 

are we having? I think it is an important discussion to have just 

because I know that there is a real presence. And we hear, and 

people talk about . . . And as I said, we do get lobbied about this 

an awful lot. But I think that it’s one that I would like . . . And I 

hope the minister . . . I know sometimes they keep track of 

some of our questions, and I hope the minister would be 

prepared to answer that question about how many illegal fights 

because he’s referring to it a few times, this illegal activity. So 

could he describe that illegal activity? 

 

You know, sometimes we come to committee meetings and the 

officials are often very prepared, very prepared and can answer 

any question, but sometimes they’re not ready for questions. 

And I think one question I would hope that we’ll be asking is to 

describe the illegal activity that’s happening in Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s illegal fights, that type of thing. What’s really the 

context, the environment that we’re really creating here, and 

how much of this . . . You know, it’d be interesting to know 

how much of this professional sport is already in existence in 

Saskatchewan and is waiting for a venue to happen, but in fact 

have to travel to other provinces to do their sport, and what kind 

of things we’re missing. So there’s a lot of, there’s a lot of solid 

questions that we’ll have to get some answers to. 

 

So he goes on, Mr. Speaker, and he talks about three main 

reasons that he’s talked about. And the first is, the government 

is committed to establish a provincial athletics commission and 

will be able to design to . . . “This commission will be designed 

to ensure a consistent standard of qualifications, rules, 

regulations, and safety protocols for all participants and 

officials across the province.” 

 

Now he’d also talked about earlier protecting participants, 

spectators. So I don’t know if he’s just neglected that one in the 

first reason, but I think that we’ll be making that connection for 

him because he did say, and I don’t know if it’s in the Act, 

about protecting spectators. I don’t see right off the top of . . . 

And so we’ll definitely have to find out more about that. I think 

that’s an important, very critical part. 

 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4387 

He also talks about ensuring “. . . that competitors participate in 

appropriate pre-fight medical testing such as blood tests, 

concussion screening, and eye exams . . . [and ensuring] that 

qualified medical staff and event officials are hired, that 

promoters and competitors have the proper licences, and that 

promoters have suitable liability insurance.” 

 

And that’s hugely important, especially that last part about 

liability insurance, and hopefully that that is the kind of liability 

insurance that has fair access. I don’t know if I want to use the 

word easily access but fair access for injuries such as 

concussion, that because of the limitations of the definition of 

professional athlete, that you’re essentially just a participant. 

And I think that should be stronger. I mean it talks about 

qualified medical staff. You would think that you would have 

qualified competitors so that you’re not having competitors who 

really shouldn’t be in the fight fighting, but there’s some level 

of that. 

 

Now he does go on in reason three, talks about “. . . will also be 

responsible for tracking competitors’ fighting histories and 

ensuring safety protocols are enforced.” So there will be five 

. . . So that’s again about the closest that we get to any sort of 

professional standing. Or who are these athletes and what are 

they . . . Are they just . . . You know, we keep track of their 

histories, and that’s a good thing so if there is potential for 

concussions and repeat concussions, that that’s happening. Now 

it will be interesting to know if this is part of a national tracking 

system so that fighters across the country are in the same 

database. Is that the plan? Which I think would be a reasonable 

plan. So that if you’ve had two or three concussions in this 

province, that they would know about that in Ontario. And 

likewise, if you’ve had a serious concussion in Ontario and 

you’ve come out here to fight, that in fact that we’re aware of 

that as well. So you know, I think this is all very interesting and 

I think this is something that we should be debating. 

 

And I just want to go on to . . . He talks about five of the seven 

provinces that regulate professional MMA, mixed martial arts 

events, have provincial commissions. And from speaking with 

these other provinces, we know that that tends to be the most 

effective governance model. So fair enough. There’s benefits: 

consistency, rules, regulations, processes across the province. 

And that’s fair. I think that’s a good idea. You would not want 

to have a situation where, you know, tough rules in Regina or 

Saskatoon, then you go up to La Ronge and it’s the wild, wild 

west up north. That would not be a good thing. I think that you 

want to have it consistent right across the province, right across 

the province. And this is important stuff. Okay. So just to be 

clear on that, I think that makes a lot of sense. 

 

[16:45] 

 

What I’m looking for is a sense of how will this work in terms 

of again this commissioner. And I’ve talked about that at 

length, and I’m going to be very interested when we get a 

chance to meet with the minister and talk more about this in 

committee about, is this commissioner somebody who is 

stand-alone, you know, a specific employee dedicated to mixed 

martial arts and boxing? Or will he be doing it off the side of 

their desk? Again will it be the kind of thing you sign a 

certificate like you see in the elevator, or a very prominent 

commissioner that you might see like the CFL [Canadian 

Football League], where you’re out doing interviews and 

talking a lot about the sport and in fact promoting the sport? 

Now the minister’s been very clear that this is not about 

promoting the sport but it’s about regulating it. And I think 

that’s a good point. That’s a very good point, a valid point, and 

that the safety element is huge, huge. 

 

But I need to say that there is a lot of questions about this, and 

particularly when we’ve seen what’s happening in other sports 

that are actually not as combative but at many times are, and 

that’s hockey and football. 

 

And as I was saying earlier, when I saw the TSN’s top 10 hits, 

they were pretty major hits. And I would not want to be on the 

other side of those hits, that’s for sure, and how they can be, in 

a sport that’s as well regulated as hockey, it can be so very, very 

dangerous. And we’re seeing that where I was talking earlier 

about this lawsuit that started out with 10, and that now I 

understand it’s over 200 players. And this is a big, big deal. 

People are saying, you know, athletes are saying, I’m in it for 

the game. I’m in it for the sport. But I also have the rest of my 

life to live, and I don’t want to live with a concussion for the 

rest of my life, you know. The career of an athlete is short 

enough, and you don’t want it to be shortened by injuries that 

could have been prevented. 

 

And so this is something we’re going to be watching very 

carefully. And we understand that there are some very 

compelling reasons for moving forward with this. Obviously the 

Criminal Code has been amended to allow this to happen. And 

there are interests, whether it be tourism, that . . . And I 

understand it, tourism. We saw that with the Grey Cup, what a 

huge economic impact it had on the city and on the province. 

And in a much smaller way, this kind of thing could have, 

might have an impact in our cities as well. 

 

And it has definitely got a fan base. And people are very 

interested in it and want to see more of it. And they want to see 

it in our towns and in our cities. But I also know that there has 

to be more to it than that, and there has to be more due diligence 

than just saying, hey we can make a bit of money at this. We 

need to make sure that it’s done in the right way, the best way. 

 

So I know that my colleagues here will want to have an 

opportunity to speak to this bill and other bills before us. But as 

I said, I’ll be looking forward to the spring when this goes to 

committee, that we’ll be talking more about this and finding out 

a lot more about what the impacts are for this. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment 

of Bill No. 108, An Act respecting the Athletics Commission 

and Professional Contests or Exhibitions. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



4388 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2013 

Bill 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 102 — The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 

102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013. And I give some 

opening comments about this legislation that, I guess some 

changes of legislation that’s coming forward. And you know 

it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, and we talk a process about 

making sure government does its due diligence when it comes 

to making sure individuals that would be impacted by 

legislation. And I’ve talked about that earlier and I think it’s 

important, and many of my colleagues have said that. 

 

There’s sometimes maybe government and ourselves and 

individuals want to make sure, and we on our side are always 

arguing the point that make sure we have meaningful 

consultation, the process is done right. Whether you go out to 

the communities and those individuals that are going to be 

impacted by legislation, you sit down, you listen to their 

concerns and I guess their ideas, and sometimes . . . We know 

we have a lot of hard-working people in our province who do a 

great job and who have the expertise and the knowledge to give 

us good input and insight onto some of the legislation that are 

being asked by organizations, by individuals. 

 

But those individuals have a right to share their views and their 

concerns. And they don’t have a government that doesn’t 

respect . . . and a meaningful dialogue with them about impacts 

in legislation that will impact, whether it’s a municipality, 

whether it’s a First Nations community, whether it’s the urban 

centres, rural, North. Individuals have a right, organizations 

have a right to be consulted in meaningful . . . 

 

And I think about our trappers. I think about First Nations. 

There are many groups that feel like, yes, government, we ask 

you to pass legislation and bringing the legislation forward that 

protects, I guess, Saskatchewan residents. And some of the 

legislation that’s brought forward, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear. It’s 

good legislation. And we’ve said that. Sometimes we’ve 

worked in co-operation with government to bring legislation. 

And we do. We work together and work with organizations to 

say, yes, on both sides. We meet with them. We find out that 

it’s a good piece of legislation. It makes sense. It’s something 

that will protect the Saskatchewan residents. It’s somebody that 

will do some good for an industry. Then we say, yes, it makes 

good common sense. Let’s support that. 

 

And I think at the end of the day, that’s what we’re here to do. 

We’re all elected to make sure we carry on the business and 

protect Saskatchewan residents. 

 

But having said that, the track record of the current government 

hasn’t been too great when it comes to the duty to consult and 

accommodate. And that is a sad reality. And I’ve looked at that 

and I’ve mentioned it in this House about the way the new 

provincial park came to be. There’s a process. And when you 

have letters coming in from First Nations like La Ronge Indian 

Band clearly stating their concern, they do not support this. But 

the government says, but you know what? In 2007 we made a 

campaign promise and we said we would have two more parks, 

provincial parks. So you know what? We don’t really care who 

doesn’t like it. We’re going to go ahead and do it. 

 

Now if that’s what you call, oh, well, we met with some of the 

groups, the Aboriginal groups, some of the Métis and First 

Nations, and they’re happy with what we’re doing. Well it’s sad 

to say when you have letters, correspondence coming in and 

you see letters saying the way — that I received and I know the 

minister did receive and the ministry should have had at its 

fingers — about the way a group was not happy with the 

process of consultation. And when you have a group that’s 

saying they’re concerned about land that’s their traditional 

territory that you’re going to impact by legislation, by a new 

provincial park, and you go ahead on that when you have the 

letter, you have the concerns raised by a band, where it’s their 

traditional territory . . .  

 

And let’s talk about respect. And that’s sad when you see a 

government move forward to carry on in a way, and it wasn’t 

very . . . As far as I see it, if we’re going to go through 

meaningful consultation, it wasn’t very respectful to the First 

Nations. And it’s their traditional territory. And sometimes I 

wonder. We talk about the Supreme Court and rulings that 

come down and, you know, the duty to consult and 

accommodate Canada’s Aboriginal people. It’s very clear. But I 

would think the government would also take the same 

protection whether it was a rural area, whether it was an 

organization. And unfortunately this government has a track 

record and, I’m being very clear, it isn’t too great when it 

comes to the process, whether it’s labour legislation that they 

brought in. 

 

Oh, they talk about all the processes and how many people 

come forward to share their ideas, and we find out later it isn’t 

so. It isn’t so. It wasn’t as many people as we find out. I mean, 

you can say we consulted. Well did you consult three, four, 

twelve organizations? I can sit here and say that at the end of 

the day, we’re talking about meaningful consultation. We’re 

making sure that those individuals being impacted . . . 

 

And I know some of the ministers will go out and say that, and 

I’ve seen some of the challenges in northern Saskatchewan and 

the way some of the ministers have handled the process up there 

— after the fact. And they’re changing policies and regulations, 

rules, then they talk about, oh well, we’ll go out and meet with 

the residents and some of the leaders. And truly, it isn’t what’s 

needed. 

 

So having said that, having said that clearly, I’m going to go 

back and talk about some of the changes that are proposed in 

here. And the legislation that we’re talking about, Bill 102, 

didn’t take in land surveyors. When an organization or a 

company does work on a piece of property, they want to make 

sure they get paid. Whether you’re doing the construction, 

there’s different things that you do. You can put a lien on a 

property that gives you protection that you’ll get paid. If you’re 

not being paid, then there’s a lien against that property and that 

covers it for a time. 

 

And in here it talks about now land surveyors, on the request of 



December 3, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4389 

them, and I know some of my colleagues met with some of 

them when they were here a week ago or so, maybe two weeks 

ago. And members of this side got to talk to them and it’s 

something that would give them some more protection. So 

that’s a good thing, and the government did that part because it 

was requested by them. It’s a good thing. We agree it makes 

sense to include them with other groups that are in there to give 

them that protection, and if that’s easy to do — a change, an 

amendment to the legislation — well that’s great and that’s 

good. 

 

It also increases from one year to two years. There’s a provision 

in here that will give a two-year instead of a one-year window. 

There’s also taken out of here, from what I can get out of it, 

where it used to be 1,000 plus a 1 per cent, they are now going 

to the 1 per cent, using that when it comes to the contracts. So 

they have made some changes. They’re small changes that they 

have made, but if it protects one of the organizations that have 

raised the concern, that is obviously a good thing. 

 

So I know to cover the rest of the evening’s things that people 

have to go to, and I know my colleagues have a lot more 

discussions on this and in committee when it goes to committee 

they will ask more questions and we have had a chance to 

consult with individuals, so at this point, Mr. Speaker, I am 

prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 102. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4357 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4357 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4357 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4357 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4357 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4358 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4358 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4358 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4358 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4358 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4358 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4359 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4359 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4359 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4359 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Support for Potash Workers 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4359 

 Hopes for a Peaceful Resolution in Ukraine 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4360 

 Hip-Hop Artist Targets Bullying 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4360 

 Saskatchewan Curlers at Olympic Trials 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4360 

 Regina Business Celebrates 60 Years 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4361 

 Honours for Saskatchewan Physician 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4361 

 International Day of Persons With Disabilities 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4361 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provision of Firefighting Services 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4361 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4362 

 Labour Market Agreements with the Federal Government 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4363 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4363 

 Mental Health Services 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4364 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4364 

 Design of Children’s Hospital 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4365 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4365 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4366 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 127 — The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 2013 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4366 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4367 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4367 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4367 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4367 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4367 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4368 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4368 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4368 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 131 — The Appropriation Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4368 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 126 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4369 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4370 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4372 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4374 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act  

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4375 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4378 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4378 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4380 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4380 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4381 

 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4381 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4382 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4388 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY ON BILLS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 .................................................................................................................. 4374 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4374 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4375 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


	131203Debates_Corrected Pg4358.pdf
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS
	THIRD READINGS
	Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS
	Bill No. 107
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS
	THIRD READINGS
	Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013

	131203Debates_Corrected Pg4358.pdf
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS
	THIRD READINGS
	Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS
	Bill No. 107
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS
	THIRD READINGS
	Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013




