




















































Hansard: October 29, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 4A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 29, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3697 

 October 29, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

present a petition today calling for reasonable funding so all 

Saskatchewan students can do well. And we know classes in 

Saskatchewan schools are growing so fast that many classes 

have well over 30 students in them and many classes are now 

being taught in hallways and boot rooms. And in a time of 

economic boom it’s only common sense that schools receive 

appropriate funding so that all students, including First Nation 

and Métis students, can achieve their full potential. I’d like to 

read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

immediately increase financial support for all 

Saskatchewan students, including resources to limit class 

sizes, to provide for resources for students with special 

needs, to support English as an additional language, and to 

provide more support for Aboriginal education. 

 

And [Mr. Speaker] as in duty bound, your petitioners will 

ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent to own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our beautiful province in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School. I was by there this morning for the opening 

mass for the sanctuary that has been done over as a gym, and 

while that certainly beats some of the alternatives, Mr. Speaker, 

it cries out to the fact that there are 450-plus students at that 

school that deserve a gymnasium just like any other school in 

the city. The prayer in this petition reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the Sask Party 

provincial government to immediately commit to the 

replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 

Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from Moose 

Jaw, Weyburn, and Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today the Minister of 

Agriculture announced the fourth annual Saskatchewan 

Agriculture Student Scholarship. This scholarship is awarded to 

students in grade 12 and recent graduates entering 

agriculture-related post-secondary studies in 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are four scholarships to be awarded. One 

scholarship is valued at $4,000, and three runner-up 

scholarships valued at $2,000 each. To be eligible, applicants 

must produce a three-minute creative video or write a 

well-researched, fact-based 1,000-word essay on one of four 

themes. Those themes are, Mr. Speaker: agriculture solutions 

for a growing world; farmers and ranchers as environmental 

stewards; safe food that is responsibly produced; or agriculture 

as a modern, forward-looking industry. The deadline to apply, 

Mr. Speaker, is March 1st, 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture is an important driver of 

Saskatchewan's economy. Last year we were the top agri-food 

exporting province in Canada for a second year in a row, with 

$11.2 billion in exports. By investing in our young people 

today, we are supporting the future growth of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all Saskatchewan young 

people to consider a career in agriculture and apply for the 

Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Autism Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. October is Autism 

Awareness Month in Canada. Approximately 400,000 

Canadians live with autism. Paul Collins, author and father to 

an autistic child, described autism with these words: 

 

Think of it: a disability is usually defined in terms of what 

is missing . . . But autism . . . is as much about what is 



3698 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

abundant as what is missing, an over-expression of the 
very traits that make our species unique. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are moving words about an experience that 
affects many Canadians. One in 88 children in Canada is 
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. And for 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Collins’s words hit very close to 
home. 
 
We would also like to recognize the role of Saskatchewan 
Families for Effective Autism Treatment, or SaskFEAT. For 
over 10 years SaskFEAT has been advocating for services and 
support for individuals living with autism spectrum disorder, 
their families, and their communities. 
 
SaskFEAT points to an inequality of services for supports for 
individuals living with autism in Saskatchewan. Changes are 
essential so that services and supports are based on need rather 
than availability, geography, income, or IQ [intelligence 
quotient]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in expressing 
our gratitude to those who are working to ensure this 
government is responding to the needs of individuals living 
with autism spectrum disorder. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Helipad Certified for St. Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
month the helipad at St. Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan became 
certified by Transport Canada, marking it as the first certified 
helipad in the province. 
 
A ceremony was held on the helipad where a STARS [Shock 
Trauma Air Rescue Society] air ambulance helicopter touched 
down, followed by a ribbon cutting to officially open the pad. 
Marlin LeBlanc, whose life was saved thanks to the expediency 
of STARS, cut the ribbon as an honorary guest. 
 
This new landing pad will ensure that no matter the weather or 
time of year, there will be a place for STARS to land that is 
clear and has direct access to the emergency ward. It will allow 
patients to be transferred from Estevan to Regina General in 
only 45 minutes, compared to two hours without STARS. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this time will only decrease when the construction 
on the Regina landing pad is completed later this fall. 
 
Estevan Mayor Roy Ludwig made these comments at the event: 
 

With the coal mine and the power plants and all that we 
have going on in the oilfield, to say nothing of all the 
farming, we just couldn’t be happier that we were able to 
get this service with the STARS helicopter. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
thanking St. Joseph’s Hospital for hosting the ceremony, Sun 
Country Health Region and all of the contractors who ensured 
this project was completed. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Comments on Government Economic Track Record 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Here’s 
what the Leader-Post’s financial editor has to say about this 
government’s economic track record. 
 

From where I sit the government’s track record in 
economic development brings to mind Stephen Leacock’s 
famous phrase, “riding madly in all directions.” You could 
say it’s been two steps forward and three steps back. 

 
Mr. Speaker, riding madly off in all directions, two steps 
forward and three steps back. That’s not my assessment, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the independent assessment of the 
Leader-Post’s financial editor. But I agree with that assessment, 
Mr. Speaker. This government shut down successful 
government-industry partnerships like Communities of 
Tomorrow, SpringBoard West Innovations, the Entrepreneurial 
Foundation, and so on. 
 
It slashed the budget for regional economic development 
agencies and it drove the film industry out of the province. It 
has ignored northern Saskatchewan and it has failed to even try 
and close the Aboriginal education gap despite the fact that 
prominent economists tell us that Saskatchewan would gain $90 
billion in economic benefits if we did so. 
 
It’s no wonder the Leader–Post’s financial editor says, and I 
quote, “The Saskatchewan Party government’s economic track 
record is a checkered one.” Saskatchewan people deserve 
better, Mr. Speaker. They want a diversified economy. They 
want smart growth. And they want our prosperity to be 
sustainable for the long term. This government is failing to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

Saskatoon Ensemble Tours Ukraine 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, this past summer two Saskatoon groups, the 
Lastiwka Choir Ensemble and Pavlychenko Folklorique 
Ensemble together travelled and toured central and western 
Ukraine. 
 
Celebrating its 30th anniversary, the Lastiwka Ukrainian Choir 
Ensemble is under the direction of Larry Klopoushak. 
Pavlychenko is celebrating its 46th anniversary and is a 
Ukrainian dance ensemble under the artistic creation of Serhij 
Koroliuk. Their tour this past summer was the second concert 
performed in Ukraine by this combined ensemble, the first tour 
being 10 years ago in 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these groups are unique. They were the first in 
Canada to combine dancers with a live orchestra to perform 
vocal-choreographic compositions. The concert tour was a two 
and a half hour free show dedicated to the 125th anniversary of 
Ukrainian settlement in Canada to be celebrated in 2016. 
 
The concerts took place in five cities where every show saw 
packed theatres of up to 1,300 enthusiastic, energized audience 
members. The legacy show gathered wide acclaim and much 
attention in the Ukrainian media. 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3699 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these outstanding individuals for their efforts as fine Canadian 

Ukrainian ambassadors from Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Habitat for Humanity Home in Nipawin 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the 

House to tell everyone about a Habitat for Humanity dedication 

ceremony and sod-turning that took place in Nipawin on 

October 25th. It was a special day for Brenda, Ty, Brandon, and 

Jett who have worked hard for a new home to call their own. 

 

A home represents security, a sense of belonging, and a place 

where we can become proud, connected members of our 

community. Brenda’s family put in at least 500 hours to build 

their home and you can appreciate that makes for very long 

days, especially with an active family and a day job that 

requires attention too. 

 

I am proud that our government has helped two more 

Saskatchewan families achieve this goal by providing Habitat 

$100,000 to create two beautiful homes in Nipawin. In fact, 

since March of 2009, our government has invested 7.1 million 

to assist Habitat Saskatchewan affiliates in providing a total of 

130 homes for low- to moderate-income families in 

communities across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this includes the $2 million that our government 

committed to Habitat in the 2013-14 budget. This funding is 

double the amount provided last year and leads the nation in 

percentage of increases. Mr. Speaker, this is what the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth is all about — to provide a better 

quality of life for everyone who calls Saskatchewan home. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Melfort Business Wins Pizza With a Purpose Award 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

ask all members of the Assembly to look for a December issue 

of Canadian Pizza magazine. It will feature one of the many 

great businesses in the Melfort constituency. TJ’s Pizza of 

Melfort is the winner of the national Pizza with a Purpose 

Award. The Muntains, Tara and Lloyd along with their two 

teenage daughters, have been in business for four years — only 

four years — and have given endless support to the community. 

They are also recipients of several awards from the Melfort and 

District Chamber of Commerce, including Business of the Year 

— 11 employees and over for three consecutive years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, TJ’s Pizza was also a nominee two years ago for 

an ABEX [Achievement in Business Excellence] New Venture 

Award and this year was a finalist for the Community 

Involvement Award. 

 

It’s my pleasure to congratulate Tara and Lloyd Muntain and 

their daughters on receiving this award and wish them many, 

many years of success in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Special Care Standards and Staffing 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Sylvia Phillips has advanced 

dementia, and she’s been in Saskatoon hospitals for the last two 

months as she’s waited for a care home placement. Sylvia’s son 

Leon says the family has “been going through hell these past 

two months.” They maxed out their vacation days to be with 

her, but when they had to go back to work, Mr. Speaker, they 

felt they had no option but to pay for private care providers to 

go into the hospital at a cost of about $1,000 per week to simply 

help with their mother’s basics. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier: how can he explain 

why families are being forced to pay for private care providers 

to go into hospitals to help with their loved ones? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, while I certainly won’t speak to the specifics of the 

case, I am not aware of the specifics of this particular case, 

what I do know though, Mr. Speaker, is that as we work to 

renew long-term care facilities across the province, what one of 

our challenges in the 156 facilities, many of them that are aging 

in the province, is in many cases we are not able to provide the 

support that we would need for people with Alzheimer’s and 

dementia. 

 

The good news though, Mr. Speaker, in a number of new 

facilities, particularly in Saskatoon, and I can think of 

Samaritan Place, Mr. Speaker, that actually has a designated 

wing for people who have been diagnosed with dementia or 

Alzheimer’s or other related dementias, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again I can’t speak to this specific case, Mr. Speaker, but I 

would be pleased to follow up after question period. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, let me be clear. Sylvia’s son, 

Leon, isn’t frustrated with the hard-working hospital staff. In 

fact he calls these staff inspiring. What he’s frustrated with, Mr. 

Speaker, is the understaffed system. He says: 

 

There are not enough staff to help with the enormous task 

of feeding. If we were not there at meal times, mom would 

not be properly fed. On a number of occasions we were 

not able to make it to the hospital at supper time. Her meal 

arrived, no one helped her eat, and her meal was taken 

away untouched. 

 

So the Phillips family hired a private care provider to go into 

the hospital to help feed their mother. My question to the 

Premier: does he think this is an acceptable choice to give 

families — either pay for a private care provider to go into a 

hospital to help with their loved one’s care, or allow their loved 

one to go hungry? 



3700 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we certainly know through work that we did, for 

example this summer with touring all of our long-term care 

facilities, with the work that we do on an ongoing basis with 

our health regions when it comes to acute care facilities, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re always working to address issues around 

staffing, around the support that we can provide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The good news, Mr. Speaker, I can report is that in long-term 

care, Mr. Speaker, 14 per cent more employees are working in 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker, than when we first took 

government, Mr. Speaker. I can also indicate to the members 

that when you look at a staff-to-bed ratio within long-term care, 

it has increased 9 per cent since this government has taken 

office, Mr. Speaker. And when you just look at the nursing 

numbers, Mr. Speaker, it’s up eleven and a half per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same would hold true for acute care facilities, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve come a long ways from when a number of 

acute care facilities across this province were closed and people 

were removed from their positions, Mr. Speaker. But we will be 

the first to admit there is still more work to be done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Phillips family 

also says that there weren’t staff available to help their mother 

to the toilet in the hospital. Sylvia’s son Leon says, “Without 

assistance, she would remain in bed, soil herself, and then 

would refuse to get out of bed, or cry in shame.” So the Phillips 

family, Mr. Speaker, hired a private care provider to go into the 

hospital to help their mother get to a bathroom. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he think this is an acceptable 

choice that families are facing — either pay for a private care 

provider to go into the hospital to help their loved ones get to a 

bathroom, or to allow their loved ones to be in a hospital bed 

and soil themselves? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would, in a case such as this, Mr. Speaker, we would 

look to first of all find placement within long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker. One of the ways that we are trying to address that, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we do know that there are too many seniors 

who have been deemed . . . assessed for placement within 

long-term care living within acute care facilities, which is not 

the proper place for them to be living, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

we are expanding the Home First/Quick Response pilot 

program from Regina to include Saskatoon and Prince Albert, 

which is a longer term issue, Mr. Speaker, of trying to help 

seniors stay in their home longer. 

 

That’s why, for example, in this Throne Speech we’ve 

announced that we are going to . . . putting in place a program 

to deliver more house calls for seniors, again helping seniors 

live in their homes longer, Mr. Speaker. That will help to 

address the challenge that we do know that we do have in acute 

care, Mr. Speaker, with far too many seniors in acute care, 

living in acute care beds when they need to be placed in 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker. And we are addressing this 

challenge. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Sylvia Phillips needs to be in a 

care facility that is designed for people with dementia, to 

properly support people with dementia. Instead, Mr. Speaker, 

she’s been in the hospital for two months. 

 

Here’s another quote from Sylvia’s son Leon: 

 

Mom was fully ambulatory before being hospitalized, so it 

was hard to see her strapped in a wheelchair because she 

was not allowed to walk and wander as she would be able 

to do in a locked-down dementia unit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, she was strapped into a wheelchair because 

there was not an appropriate facility for her to be living in. Mr. 

Speaker, she was forced to soil herself in bed because there 

weren’t enough staff to take her to the bathroom. She didn’t 

receive her meals, Mr. Speaker, because there weren’t staff 

available to help her eat. The family, Mr. Speaker, felt 

compelled to hire a private care provider to go into the hospital 

at a cost of about $1,000 per week just to ensure that her mom’s 

basic needs, her basic needs, were being met. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he think that these are fair 

choices for Saskatchewan families? My question to the 

Premier: does he think, does he believe that this is dignified, 

that this is respectful care for seniors in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

take the quality of care of our seniors in this province and those 

particularly in our care very seriously, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

we commissioned the first study of long-term care, all 156 

long-term care facilities in this province, Mr. Speaker, and we 

could speak to the results of that work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s why we’ve put in place the $10 million Urgent Issues 

Action Fund, Mr. Speaker, to address those urgent issues that 

came out from that review this spring, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

also taking steps to help seniors live in their homes longer, 

which is what they’re telling us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re also working to renew long-term care facilities and 

address the quality of care where we can, Mr. Speaker, within 

long-term care, particularly around the design because we do 

know that we have aging infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. Not only 

were 16 facilities closed over the 16 years of NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government, Mr. Speaker; not enough of 

them were renewed to begin with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s why we’re working on 13 long-term care facilities across 

rural Saskatchewan. We’re working towards replacement of 

three facilities in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. And we opened 

100 beds — much to the opposition of the opposition across the 

way — in Saskatoon with Samaritan Place, which by the way 

does have two wings dedicated for people with Alzheimer’s and 

other related dementias, Mr. Speaker. 

 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3701 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s more work to do, but we’re 

going to address that challenge. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that seniors’ care in 

this province is getting worse under this government. Instead of 

improving minimum care standards, which it should have done, 

it simply did away with those minimum care standards. Instead 

of ensuring appropriate staffing levels, it simply lowered the 

expectations for the quality of care that seniors should receive. 

 

When families have come to the legislature with their very real 

concerns, this government has been dismissive, saying there’s 

absolutely no cause for alarm. And even when it was faced with 

a damning report from health region CEOs [chief executive 

officer], this government’s response was weak. 

 

To the minister: can he tell this Assembly what the CEO of the 

Saskatoon Health Region had to say about this government’s 

response to the seniors’ care crises? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, just to put it into context 

for the member opposite, in the 1990s when they decided to 

remove level 1 and level 2 from long-term care, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the things that they didn’t do was change the hours of 

standards that they now support, Mr. Speaker. So today that has 

no reflection on the level of care that we are providing within 

the long-term care because those hours of standards were 

written in 1966, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We believe that the standards that we should be providing to 

residents of long-term care should be based on the individual 

needs of the residents themselves. We have 8,700 residents 

across long-term care. Each of them have their own situations, 

their own experiences, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we did, as I mentioned in a previous answer, 

is we commissioned the first review of long-term care by the 

senior leaders within our health regions. They toured every 

single long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. They reported back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I indicated that $10 million would be used in an 

urgent manner to address the urgent issues that were as a result, 

knowing that it most likely will not resolve all of those issues, 

Mr. Speaker. But it is a far cry from what the members opposite 

did in the 1990s when they removed 1,200 beds without a 

long-term plan for the seniors of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — It was a simple question, Mr. Speaker. Here 

is what the Saskatoon Health Region CEO identifies as the root 

cause of the seniors’ care crises. She says, “I think it relates 

primarily to the level of staffing that we have.” And this is what 

Maura Davies has to say about this government’s response to 

the seniors’ care crises: “It won’t ultimately address the larger 

issue of adequate staffing or the condition of some of our 

facilities.” 

So the main problem is staffing, but the government’s proposed 

solution will not address the problem. Talk about a disconnect, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: does he agree with the Saskatoon Health 

Region CEO’s assessments? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

I would agree with the CEO of Saskatoon Health Region’s 

assessment of the situation within one health region. We have 

12 health regions in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the report indicated that some issues around 

staffing are present, but that wasn’t the consensus in every 

single report from 156 facilities, Mr. Speaker. That’s why in the 

Urgent Issues Action Fund, we designated that the fund and the 

business proposals that we are requiring to access the fund 

could be in a variety of areas — could be in staffing, could be 

in equipment. It could be in food quality, Mr. Speaker. There 

were a number of areas where the CEOs are expected to apply 

for the dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we have, as I have said before, we have increased staffing 

in long-term care in this province, nearly 700 more full-time 

equivalents across this province in long-term care. Not to say 

that that has solved all of our issues, Mr. Speaker, but I think 

we have gone farther than any previous government in trying to 

address the issues that have been raised in long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact we laid bare the issues in long-term care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health Region’s 

CEO has also noted that this government’s one-time payment 

fund won’t address the over capacity issues that have our 

hospitals bursting at the seams. Maura Davies says: 

 

. . . in addition to the patients that are in emerg waiting for 

long-term care, we have lots of patients in other parts of 

our hospital, basically in every nook and cranny we could 

find for them, and that’s not the right setting for them 

either. 

 

When you have patients in every nook and cranny of the 

hospital and when you don’t have enough staff, no wonder 

seniors like Sylvia Phillips had to have private care providers 

come into the hospital to deliver their basic care. And no 

wonder our province’s nurses are saying they’re very afraid for 

patient safety. 

 

To the minister: will he admit that there is indeed great cause 

for alarm in our health care system and our seniors’ care 

system, or is he still stubbornly refusing to admit this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this government has never 

shied away from the challenges that face this government when 

it formed in 2007 within health care, Mr. Speaker, whether that 

be long waits for surgeries, Mr. Speaker. We put a plan together 



3702 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

and initiative to reduce surgeries, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve been 

very successful in that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we announced a review of long-term care, the first 

in our province, this spring, Mr. Speaker. We are working to 

address that. I released a report, I believe, 27 days ago, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t think anyone would have any expectation that 

all of the issues would have been solved in three weeks, Mr. 

Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, we are working towards addressing 

them. 

 

[14:00] 

 

In terms of the capacities within our hospital, we certainly 

recognize that, Mr. Speaker, we want to get to the goal of no 

waits in our emergency rooms and our tertiary centres by 2017. 

Mr. Speaker, some of the actions that we’ve taken in particular 

to Saskatoon is 100 new beds in Saskatoon, which the members 

opposite opposed, through the building of Samaritan Place, Mr. 

Speaker; the investment of $2 million in the Home First/Quick 

Response pilot program, Mr. Speaker; as well as the new 

hot-spotting approach which we’ve announced in the Throne 

Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provision of New Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the headline news in 

Alberta today reads, “Wildrose urges Tories to pay cash for 

new schools as P3 plans falter.” Here’s a quote from the article: 

 

With only one consortium expressing interest in the 

Alberta government’s plan to build 19 elementary and 

junior highs and repay the cost over the next three 

decades, the party’s infrastructure critic is worried 

taxpayers will be fleeced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now that’s all of the opposition parties in Alberta 

that stand in opposition, are calling for the P3 [public–private 

partnership] plan there to be scrapped. Yet this government 

keeps pointing to Alberta as some sort of shining success with 

P3 schools. My question to the minister: is he paying any 

attention to what’s happening in Alberta? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, P3s have been around in Canada for a number of 

years. They can really be kind of described as a first wave, 

second wave. 

 

First wave, Mr. Speaker, done through the ’90s and early 2000s 

ran into some issues, Mr. Speaker. They were ad hoc at basis 

according to the Conference Board of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

Often they didn’t have a value-for-money audit done on them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Since 2004 the new wave of P3s have been very successful. 

Most every province except for Saskatchewan so far has 

entered into P3 contracts, Mr. Speaker. We’ve learned from 

other jurisdictions, whether it’s Partnerships BC, whether it’s 

Alberta, whether it’s Infrastructure Ontario — all have entered 

into P3s. Even in Manitoba, municipally they’ve entered into 

P3s under the new format where there is quite a stringent 

criteria governments or municipal governments follow to make 

sure that they’re successful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s what we’re doing in Saskatchewan. We are in favour of 

P3s, Mr. Speaker. We’re in favour of getting our infrastructure 

built on a timely basis, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately the NDP are 

stuck in their old ways. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t answer 

the question. It was whether he’s keeping track of what’s going 

on in Alberta. The Wildrose infrastructure critic says: 

 

If we have a sole-source contract for schools, I hate to 

think what we would end up paying. Where’s the 

competitiveness for taxpayers and where’s the results for 

kids who need these facilities? 

 

Mr. Speaker, together the Willowgrove and Holy Family 

elementary schools cost taxpayers less than $40 million. These 

are publicly financed, publicly operated schools and joint-use 

facilities. That’s way less expensive than the $46 million per P3 

school that this government has budgeted. But the minister 

claims that’s because of a construction company bid quite low 

on that project. Right. 

 

To the minister: where’s the competitiveness for taxpayers in 

his government’s P3 school plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I find it, Mr. Speaker, quite 

interesting that the member opposite is quoting from the 

Wildrose party in Alberta. That just doesn’t seem like a real 

mix. 

 

Last night, Mr. Speaker, I thought he was maybe more on point 

when he was tweeting, Mr. Speaker, the speaking points exactly 

from QP [question period] — because I think that’s where he 

aligns much better — that schools were going to be private, 

which is absolutely wrong; that they were going to be of greater 

cost, which is absolutely wrong; that they were going to be late, 

Mr. Speaker, in construction, which is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s more the speaking points he should stick to; probably 

stay away from the Wildrose party because he may have to 

quote other things the Wildrose party stand for as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are looking at what’s done in Alberta. And 

certainly on their fourth bundle, they’re finding some issues 

with competitive on the RFP [request for proposal]. But if you 

look at the first three bundles, they’ve saved major costs on 

their facilities. We believe that can happen here in 

Saskatchewan with our first bundle. We’re not looking at a 

fourth bundle until we complete a first one, Mr. Speaker. We 

want to see the savings that are realized in that first bundle 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3703 

because what we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is ensure that our 

students in Saskatchewan have proper facilities to learn in, Mr. 

Speaker, not under the decline that we saw under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when it came to portables, 

this government couldn’t run a three-truck portable parade this 

past fall. And now they say, just trust us with hundreds of 

millions of dollars of bundled, bulk-bought schools, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t think so. There’s a lot of government bluster 

and claims on the P3 school file, but there sure aren’t many 

clear answers or facts. 

 

To the minister: are operating costs included in the $420 

million estimate this government has put forward on the new 

schools that our children need, or will the price tag be even 

higher? Simply, what are the full costs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when we were 

estimating costs on the facilities, that’s what it was, was an 

estimate. We looked at what it has cost the Ministry of 

Education over the last number of years to build a school in the 

province. We know that it’s roughly about 25 million for a 

school, or in a joint-use school roughly around 50 million. 

Some come in lower, Mr. Speaker. Some come in higher. That 

was a rough estimate. We’re starting down the process of P3 

where a value-for-money evaluation will be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of this was explained to the member opposite 

in committee. In fact we spent a couple of hours going over . . . 

In fact, I think there’s two pages in Hansard that it was 

explained to the member opposite the procedure that we’d have 

to go through — value for money, RFQ [request for quotation], 

RFP — before cabinet made a final decision. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the member was quite comfortable. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

member said at the end of that “. . . I’m not suggesting that the 

route needs to be [some] sort of an independent officer.” But I 

bet you, sometime through question period, he’s going to be 

asking for an independent officer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

SaskPower Rate Increase 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After this year’s hike 

in customers’ power bills, businesses and families are already 

paying more than ever for their power needs. In the last five 

years, rates have skyrocketed more than 18 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rate increases are a direct result of this 

government’s mismanagement of the Crowns. They stripped 

SaskPower of $120 million in a special dividend in 2012 and, 

as a result, SaskPower had no choice but to jack up the rates. 

And now with their new rate hike application, SaskPower is 

being forced by this government to jack up rates again, almost 

40 per cent since 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why are customers being forced to pay almost 40 

per cent more for power as a result of this government’s 

dividend stripping from SaskPower? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the rate 

application that SaskPower has just submitted to the rate review 

panel is approved, Mr. Speaker, I’d like that member to know 

that SaskPower’s average rates will continue to be competitive 

at approximately 18 per cent, Mr. Speaker, below the average 

rate charged by other thermal utilities within our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker this is an interesting position that that member 

opposite took, considering only a few days ago she said this, 

and I quote, “. . . well we know that there is a $10 billion 

infrastructure deficit, so they are beginning to catch up on that, 

so that is a good thing.” That is what the member from Nutana 

said only a few short days ago. So what is their position? Is 

there a deficit in the infrastructure or not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SaskPower writes in 

its application to the rate review panel their new rate hikes will 

bring in about $103 million in revenues in the first year. This 

means that next year’s rate hike won’t even cover that dividend 

stripping of 120 million. Rather than allowing the Crown to 

invest in a grid to make it more reliable, renewable, and 

affordable, the government forced SaskPower to jack up rates 

to cover their own financial mismanagement. That nearly 40 

per cent increase will hit people in the pocketbook hard. 

 

Why would this government think it’s appropriate that power 

customers are going to pay hundreds of dollars more for their 

power to pay for this government’s financial mistakes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, you know it’s 

kind of interesting the position that that member opposite is 

taking when in 1998, under an NDP government, they took for 

dividends 114 per cent of the earnings. In 1999 it was 97 per 

cent of the earnings. In 2001 it was 181 per cent of 

SaskPower’s earnings they took in a dividend. And in 2002, 

114 per cent. 

 

What is the record of this government, Mr. Speaker? Well in 

2009, what were the dividends? Zero. Mr. Speaker, in 2010, 

what were the dividends? Zero. In 2011 when there was 

unprecedented profits, we did take $120 million. She calls that 

stripping the Crowns. Quite frankly, we call it flood relief in an 

unprecedented flood year. But in 2012, what did we take in 

dividends, Mr. Speaker? Zero. Mr. Speaker, we have not been 

taking dividends from SaskPower. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

 



3704 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it gives me 

great pleasure to speak to the Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, first 

off, as is often done, I want to have a few thank yous. I want to 

thank the people of Carrot River Valley for having me represent 

them for the last six years. It’s been an honour and a privilege 

to be able to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course, as everybody here knows, Carrot River Valley is . . . 

I’ve long considered it, as most MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] do consider their constituency to be the 

best, but I always did consider Carrot River Valley a great place 

to be, great place for fishing, great place for agriculture. And 

the people there are the finest you can possibly have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also, and all of us do this, we want to thank 

our families for having to live without a lot of us, especially as 

rural MLAs being away for a long time. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, my wife, Terry, has become very adaptive and 

proficient. Last winter there was a lot of snow, and I wasn’t 

home to shovel off the driveway, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

she went out there and just did a fantastic job. I got home and 

the driveway was nice and clean. In fact, Mr. Speaker, she got 

to be so good at it that on the weekend, I didn’t even bother 

doing anything on the driveway because, Mr. Speaker, she did a 

much better job than what I did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to . . . I’m very proud of my children 

who now have both finished university and are out working so I 

actually can start having some financial ability. But both of 

them are working in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which makes 

me very happy because it’s nice that you can have your children 

close to be able to come home and visit you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank our constituency assistants. 

Shelley, Cindy, and Charlene do a yeoman job back in our 

constituency looking after the calls that come in when I’m not 

there. And even when I’m there, they still look after them, Mr. 

Speaker, and do a great job at that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Carrot River Valley, as I’ve said and I have 

always said, is a good constituency. I’ll tell you how it’s been 

really nice that we haven’t had that many calls into our 

constituency office. And I take that as something to do with the 

way our government is operating. The people are happy with 

the way that this government is operating. And on the average, 

people, Mr. Speaker, are not that happy with the way the 

government operates. They always have complaints of one type 

or of another, and rightfully so. But, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Carrot River Valley have been very good. They know how to 

operate and they know how to do it properly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Going on to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. I think it can be 

summed up, summed up in one word and that’s growth. You 

know the opposition likes to sit back and criticize our Throne 

Speech or criticize our budget. But here’s the catch, Mr. 

Speaker, they didn’t have any plan for growth. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, before you criticize someone, you should walk a mile 

in their shoes. That way when you criticize them, they’re a mile 

away or you’re a mile away and still have their shoes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the opposition likes to claim 

that we’re doing everything wrong, that we don’t have a plan. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling you, we do have a plan and that’s 

in our Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, our Throne Speech lays 

out, and we have continued to lay out what our plan is for the 

growth of Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Now take a look at the difference in leaders. You know, when 

our leader was first elected as leader he, within six months, 

came up with an action plan on how things would work. But 

yet, what do we hear from the NDP, from their leader? He’s 

been there over six months. Have we heard anything about what 

their plan is? Not a thing. All they can do is criticize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s almost embarrassing to listen to them. They 

criticize everything. They say spend money, don’t spend 

money; build, don’t build. I don’t know. The member from 

Athabasca went on for quite a long time there yesterday, 

continued on and on. But you know, when you don’t know 

what you’re talking about, it’s hard to know when you’re 

finished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan and will continue to 

have a plan on how to move things forward. Let’s take a look at 

agriculture, Mr. Speaker, because that’s one of the main things 

up in Carrot River Valley along with the . . . I should mention 

that the lumber industry, which is operating very well, Mr. 

Speaker, we have Edgewood operating in Carrot River and 

Weyerhaeuser operating over in Hudson Bay. These plants 

were shut down under the NDP’s tenure, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh yes, that’s right too. They 

wanted it last minute, before the 2007 election. They wanted to 

throw $100 million into the plant in Prince Albert. You know, it 

was a good political ploy but that didn’t work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s the other thing too. Edgewood is a BC 

[British Columbia] company. They moved to Saskatchewan 

because they saw that we had a Saskatchewan Party 

government in Saskatchewan that would not hinder business. 

 

But I want to go on to the agriculture part, Mr. Speaker, where, 

under Roy’s revenge, they devastated rural Saskatchewan. You 

know, agriculture is one of the pillars of the foundation of 

Saskatchewan. Last year our exports were $11.2 billion, highest 

among the provinces. And, Mr. Speaker, this year with the 

crops that we had, the way things are going, we’re going to be 

even higher. Agriculture is one of the things that moves this 

province forward and keeps the people employed. Not only 

that, Mr. Speaker, we also have a lot of agriculture 

manufacturing businesses here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at agriculture, you have to look at 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3705 

what the NDP did to devastate rural Saskatchewan. They cut 

the funding back to our RMs [rural municipality]. Now in order 

to move this product — we had a great crop, but in order to 

move it — the RMs have to build roads. They have to work on 

these roads. And what did the NDP do? They cut the funding to 

the RMs back. 

 

Now the funding for the RM of Moose Range has been 

increased, since this government’s been in power, 124 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these are great things. The RMs can 

actually now go and budget because they know that they’re 

going to get 1 per cent of the PST [provincial sales tax]. They 

can go and budget for their bridges. They can go and budget for 

their roads, for their infrastructure, which the NDP completely 

forgot about. 

 

A good example, Mr. Speaker, of how the NDP could cut 

things back, our regional parks, which of course we have a lot 

of regional parks around our small communities, our regional 

parks were basically left with nothing. Mr. Speaker, this 

government in the past six years has increased the funding to 

the regional parks 700 per cent — 700 per cent. The regional 

parks now are at . . . or have gotten $5.2 million in the past six 

years, compared to $650,000 from the NDP in the six years 

previous to us being in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

member from Athabasca asks, why was that? The member from 

Athabasca sat there and claimed that they had bundles of 

money when we came into power. We took over those bundles 

of money. If that member had that kind of money, Mr. Speaker, 

why didn’t they give some money to the regional parks? Why 

didn’t they give some money to the rural municipalities? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on but, Mr. Speaker, it takes us 

into health and what the previous administration did to health. 

They sit there every day and ask questions on health, but what 

did they do? They shut down 52 rural hospitals plus the Plains. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a . . . When this government came into 

power, we were desperately short of nurses. What have we 

done? We knew that we were growing. We knew that we had a 

deficit left on the nurse, on the health care, from the previous 

administration. So, Mr. Speaker, we went out and actively 

participated and tried to get more nurses. And we did, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re now up to 1,000 more nurses than what there 

was in 2007, plus 300 more physicians, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, actually our nurse to bed ratio has gone up 11.5 per 

cent. 

 

And we also have a rural health minister. Now this is really 

different than what the NDP did. The NDP went and shut down 

52 rural hospitals. We have a rural health minister, and I’ve 

been there. He’s been out to 80 different facilities within the 

province talking, talking to the providers of care, talking to the 

nurses, talking to the people, finding out what their concerns 

are. Where was the NDP? Did they ever send anybody out to 

the rural hospitals? Well yes, I guess they did when they cut the 

power off and closed them. That was the way NDP handled 

rural health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite often we hear about this long-term bed 

shortage. And I know that there is a bad situation out there. We 

know that. But of course it wouldn’t be quite so bad if the NDP 

hadn’t cut 1,200 beds. You know, we’re increasing them by 

1,300. Mr. Speaker, is there more to do? You bet you there is. 

But boy oh boy, you’re just not going to do it in a heartbeat. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we in this government are planning for 

growth, sustainable growth, by the way, and we want to move 

forward. 

 

You know, just a good example, there was some problems in 

the long-term care, so our government created a $10 million 

Urgent Issues Action Fund to address the issues identified. I 

don’t think that was ever done under the NDP. The NDP were 

more, they were more concerned with cutting the beds rather 

than increasing them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could go on here, and we could talk about 

education a little bit because it seems that the NDP are sitting 

there now claiming that, you know, on how we should build 

schools. We had the Opposition Leader who got up and talked 

about the shortages of schools in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Well 

okay, we said we’re going to build them there. What do they 

do? Sits back and complains some more; doesn’t like the 

funding for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now you take a look at the difference. First off the 

NDP had no plan for growth. Fact is I think they had a plan for 

decline. Actually I think if you went back and if you actually 

looked somewhere hidden in their little, little deal back in the 

’90s, I’m willing to bet that they were continuing to look at 

declining enrolment. It has to be that way, Mr. Speaker, or else 

why else would they have closed down 176 schools? There 

must be a reason. So I guess they had an agenda all right, but it 

was an agenda for a decrease in population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, this government believes in 

growth. This government believes that we will move forward. 

You know, we’ve already built 20 schools. Fact is, I’m quite 

happy that I’m going to be going to Hudson Bay here probably 

in another month to do sod-turning for a brand new school in 

Hudson Bay. Mr. Speaker, that is a far different cry than what 

the NDP were doing. Like I said, their sod-turning included 

taking a set of side cutters to the power and cutting it off in 

those schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the things that we have done in education 

is this student-first approach. We’re going to build on some of 

the successes that are happening. Now the Chinook School 

Division used student reading assessments to help the teachers 

respond to each individual student’s need. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this approach is working. In 2008, 63 per cent of the students 

were reading at grade level. By 2012, it had gone to 84 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are things that this government is 

helping, helping move this province forward for the betterment 

of our teachers, for the betterment of our students. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we as a government need these new students coming 

along because we need people working in this province, and 

we’re happy to see that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going back over . . . There was one thing I forgot 

about on the health end here. I had it, if I can just find it. 

Another thing . . . At least I think this should fit into health. 

And this spring, the government announced funding to open 



3706 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

Angel’s Lighthouse just over in Melfort — my good friend 

from Melfort there — over in Melfort, and to providing 

emergency residential services to women and children fleeing 

domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, these are things that we are 

doing to help out on that respect. And you know, the last time 

there was a transition house built in Saskatchewan was in 1989, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we could go on and on about this. We 

can go into our post-secondary education. And I’ll tell you 

what. I’m a great believer. We have Cumberland Community 

College up in the Carrot River Valley, and Cumberland 

Community College does a great service to all of the people. It 

helps out with not only on the trades end of it but, Mr. Speaker, 

now they’re actually working with the University of Regina and 

working students through to their university degree on 

education. This is nice. People don’t have to . . . Students don’t 

have to travel from out of their homes or too far away from 

home, go to the city all the time, to Regina or Saskatoon, to go 

to university. And I think these are great things. These are steps 

that our government is working towards and making things 

happen in a positive way, in a positive light. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, speaking of Cumberland 

Community College, it was this government that put money 

forward to build a brand new facility in Nipawin because of the 

overcrowding. Now you have to realize we’re sitting right 

beside a couple of reserves up there. And so our First Nations 

people, some of them don’t have their grade 12. Now do you 

know what? They can go there. They can get their grade 12. 

They can work. They can work hard on their trades. These are 

people . . . Then they come out of there. These are people who 

are going out, getting jobs, and moving forward in the world 

and quitting their reliance on welfare. And, Mr. Speaker, these 

are just fantastic. I’m just so happy to see stuff like that 

happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year we’re going to spend more than $500 

million on our highways. Now everybody, everybody knows in 

this province what kind of a deplorable shape our highways 

were in. Mr. Speaker, our highways were well known, well 

known throughout Canada to be some of the worst there 

possibly was. Under the various different Highways ministers 

we’ve had, we’ve seen a large improvement in our highways. 

And I have to say, being up in Carrot River Valley, our 

highways . . . Every MLA has a highway that he wants to get 

worked on. There’s not one that doesn’t. But boy, you know, 

our highways are in pretty good shape and they are in far better 

shape than what they were under the previous administration, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The twinning is done now, going right through to Prince Albert, 

as a member from Prince Albert was talking about before, 

going to the opening of that. These are needed, Mr. Speaker, 

because when you have a growing province, when you have a 

growing province you need to be able to move around the 

province, which is something that that previous administration 

never thought about. They just thought well, you know, if they 

could get to the Alberta border, well then they could hit a good 

highway and they’d be okay from there on, Mr. Speaker. But 

I’m telling you, our highways now are just absolutely far better 

than under the previous administration. Of course it comes with 

a cost. Everything comes with a cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been quite a few things that we have talked 

about and I guess I’m only supposed to use up so much time, 

but it’s been brought up these P3s, the P3s that we have been 

talking about that the opposition so desperately hates. Well I’ve 

got a September-October of 2013 Fraser Forum magazine and I 

just want to do a couple of quotes out of it. And I quote: 

 

International evidence shows that P3s substantially 

outperformed conventional government-led projects both 

in terms of cost and completion time. A study from the 

United Kingdom found that P3 projects typically finished 

one per cent earlier than scheduled and with virtually no 

cost overruns, while government-led projects finish 17 per 

cent late with cost overruns of 47 per cent. 

 

That was done by MacDonald. 

 

Okay then there’s one more: 

 

An Australian study found similar results with 3.4 per cent 

of the P3 projects completed ahead of schedule and 23.5 

per cent of the government-led projects completed behind 

schedule. 

 

And that was done by Duffield and Raisbeck. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we want to, we want to keep up with the 

infrastructure in this province, we’re going to have to come up 

within innovative ways to be able to do it. You can’t just . . . 

Like P3 actually is the same as me going and buying a house 

and getting a mortgage with the bank. It’s really the same thing. 

If I’m going to sit there and wait until I have the money to buy 

that house, my chances of buying it are pretty slim or it’s going 

to be a long time. So, Mr. Speaker, you go to the bank. You get 

a mortgage. It’s really quite simple. Yet that’s a P3, in a sense. 

This is what we’re doing. This is what we’re doing with the 

schools. So that way we can build schools. We can move this 

province forward. And there’s places for P3s. And they don’t fit 

in every situation, but there are places for P3s in this province. 

The opposition wants schools; we want schools. Let’s get our 

schools and let’s get them done in a timely fashion, Mr. 

Speaker, because this province is actually growing. It’s not, it’s 

not like under the old NDP where it was in decline all the time. 

This province is growing and moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess I should probably give some other people 

time to speak so actually what I’m down to right now is saying, 

Mr. Speaker, that I believe that this Throne Speech is a good 

Throne Speech. It shows that we actually, we actually have a 

plan, far better than the opposition. Because all they can do is 

criticize but they have, they have no plan. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

that is why I am going to support the Throne Speech and I will 

not be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it also 

gives me great pleasure to be able to rise today and speak to the 

2013 Throne Speech which opened our third session of this 

twenty-seventh legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3707 

And of course this is also my third Throne Speech and each 

year I feel very privileged to be able to sit in this Assembly and 

participate in the debates on this speech and on many other 

items that are going to come up for business later in this 

session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech that’s entitled “Meeting the 

Challenges of Growth” clearly outlines our government’s 

commitment to not only fully appreciate the tremendous growth 

we’ve seen in the last six years but also to acknowledge some 

of the challenges that come with that growth. As our Premier 

said, Mr. Speaker, last year we outlined our growth plan and 

this year our Throne Speech outlines the road map to achieve 

that growth and to handle the challenges that come with that 

growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to offer a quote and this quote is from 

Whitney Stinson from Global Regina, October 23rd of this 

year. And I quote: “This marks the first time in our history our 

elected officials will represent more than 1.1 million 

Saskatchewan residents.” And that’s where the Throne Speech 

began today on meeting the province’s growth challenges. It’s 

great to see the media appreciating what we are outlining in our 

Throne Speech today. 

 

But before I get into talking specifically about this Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just review some of the 

activities that have occurred in The Battlefords constituency 

over the past few months and this past summer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think one of the most exciting things that I had the opportunity 

to attend this year was the official opening of our new 

Northland Power plant. And I had an opportunity to speak at 

that occasion on behalf of our Minister of SaskPower. This is a 

new 260-megawatt power plant which is going to provide 

power into the Saskatchewan power grid and I think it’s going 

to go a long ways towards providing the power that we need to 

sustain this growth in this province for many years to come. 

 

Another opportunity that I very much appreciated was to attend 

opening of two new homes for the disabled with our Minister of 

Social Services this past month. These are two beautiful homes 

that are going to provide five new bedrooms in one home, six in 

another home for those with handicaps in The Battlefords — 

very welcome additions to the already existing homes there. 

And this is also part of something that Social Services has been 

involved with in The Battlefords. 

 

I had occasion to speak on behalf of that same Social Services 

minister at the opening of two eight-plexes that are being built 

in The Battlefords to provide affordable housing, first-time 

housing for people in The Battlefords with low and moderate 

incomes. And I was very pleased to be able to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this is just part of our overall plan here in Saskatchewan 

where we are committed $344 million to build 12,600 new 

units in this province. And I think that’s a very commendable 

record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A couple of other things that I had an opportunity to attend was 

firstly at our Battlefords Agency Tribal Chiefs Atoskewin 

Success Centre official opening in their new building. This is a 

centre that’s being run by our Battlefords Agency Tribal Chiefs 

and it provides first-line education for First Nations, young 

First Nations people looking for a job. And they provide life 

skills training. They provide driver licence training to make our 

First Nations people more . . . to prepare them better to find a 

job so that they can participate as well with other people in the 

opportunities that are available in this province today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Another opportunity I had on behalf of our Minister of the 

Economy was to attend the Battlefords Agency Tribal Chiefs 

job fair and career days that was held a couple of weeks ago 

here. This is their second annual job fair and career days. And 

this was an opportunity for, they estimated between 4 and 500 

young First Nations people that are seeking employment to 

have an opportunity to meet with between 30 and 40 employers 

who were looking for employees in The Battlefords. And I 

think this was an excellent opportunity to bring people looking 

for employees together with employees looking for jobs. And I 

commend them for the work that they’re doing in that case. 

 

Also, and something that’s very close and dear to my heart of 

course in The Battlefords is the work that’s begun on our new 

Sask Hospital up there. I had an opportunity to be invited this 

summer to attend two 3P [production preparation process] 

planning sessions. These were week-long sessions and they 

provided the work of their week-long endeavours on the Friday 

afternoon, and myself and my colleague from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford were able to attend these. I really appreciated 

having him there and it was great. 

 

What they’ve done is they’ve rented a huge warehouse in our 

industrial park in The Battlefords and the staff, the patients, the 

doctors, the nurses, the psychologists, everybody from the 

cooks to the maintenance staff all had a part in designing what 

our new Saskatchewan Hospital is going to look like, Mr. 

Speaker. And at the end of that planning session — both of 

those planning sessions — something that I took away from 

that was that here’s an opportunity for the people to have some 

input into what their new premises are going to look like. And I 

think what came out of it was they certainly claimed ownership 

to that new building. They’re going to be able to sit down at 

their desk in the years to come and say, I had some input in how 

this was built. I can now sit at my desk; I’ve got a clear 

sightline to the patient rooms, to other stations. And it’s being 

designed properly and I think this is an excellent exercise. 

 

Of course this past year, Mr. Speaker, was the 100th 

anniversary of the city of North Battleford, and I’ve had an 

opportunity to attend many 100th anniversary celebrations. And 

I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the committee, the staff 

from the city, and the volunteers that have worked so hard to 

make all of these celebrations such a great success. And I know 

the residents of North Battleford and area have certainly 

enjoyed all of these celebrations. 

 

One other opportunity that I had that I was very happy to have 

was I was asked by the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport to 

attend on his behalf and present a cheque for $83,000 jointly to 

the city of North Battleford and the town of Battleford, in 

support of our urban park. It’s The Battlefords valley park. And 

something that I commented on that night and I think it’s very 

important, we hear a lot about our regional parks and indeed 



3708 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

about our provincial parks but not a lot about our urban parks. 

And I think this urban park is very important to the residents of 

The Battlefords and to visitors that come to The Battlefords. It’s 

allowed the city and the town to be able to build hiking trails, to 

build cross-country ski trails, to build portable barbecues, 

warm-up shacks down on Finlayson Island, those kinds of 

things. And that all adds to the quality of life for The 

Battlefords and for this province together. 

 

And while I’m talking about giving thank yous, Mr. Speaker, I 

think I would like to at this time thank two people that are very, 

very, very important to the operation of my constituency office 

in The Battlefords. And those two people are Lillian Robinson 

and Gail Heintz. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Cox: — Lillian and Gail — thank you — keep my office 

running, running smoothly. They are tasked with keeping my 

schedule up to date, keeping me at the functions, some of the 

few that I’ve just mentioned today, but I think more importantly 

in handling the questions, the concerns, the problems that 

constituents bring to them on a daily basis. They handle these 

very efficiently, very professionally, but I think more 

importantly, they handle it with a lot of compassion. They are 

very prompt in getting the message to the ministries here in 

Regina. And I would also like to offer my thanks to those 

ministries. I think the staff in the ministries here in Regina do 

an excellent job, and in every case they get back to either my 

office or to the constituent. And that’s excellent service that I 

think are being provided, and we should definitely acknowledge 

our ministries for doing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe, and I think that most of my colleagues 

will agree, that in order for Saskatchewan to continue to be the 

leader that we have become in recent years, we will need a 

good education for our young people. That is why that I have 

chosen to address some of our education priorities at the 

beginning of my address here today. 

 

Just to highlight some very astounding figures that reflect our 

growth, I would mention elementary enrolment figures in and 

around two of our major cities. And I know some of my 

colleagues have mentioned some of these before, but I think 

they bear mentioning again, Mr. Speaker. Here in Regina, 

elementary enrolment has grown since 2007-2008 by 3,369 

students. That’s a whopping 18 per cent increase in enrolment. 

In Saskatoon, for example, that increase has been even greater 

at 20 per cent or 4,256 students. 

 

Now let’s look at one of our newest cities, the city of Warman 

— a whopping 90 per cent increase of 428 students in that city. 

A similar story in Martensville with 52 per cent increase in 

elementary enrolment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why in this Throne Speech we have 

outlined plans to build nine new joint-use facilities in these 

centres. And, Mr. Speaker, that is in addition to the $600 

million that we have spent since 2007 on 20 new schools, 23 

major renovations, and 900 other minor renovations to our 

schools. Along with this increase in enrolment that I’ve just 

mentioned, Mr. Speaker, we also know that there were 15,000 

births in Saskatchewan last year. So those numbers are going to 

continue to increase and we must plan to handle that increase in 

the future. 

 

This past fall, my colleague from Cut Knife-Turtleford and 

myself were invited to attend the monthly meeting of the Living 

Sky School Division. It’s something that we do on occasion just 

to keep abreast of issues that are happening in our school 

division and any questions or concerns they might have. Two 

issues that they brought up that evening to myself and my 

colleague, the first one was bandwidth in rural schools and the 

second was the need for more consultation between the 

Ministry of Education and stakeholders. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say our government is 

listening. Both of those items have been addressed in this 

Throne Speech. SaskTel is undertaking a commitment to 

provide greater bandwidth in our rural schools. One of the 

school board members that night, Mr. Speaker, talked about 

when the high school in his town is using their computers, then 

the children in the elementary school can’t use their computer 

lab because there’s no bandwidth. Well we are going to correct 

that problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second issue that I was also very pleased to see a 

commitment in our Throne Speech was that we are going to 

continue with more consultation from the Department of 

Education with students, with teachers, with parents, and with 

administrators. This government does listen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to offer a second quote if I may, Mr. Speaker. And this 

quote is from Dale Hunter, CTV [Canadian Television Network 

Ltd.] Regina, October 23rd of this year, and I quote, “The 

government is promising new money and new ideas. There can 

be little doubt health care is once again back at the top of the 

agenda.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are addressing health care issues. There are 

now 300 more doctors practising in this province than there 

were six years ago. In 2007 we committed to hire 800 more 

nurses for Saskatchewan residents. We have far exceeded that 

goal. There’s now 1,000 more nurses working in our province. 

 

In the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I was delighted to see the 

announcement that the collaborative emergency centre in 

Maidstone is now open and the announcement that we are 

committed to open four more collaborative emergency centres, 

one close to The Battlefords and that is in Spiritwood. 

Although, Mr. Speaker, neither of those are in my constituency 

of The Battlefords, I think they’re going to be a benefit to The 

Battlefords because now people who are in need of emergency 

care from communities that are, say, close, partway between 

The Battlefords and Spiritwood, partway between The 

Battlefords and Maidstone, will now be able to receive their 

emergency care in either Maidstone or Spiritwood. And I think 

that’s going to go a long way to relieve the pressure on the 

Battlefords Union Hospital, so I applaud those efforts. 

 

A few moments ago I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that I had the 

opportunity, along with my colleague from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, to attend the 3P for the Saskatchewan 

Hospital planning. So I was certainly delighted to see a further 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3709 

announcement in this Throne Speech of the ongoing work at 

Sask Hospital. And I would just like to say to the residents of 

The Battlefords, to the constituents there, that every day we are 

one step closer to the reality of a new Saskatchewan Hospital in 

North Battleford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to plan for continued growth and to plan 

for the challenges of that growth, we know that we have to 

update our infrastructure. And that is why since 2008 this 

government has spent $13.2 billion, more than double in the 

previous six years, to upgrade our infrastructure. We’ve built 

new hospitals. We’ve built new schools. We’ve upgraded water 

and sewer systems and laid new water and sewer systems. 

We’ve upgraded our electrical system. 

 

And at a function I was at recently, Mr. Speaker, and had a 

conversation with some SaskTel management people from The 

Battlefords, they told me that their plan for SaskPower over the 

next 10 years is going to involve expenditures of approximately 

$1 billion a year. That’s their long-term commitment to upgrade 

the infrastructure that we inherited when we came to 

government, Mr. Speaker, the deficit in that infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing that I was very delighted to see in 

our Throne Speech because we know that to continue growth 

for this province, we’re going to need more workers, we’ve 

announced 1,000 new training seats. We’ve announced a 

commitment for 700 new adult basic education spots. And 

closely related to this, and I think very important to The 

Battlefords area, is the driver ed program for high schools on 

First Nations. We feel that in the first year, Mr. Speaker, 2,600 

young First Nations will take advantage of that program.  

 

And as I mentioned earlier in my address here today, I’ve 

attended numerous training sessions with Battlefords Agency 

Tribal Chiefs, Battlefords Tribal Council. I’ve been to the 

Indian Métis Friendship Centre, their training program, SSIT, 

and as well our Ironclad training centre. All of these training 

centres outline that one of the first things they do for their First 

Nations clients is they have to get them a driver’s licence. In 

order to get a job away from their home reserve, they need a 

driver’s licence to get to, back and forth from work. So I think 

this is going to go a long way, Mr. Speaker, to assisting our 

First Nations to get on a level playing field with our students 

from the urban areas. They’re now going to have a greater 

opportunity to get employment and to be part of the 

opportunities that are available in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though The Battlefords is an urban 

constituency for the most part, we certainly recognize the 

importance of agriculture in our community and all across this 

province. 

 

And I’m very happy to see such a great crop come off this fall. 

And I think some of my colleagues have mentioned it earlier 

on. If this isn’t a record crop for Saskatchewan, it’s awful close 

to a record crop. Our prices are good. Our cattle prices are good 

as well. I think the whole agriculture field is in good shape this 

fall. 

 

In 2012, Mr. Speaker, we exported $11.2 billion worth of 

agriculture exports from this province. That’s the highest of all 

of Canadian provinces and territories for the second year in a 

row. And it happens to be one-third of all of Saskatchewan’s 

exports. That drives home the importance of agriculture to this 

province. 

 

And last fall in our plan for growth, 2020 and beyond, we have 

an ambitious goal set of $15 billion in agriculture exports in 

2020. In order to achieve that goal, we realize that we’re going 

to need funding committed to agriculture research. And that’s 

why in this Throne Speech we’ve committed $27.7 million to 

go towards agriculture research to help our ag producers attain 

that goal of $15 billion worth of exports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also very proud of our record in assisting 

those citizens with long-term and enduring disabilities. Today 

more than 11,000 citizens in Saskatchewan are on the SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. And we 

now announce in this Throne Speech that we have made our 

third increase in four years to the benefits paid out under that 

program.  

 

Our seniors, Mr. Speaker, our seniors enrolled in the seniors’ 

income plan, and more than 16,000 of them today, will see their 

benefits triple from what they were in 2007 by 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past summer, I was very pleased to have been 

asked to sit on our all-party committee for highway traffic 

safety. And our Chair from that committee was our MLA from 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton, and the members from Saskatoon 

Meewasin, Regina Walsh Acres, Sask Rivers, and myself from 

this side, and our two members from across the aisle from 

Cumberland and Saskatoon Riversdale. And I’d like to take this 

opportunity to say how much I enjoyed that committee, how 

much I enjoyed getting to know our two members opposite. We 

had some good, excellent discussions. 

 

We went into that committee with, I think, a single aim, and 

that was to try to solve some of the problems with traffic in this 

province and to prevent some unnecessary deaths. And I thank 

the two members opposite for their contribution, to what they 

brought to the table as well. Our committee travelled from 

Regina here. We started our deliberations here. We travelled to 

Estevan, then we moved on the next week to Saskatoon, to P.A. 

We had a session in La Ronge as well as in Pelican Narrows. 

And as well as the personal presentations that we had to us, Mr. 

Speaker, we had many, many written submissions that we went 

through in coming to our conclusions. 

 

Basically what our committee looked at, Mr. Speaker, was five 

different items of traffic safety. Firstly we looked at impaired 

drivers. We looked at distracted drivers. We looked at excessive 

speed. We looked at dangerous intersections. And we looked at 

collisions with wildlife. 

 

And some of the things that we come up with, some of the 

suggestions, some of the problems that we identified and some 

of the ways to solve some of these problems, one of the first 

things we identified is that we need to increase the awareness of 

Saskatchewan drivers to these problems. And we need to do 

that by training, by advertising, by commercials — whatever 

we need to do to convince our drivers of those things. Impaired 

driving is dangerous. Distracted driving is dangerous. Excessive 

speed is dangerous. And we also need to be aware of dangerous 

intersections. And those are the things that we looked at. 



3710 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

And awareness was the first one. The second one is 

enforcement of course. We know we need enforcement, in 

some cases more enforcement than we have right now. And 

thirdly we need stiffer penalties. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was very 

gratifying to see in this Throne Speech that our government is 

responding to our suggestions. And it’s very great to see that 

our efforts have been worthwhile. 

 

We noticed in our Throne Speech we’re talking about more 

twinning of highways, which will help make them safer. We’re 

talking about a pilot project for passing lanes. We’re talking 

about tougher penalties. All of these things have been outlined 

in our Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to just wrap up here in a few more 

minutes, but I’d like to just summarize some of the things in 

this Throne Speech that I think are important to The 

Battlefords. You know, I was at actually two functions this past 

weekend, had an opportunity to talk with some of the 

constituents from The Battlefords, and had some very positive 

comments. And unlike my colleagues from Regina Rosemont 

and from Athabasca — it seems they had negative comments 

— I had very positive comments. 

 

And I don’t know whether those across the floor are negative 

because they’re in opposition or they’re in opposition because 

they’re negative. It’s kind of like the chicken and egg thing, I 

guess. And I don’t know where that’s going to go. 

 

But I’d like to just talk about some of these things that are 

important for The Battlefords. And you know, I had a couple of 

fellows who hadn’t read the Throne Speech yet, so they asked 

me, what is it that’s in this Throne Speech that helps The 

Battlefords? My response to that, Mr. Speaker, was basically 

what’s in the Throne Speech that’s good for one citizen in 

Saskatchewan is good for us all. What’s good in Estevan is 

good in Yorkton, is good in P.A. and Swift Current and North 

Battleford. And that’s what this Throne Speech was all about. 

 

But specific to us, Mr. Speaker, if I can just summarize. First 

and foremost, mention again of the planning that’s ongoing for 

our Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. Secondly, our 

initiative to continue building affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan and certainly in The Battlefords. We’ve seen in 

the last five or six years 161 affordable housing units built in 

The Battlefords. That’s going to be continuing. I think it’s 

important, as I mentioned, that our collaborative emergency 

centres in Spiritwood and Maidstone again will help relieve 

some of the pressures on our Battlefords Union Hospital. 

 

Our Traffic Safety Committee, the recommendations coming 

out of that and that we’re going to see legislated here later this 

fall I think are also important to help save lives in The 

Battlefords, very important. 

 

I think our First Nations education . . . our drivers ed program 

on our First Nations, very important. We have several First 

Nations within a very close proximity of my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m very pleased to see that we’re going to offer 

that driver training to the First Nations people to help put them 

on a level playing field with the students coming out of urban 

schools. 

 

I’m happy to see the bandwidth being increased in and around 

The Battlefords to help school children be able to access 

computer training. Our adult basic education seats, Mr. 

Speaker, very important in The Battlefords as it is in other 

parts. And of course our student support for our post-secondary 

students, some $338 million in the past year for direct support 

for students, very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, just one more quote. And this quote is 

from Wayne Mantyka, CTV Regina, October 23rd of this year, 

and I quote, “This Throne Speech maintains the government’s 

focus on a growth plan as the province pushes forward with 

expanding the economy and dealing with the issue that growth 

brings.” Mr. Speaker, I totally agree with Mr. Mantyka 100 per 

cent, and for that reason I will be supporting the Speech from 

the Throne and will not be supporting the amendment. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m delighted to rise in reply to the Speech from the 

Throne and to speak in support of this speech. We know how 

important this speech is for people right across the province. 

And as I begin, I’d like to, I’d like to turn my attention just 

briefly to Saskatoon Greystone and the constituents that I have 

the honour of representing on a daily basis. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very pleased to talk about the support 

that I receive in the office, and Ms. Katie Konkin is there. She’s 

helping to make sure I stay on time and on track and anyone 

that knows me knows that that’s no main feat. And so as she’s 

returned from Queen’s, a degree in hand, she’s returned to 

Saskatchewan like so many others from this province that are 

coming back, looking at the opportunities as they present 

themselves, looking at the employment prospects for today and 

into the future, and also for the high quality of life that there is 

here for families, with the knowledge that obviously it’s a 

remarkable opportunity where young people can roll up their 

sleeves and help to shape the future of Saskatchewan in unique 

ways. 

 

I’d also like to pay tribute to the members of my family, who 

provide me support and allow me to undertake the work at 

hand, as well as those right across Saskatoon Greystone that 

speak in kindness and also in candour about some of the 

challenges and opportunities that they see right across the 

community. 

 

I think I speak for all of us, regardless of partisan stripe, when I 

say that it’s our constituents that keep us grounded, keep us 

focused on the tasks at hand, and make sure that we remain in 

contact and in touch on a daily basis with opportunities for 

learning, for listening, for empathizing, and ultimately do our 

best to act upon for those constituents that we all serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was an important book published by our 

former Lieutenant-Governor Dr. Gordon Barnhart. It’s a 

biography of our first premier, Premier Walter Scott. And in 

that biography, Dr. Barnhart recounts a reflection on the first 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3711 

meeting between the first university president, the University of 

Saskatchewan president, Walter Murray, and our first premier, 

Walter Scott. And as Walter Murray was able to get off that 

train and was greeted by the premier, he looked around. He had 

come from the east coast, well-established communities, and 

well-established post-secondary institution. As he got off that 

train, he asked a simple question, and the question that he asked 

is, why should I stay? Because as you might imagine, there was 

no university that was built. It was something that he had 

accepted a challenge to come and undertake. And Walter Scott 

responded, and I’ll paraphrase simply to say in a way that still 

inspires all of us to think about and reflect upon the value of the 

people of this province. And he said, because this is a big land 

for big people with big ideas. And, Mr. Speaker, when we think 

about the significance and the importance of this Throne 

Speech, we can think about the significance and the legacy of 

those big ideas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a big idea then, more than 100 years ago, 

and a big idea today focuses on ways that government can help 

ensure that growth continues — although government is not 

responsible for this growth; that comes from a variety of 

sources, from the private sector, from communities, from 

families, but government has a facilitating role — but not just 

that growth but ways to overcome some of the challenges, 

inevitable challenges, in fact universal challenges that are 

associated with growth. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, growth is the cornerstone of the new 

Saskatchewan, a defining and a definitive character of the new 

Saskatchewan. So what does that look like today? For the first 

time in history, Saskatchewan has a population of more than 1.1 

million people. And, Mr. Speaker, when we think about a very 

simple measure, a very simple matrix that Tony Blair offers in 

his recent biography, that matrix is, are more people moving 

into a jurisdiction or moving out? And, Mr. Speaker, 

importantly, more people are moving into Saskatchewan. More 

people are staying in Saskatchewan. More people are 

envisioning Saskatchewan as the land of promise for 

themselves and their families, and that’s vitally important. 

 

We also know that there have been more than 14,700 new jobs 

created year over year right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

This is a really, really important statistic because we know that 

there are jurisdictions, in fact there are countries around the 

world that haven’t seen that kind of employment growth. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when we think about communities right across the 

province and how they are thriving and how they’re growing, 

they’re helping to define the new Saskatchewan. For example 

in Saskatoon and in Regina we see nation-leading growth 

records in GDP [gross domestic product], and again we can go 

to the Conference Board to see how that can be situated against 

the context of other communities and other cities right across 

the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that our government is reflecting and 

reinforcing the momentum that’s under way across the 

province. And we know how important it is that others are 

helping to lead this growth and, at the same time, we’re playing 

a facilitating role. 

 

The agenda, as it’s spelled out in the Throne Speech, is about 

making sure that we continue to help move Saskatchewan 

forward. An example that is evident of that commitment 

certainly was on display last week with the announcement at 

Dundonald School where our Premier announced nine new 

joint-use schools. Four of those schools will be located in 

Saskatoon, and others will be located across the province. 

These schools will be constructed through a public-private 

partnership. And, Mr. Speaker, these are just simply some 

additional investments, vital investments in helping to make 

sure that our growing population and our growing enrolment 

continue to have their needs met.  

 

We know that there’s more work to do. There’s been plenty of 

work done in school infrastructure already, but this new 

announcement and these new schools are going to help, just as 

the infrastructure investment at St. Matthew School right in the 

heart of Saskatoon Greystone continues to move forward, 

where recently I had an opportunity to sit down with Principal 

Rivard and have a look out over the construction that’s under 

way, understand the challenges that he and his team face on a 

daily basis as they’re balancing the needs of the school as it’s 

operating today, in fact in two locations, and at the same time 

working with an eye on the future when the renovations are 

going to be complete and the school is going to be unified once 

again. And I’m delighted to see the kind of progress that’s 

being met, and I’m thankful for his effort and the effort of his 

team as we continue to move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another aspect of education — and education is 

one of those big ideas — but another aspect of education that is 

really worthy of our attention, worthy of our empathy, and 

worthy of our action relates to helping to make sure that 

students feel secure in our schools. Soon our government is 

going to respond to the anti-bullying recommendations that 

were put forward by the member from Saskatoon Fairview, 

based on the extensive consultation she held throughout the 

province with students, with parents, and with teachers. 

 

I was able to attend one of these sessions in Saskatoon, and I 

was able to see her level of engagement with community 

stakeholders, with people that came and told their stories and 

shared their concerns. She sat with some students that were 

there that evening as they began to talk about some of the 

challenges and the hurdles that they face. And I just want to 

make sure that we acknowledge in a very public way the work 

of the MLA for Saskatoon Fairview for her important work on 

this vital initiative. Importantly she’s going to help be part of 

hosting a forum during national Anti-Bullying Week in 

November to discuss directly with students key aspects and 

characteristics, troubling characteristics of bullying, and 

identifying pathways to help prevent bullying right here in 

Saskatchewan. And we know there’s more to do, but we really 

appreciate her effort. 

 

Another big idea — and has been from the early days of 

Saskatchewan where really we were seen as innovators in 

health care at the community-based level — continues to be our 

focus on making sure that as we invest in health care with the 

knowledge that there’s always more to do, that we’re helping to 

improve the quality of life for people right across the province. 

I think recently what we’ve seen is some needed attention on 

long-term care, and what we’ve seen recently is the creation of 

a $10 million Urgent Issues Action Fund to help address issues 

that have previously been identified, like purchasing required 



3712 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

equipment, insuring that more baths are available, that there’s 

improved nutrition, improving responsiveness, and a range of 

other initiatives. We know that there is more to do, but this 

investment, this additional investment is meant to help make 

sure that we continue to see some improvements in this area 

because that means improvements in the quality of life for 

people right here in the province. 

 

I’d also like to touch upon some of the important work 

undertaken through our Ministry of Social Services. And really 

when we talk about the Ministry of Social Services, we talk 

about efforts that are undertaken to help provide greater support 

and services for those among the most vulnerable in our 

community. I think we’ve been able to make some important 

gains in this area, again with the knowledge that there’s always 

more to do. 

 

A couple of areas that have come to mind, first and foremost on 

housing. Our government has committed more than $344 

million to expand the housing supply across the province by 

more than 12,600 units and to repair or upgrade about 24,000 

additional units by 2016. In fact last year, Saskatchewan led the 

nation in housing starts on a per capita basis with the total 

number of rental starts in 2011 and 2012 exceeding the number 

of rental starts in the previous 16 years combined. Again we 

know there’s more to do, but when we begin to look at statistics 

that offer that there were more rental starts in 2011 and 2012 

than all of those in the previous 16 years, I think it demonstrates 

a heartfelt commitment for us to move forward in this area. 

 

Indeed and additionally, we’ll be broadening the HeadStart on a 

Home program to encourage the construction of additional 

rental properties. And since its creation in 2011, HeadStart on a 

Home has provided more than $193 million to finance the 

construction of more than 1,150 entry-level homes across the 

province. That’s a big idea, Mr. Speaker. We know housing is 

vitally important. This is an initiative that’s making a real 

difference for Saskatchewan families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know that there’s more work to do with 

those that work to overcome and work through and demonstrate 

their resilience as they work with others in areas of disabilities. 

And I’m very pleased to see that more than 11,000 

Saskatchewan citizens with long-term and enduring disabilities 

have now enrolled in our SAID program, an income support 

program that recognizes unique needs and experiences. And I 

can think of a number of conversations, and I know I’m not 

alone, as colleagues again on both sides of the aisle meet on a 

regular basis with those among our most vulnerable in the 

province. This initiative is making a difference in people’s 

lives, and it’s based on stories that we’ve heard about ways to 

help out perhaps in just simple, straightforward ways. This year 

our government was pleased to bolster the benefits paid out 

under the SAID program for the third regular increase that’s 

taken place over the course of the last four years. 

 

I’d also just like to touch on the work that’s under way to help 

support our seniors, again with the knowledge that there’s 

always more to do. A few months ago we were pleased to 

increase the benefits paid out under the seniors’ income plan, 

and indeed at this point more than 16,000 Saskatchewan seniors 

receive SIP [seniors’ income plan] benefits every month. And 

this I think is vitally important when we think in the context of 

our population and some of the demographic characteristics that 

we see here in Saskatchewan, a growing population to be sure, 

1.1 million people strong, but we know that seniors have played 

a vital role in helping to lay the foundations of Saskatchewan. 

And we think that this is a very, very important support 

initiative that we hope is, certainly the feedback is helping to 

make a difference in people’s lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the course of the last 14 months or so, I’ve 

had an opportunity to spend a fair amount of time in a number 

of our rural and remote communities and reserve communities. 

And during that time, especially in our North, I received some 

considerable feedback about people in communities that wanted 

to have greater access to high-speed Internet, among other 

services. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very pleased to see, 

within the Speech from the Throne, the northern fibre 

expansion project which is a partnership between SaskTel, 

SaskPower, and Cameco to bring high-speed bandwidth to our 

North through 566 kilometres of new fibre replacement. 

 

[15:15] 

 

This is going to make a real difference. It’s going to make a real 

difference for young people, especially in those communities 

that are increasingly connected. In fact when the member from 

Fairview and I undertook some consultations with First Nations 

and Métis youth across the province, we saw how connected 

these young people are and want to be in ever-increasing ways. 

And I think this is going to make a real difference in the lives of 

those young people, among others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also just want to highlight on a key issue of the 

environment and regarding water. What we saw in the Speech 

from the Throne is that it is highlighted that our government has 

implemented, under the good work of our Minister of the 

Environment, a 25-year Saskatchewan water security plan to 

ensure our water resources are used in a sustainable manner. 

And we know how important water is for today, but also for the 

future. And so we know how important the work of our 

Minister of the Environment, and a good friend and colleague 

from Saskatoon, how important his work has been in this 

endeavour. And I wanted to make sure that we highlighted this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have the privilege of serving as the Minister 

of Advanced Education, and I wanted to touch on a number of 

initiatives that have been identified in the Throne Speech as 

well as those that are consistent with and aligned with the 

speech. Mr. Speaker, since first taking office we know that 

advanced education has been identified as a consistent priority 

for our government. In fact during the 2007 election we 

highlighted the graduate retention program which, shortly after 

being elected, we were then able to act upon. The program 

provides up to $20,000 back over seven years for graduates that 

stay and work and thrive here in Saskatchewan. And I’m 

delighted to highlight that since its inception, since this 

program began in 2008, we now see more than 40,000 

graduates from across Saskatchewan benefiting in the graduate 

retention program. 

 

This is a vitally important number because when we think about 

that 1.1 million, when we think about the population having 

increased by more than 100,000 people, we know that graduate 

retention, that is, making sure that young people as they 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3713 

successfully complete and finish school, whether that’s an 

apprenticeship program, whether that’s a SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] diploma or a SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] certificate, 

whether it’s out of the regional colleges or through our 

universities, that they’re staying in Saskatchewan and they 

continue to draw on this program. It’s one of the reasons that 

we’ve made sure that it’s in place, and we’re delighted to see 

that they’re helping to build and helping to ensure that the 

momentum remains under way in the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also put in place, based on a platform 

commitment from 2011, the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship which provides $500 a year, up to a maximum of 

$2,000, to high school graduates that then move on to 

post-secondary education and skills training right here in 

Saskatchewan. And the good news is more than 4,500 students 

are benefiting from this initiative already, Mr. Speaker. These 

are just a couple of programs that we think are making a real 

difference in the lives of young people because we know young 

people have always helped to define and give shape to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact in student supports this past budget, the budget year that 

we’re currently in, sees more than $117 million in student 

supports for programs such as scholarship, loans, and bursaries. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that this draws on a number of 

initiatives that, as a government, we’ve focused on and helped 

to put in place, for example, reducing interest rates on the 

Saskatchewan portion to student loans, eliminating vehicles 

from the calculation of student loans, allowing full-time 

students to earn as much as they choose to during their time of 

study, and a number of other initiatives that we heard directly 

from students that in small but significant ways helped to 

improve the quality of their life, helped to ensure that they have 

a few more dollars in their pocket while they’re studying, and 

helped to ensure that as they’re successful in their studies, that 

they can then look to the thousands of job opportunities that are 

available in the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on student supports, since that first budget in 

’07-08 we’ve provided more than $388 million in student 

supports, Mr. Speaker. We want to make sure that again that 

message is very, very clear, that our post-secondary sector and 

our students especially have opportunities to continue to thrive 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the post-secondary sector, our 

institutions and students combined, we’ve made sure that those 

investments again have been a real priority. That’s why the 

overall investments since coming to office in 2007, the overall 

investments for post-secondary education, including student 

supports, is $4.6 billion, Mr. Speaker. It includes operating 

costs, capital projects, and student supports. For example, since 

2007, operating funding to the University of Regina has 

increased by 36 per cent to over $105 million. Operating 

funding to the University of Saskatchewan is up 59 per cent to 

now about $333 million. Operating funding to SIAST is up 23 

per cent to $147 million. And operating funding to our regional 

colleges is up about 61 per cent to over $27 million. 

 

We’ve also invested significantly in key capital projects. In fact 

since 2007 and ’08 we’ve invested over $400 million into 

capital projects in the post-secondary sector. A good portion of 

this funding has been dedicated to the Health Science Building 

at the University of Saskatchewan. I had an opportunity to be 

there two or three times in recent weeks, and we know how 

important that building is for the future of the University of 

Saskatchewan as well as for the future of this province. It’s 

home to students and faculty and researchers. In fact we were 

able to have a look at one of the labs, and work is under way. 

And it’s just wonderful to see the kind of endeavours that that 

investment is now allowing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also participated with the federal 

government in previous years with the knowledge infrastructure 

program. And it’s worth highlighting a few of these initiatives, 

Mr. Speaker, because that knowledge infrastructure program as 

it pertained to the post-secondary sector offered more than $117 

million in infrastructure improvements and enhancements, for 

example, the Western College of Veterinary Medicine. We 

were able to complete the renovations. Essentially when we 

came into office, the Western College of Veterinary Medicine 

was tarped. Construction had come to a standstill. That was 

affecting not simply the Western College of Veterinary 

Medicine, but it was affecting communities right across the 

province. We were able to move forward. That construction is 

now complete at the University of Saskatchewan, and we know 

that the Western College of Veterinary Medicine has students 

studying from British Columbia, from Alberta, from 

Saskatchewan, from Manitoba, and from other places across 

Canada and beyond. And, Mr. Speaker, that was a vital priority 

for us to move forward to help ensure that we continued to 

demonstrate our leadership, a leadership that continues to be 

acknowledged. 

 

We were able to move forward with Lab Building upgrades at 

the University of Regina. And we continue to see a number of 

other initiatives right across the province, whether we’re talking 

about improvements at Great Plains, whether we’re talking 

improvements in the Southeast at an energy centre that’s now 

down in Estevan, whether we’re talking about the 

improvements that, and really the enhancement of an entire 

facility in Nipawin. I recently had an opportunity to go and tour 

right across the province. We see that those dollars, both federal 

and provincial dollars, have helped to make a real difference. 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, that we continue to see real progress 

on, relates to student housing. In fact, since 2007 and ’08, 

we’ve provided more than $34.8 million towards more than 

1,000 new units since we’ve become government. That’s more 

than a 4,000 per cent funding increase in our first six years 

compared to the opposition’s last six years — a 4,000 per cent 

increase in funding for student housing. Mr. Speaker, that 

means more students in communities like La Ronge, in 

Saskatoon, in Meadow Lake, in Prince Albert are now able to 

focus more time on their studies because they and their families 

have more places to live. And in fact, in this most recent 

budget, the University of Regina received an additional $10 

million to begin construction on a new 605-bed student 

residence and child care facility. Mr. Speaker, we know there’s 

more to do here, but this is a very real and lasting contribution 

to the quality of life for our students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to highlight some of the work that 

we’ve done in co-operation with First Nations and Métis 



3714 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

students and educators and institutions right across the 

province. In the last six years, we’ve seen an investment of 

more than $245 million in First Nations and Métis education 

and skills development, which includes providing $5.7 million 

for SIIT, a 51 per cent increase from 2007. It includes more 

than $10 million for the Gabriel Dumont Institute, a 39 per cent 

increase from 2007. 

 

And importantly across Saskatchewan’s post-secondary sector, 

we see that First Nations and Métis students, the enrolment of 

these students has increased from around 13,000 students to 

now more than 15,000 students over the course of the last five 

years. This year alone there’s been a significant increase in First 

Nations and Métis enrolments in our universities. For example, 

at the University of Regina there’s been a 15 per cent increase 

year over year. At First Nations University of Canada, we’re 

very happy to see a more than 21 per cent jump in enrolment at 

that institution. At the University of Saskatchewan, we see — 

and the numbers are still preliminary — we anticipate what has 

been a 30 per cent increase in Aboriginal enrolment at the 

University of Saskatchewan. Those are some of the indicators. 

 

There are other institutions that are seeing similar trends. For 

example, we recently did a tour of Cumberland College in 

Nipawin, and we’ve seen significant enrolment increases from 

our First Nations and Métis students in that institution. We 

know that at Northlands College enrolments are strong, and in 

fact they’re looking for ways to enhance some of their mining 

initiatives. And right across the province we’re seeing very, 

very promising trend lines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there’s a lot to do in this area and we 

know that our First Nations and Métis people already play a 

vital role in Saskatchewan’s economy. Just last night I had the 

opportunity to help share in the celebration of Cameco’s 25th 

anniversary. And, Mr. Speaker, we know how important 

Cameco is when it comes to employment, especially in our 

northern communities, Mr. Speaker. So there’s always more to 

do, but it’s through that kind of investment through advanced 

education and skills training, and then to see our private sector 

partners, especially with their employment opportunities, like 

those of Cameco, among many, many others, we see that we are 

making some significant progress. We know there’s a lot more 

to do here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne we’ve seen an 

announcement of more than 1,000 new training seats. This is 

going to include 300 additional apprenticeship seats, which is 

going to bring the total number of apprenticeship seats to more 

than 6,700, an increase of 76 per cent since 2007. We know 

there’s more to do, but a 76 per cent increase in apprenticeship 

seats. 

 

We also see that we’re moving forward with 700 new spots 

added to adult basic education, and this is vitally important, Mr. 

Speaker. We heard that again, the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview and I heard about the significance of adult basic 

education seats right across the province. This is going to bring 

that seat count to more than 8,500, an increase of 46 per cent, 

again since having the opportunity to come to office in 2007. 

 

The Speech from the Throne also highlighted the significance 

of being able to move forward the new centre of excellence 

regarding manufacturing. And that centre of excellence is also 

going to play an important role, especially when it comes to 

connecting the learning and earning opportunities for our First 

Nations and Métis students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks ago I had the pleasure of 

attending, with the member from Yorkton and the Premier, the 

announcement at Parkland Regional College where our Premier 

announced $10 million for a new trades and technology centre 

in Yorkton. And I want to applaud the member from Yorkton 

because over the course of the last several years he’s been 

tenacious in making sure that that remained on our radar screen. 

He was a key liaison and link between the ministry and his 

local community, as well as the college, making sure that as 

questions came up they were being addressed quickly on both 

sides. 

 

And so I want to applaud our colleague from Yorkton for his 

diligent and hard work on this. I also want to say how much we 

appreciated the assistance of the Minister of Finance for his 

efforts as well. The facility is going to help to address trades 

and technical training needs in the region by graduating 

hundreds of students per year and providing upgrading for more 

than 2,000 students annually. 

 

[15:30] 

 

What’s also impressive about this project is the level of 

community support. Parkland Regional College has raised more 

than $8 million within the region through its capital campaign 

— more than $8 million. And in fact, I think next week there’s 

likely to be another community-based announcement that’s 

going to be recognized probably right across the province and 

maybe well beyond for another significant investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate CEO Fay Myers, the 

board, and the staff at Parkland Regional College, as well as the 

students because the students played a key role. And certainly 

when we were there we were able to engage them, learned a lot 

from the students, whether they’re local students, whether 

they’re from nearby reserves and coming in and interacting. As 

well, Parkland has about 60 international students, and so we’re 

seeing that that college is increasingly diverse and dynamic and 

cosmopolitan in its character. We’re delighted to be able to 

together move forward on this new initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2012 I had the opportunity to introduce in this 

Assembly and ultimately to help pass the degree-granting Act. 

This Act provides the ability to extend degree-granting 

authority or authorization to post-secondary educational 

institutions outside the University of Saskatchewan, outside the 

University of Regina. The goal of the Act is to make sure that 

we’re being both responsive to local communities and regional 

communities, and at the same time responsible to our students 

and other stakeholders on quality assurance. And I think we’ve 

got a mechanism in place that allows for that careful balance. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to highlight that we’ve been 

able to move forward with both Briercrest College and SIAST 

as the authorization for those two institutions to grant degrees 

has gone forward. 

 

In the case of Briercrest, they now have authorization, and we 

were able to present this at the recent installation of the new 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3715 

president of Briercrest. We were able to present this in a form 

and format that we hope has enduring qualities; they will be 

able to really, and quite literally, hang this on the wall. And also 

to provide similar documentation to SIAST, which can now 

offer a Bachelor of Psychiatric Nursing. This is another effort to 

make sure that more students have greater access to 

post-secondary opportunities right across the province. 

 

And I think, importantly, Mr. Speaker, within the Speech from 

the Throne we were able to highlight that SIAST is going to 

continue to evolve. We know how important this institution is, 

and we were delighted to see both Dr. Larry Rosia and Board 

Chair Ralph Boychuk here as we support the evolution of 

SIAST into a proper polytechnic institution. And certainly we 

know how important that’s going to be for the SIAST campuses 

right across Saskatchewan, whether it’s in Prince Albert, 

whether it’s in Moose Jaw, whether it’s in Saskatoon and 

Regina. And we know how important it is. 

 

SIAST actually became a member of Polytechnics Canada in 

December of 2012 as it began to position itself for this. And we 

know that three defining features of polytechnic education in 

Canada are first and foremost, that there is a degree-granting 

option. We’ve been able to make sure that that’s in place. 

Secondly, that research that’s undertaken is applied, and the 

innovation that it’s focused on has real grassroots application. 

In fact SIAST now has the capacity to receive funding from the 

Canadian Foundation for Innovation as well as NSERC 

[Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 

Canada]. 

 

We’re delighted to see that this strategic positioning is going to 

allow SIAST to play an increasingly important role, again in 

applied research. As well it’s going to continue on, as other 

polytechnics do across the country, with trades training and the 

apprenticeship opportunities that we continue to expand. And 

so we’re proud to support SIAST, and we’ll continue to assist 

this organization, this very important post-secondary institution, 

as it continues to move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech helps to guide our government 

as we continue to move forward with many partners right 

across the province, including importantly our post-secondary 

partners. Mr. Speaker, education is one of those big ideas that 

has been a defining feature since the founding of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, what’s important is now, with more than 40,000 

graduates benefiting from the graduate retention program, that 

means they’re staying in Saskatchewan. They’re working in 

Saskatchewan. They’re raising their families in Saskatchewan. 

They’re helping to increase the quality of life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know how important post-secondary education 

is. We know how important these young people are. It has been 

forever thus in this province. In this big land for a big people 

with big ideas, we’re delighted to see that these big people, our 

young people, are staying in Saskatchewan and making a real 

difference in helping to set the course for the new 

Saskatchewan and the next Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s in this theme and in this spirit that I’m 

delighted to support the Speech from the Throne. And I 

appreciate the honour and opportunity of having the chance to 

speak directly to the Speech from the Throne. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure and an honour to enter into the debate on the 

Speech from the Throne 2013. Listening to the member from 

Greystone, I almost thought the theme of the speech was, we 

know there’s more work to do. And I think that’s an acute 

observation on his part because they do have a lot more work to 

do. And he certainly acknowledged it throughout his remarks. 

 

There is a lot of work to do. We have an awesome 

responsibility. We are very glad, very happy that people are 

choosing Saskatchewan as a place to call home. It’s a great 

place to be. And we think that’s a wonderful thing, but it comes 

with an awesome, awesome responsibility to make sure our 

province is sustainable and that people, when they come here 

and they bring their families, that they can expect that it’s 

affordable, it’s safe and that their whole families, including 

their parents and the children, are safe and well looked after. 

 

So I’ll get into more on those details as we go forward. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I think this speech in many ways falls short for the 

families and the people here in this province who have a right 

to expect more from their government. This government’s been 

in power now some six years. And this government, I mean, we 

often hear this, they tend to skip a beat and want to talk about 

the ’90s as the reason things . . . why they are hobbled and can’t 

do the things they should be doing. But that’s not quite true. It’s 

their responsibility. The Sask Party asked for the job. They got 

the job, and they should deliver. And that’s what people . . . 

that’s their expectation. 

 

Now before I get started on my comments and the body of my 

remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to acknowledge 

several people. And of course, as we should do and we ought to 

do is acknowledge our family and our support. It’s not easy 

being in the role we have because if we do our job well, we’re 

out and about and we hear things that we should hear. And 

sometimes it’s pleasant and sometimes it’s not so pleasant. And 

when we have those people come up to us, I always say, you 

know, this is why I’m here, to be accessible to people so they 

can tell me what’s on their mind. And whether it’s a good thing 

or a bad thing, it’s our job. We asked for the job and it all 

comes with it. And we have to act with a certain class and a 

certain graciousness in that role. 

 

So I do want to extend a thank you to my own family who have 

experienced this now for several years. They’ve been very 

supportive and they continue to do so. I want to thank my own 

executive back in Saskatoon Centre for being supportive as 

well, to make sure I continue to do my own work, and my 

constituents,. I tell you, you know, I know, I know the member 

from Nutana said last night she has the best riding, the best 

constituency. I think it’s the second best. I think Saskatoon 

Centre is really the heart of Saskatchewan. I think it’s the best. I 

tell you we have, along Spadina Crescent, the most beautiful 

part of the province. When you’re taking a walk along there, 

along the Bessborough and the churches, it’s a beautiful place. 

And people often think of that image when they think of 

Saskatchewan. And I’m proud to represent downtown 

Saskatoon. 

 



3716 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

I have a very diverse, very diverse constituency because I also 

represent a lot of 20th Street. I share that with the MLA for 

Riversdale, 21st and 22nd. Real working class areas where 

these are the folks that really drive the economy, drive the 

service industries. And when I talk about issues, when we talk 

about labour issues, these are the folks that really put things 

together for Saskatchewan. They are the ones working in the 

mines. They’re the ones who are working in the stores. Many of 

them have ties to agriculture. Many of them go up north. And 

many of them are in unions, many of them are not, but they 

make a lot of difference. 

But I also represent some very wealthy people downtown, in 

the condos downtown. And sometimes they don’t call me as 

often as they might, but that’s what I understand. I think and I 

know that Bill Doyle, the president of Potash Corp of 

Saskatchewan, he lives downtown in one of the condos. A big 

deal when he moved up here as part of the commitment Potash 

Corp made. But he hasn’t called me many times. I don’t expect 

that, but that’s okay. But I represent a wide range of people, I 

truly do, and it’s a real honour. And I take it very seriously that 

we all want the best for Saskatchewan. And I think on both 

sides of this House, that’s what we really truly do. 

And as a teacher, I would often have that conversation with 

parents when they would come in, very unhappy about what’s 

happening in the school. We have a common ground. We all 

want what’s best for the students. And in this House, we want 

what’s all best, what’s best for Saskatchewan citizens and 

residents. That’s our goal. That’s our goal, and we take that 

further into Canada, and as a global responsibility. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to underline that when we see 

the exciting things that are happening downtown — whether 

it’s in the arts, or whether it’s in business, whether it’s in social 

justice movements — when we have member statements, I’ll 

highlight some of those. For example, Equal Justice For All, an 

advocacy group for those less fortunate, they’re back in 

business. They’ve worked hard to re-establish their funding and 

that’s exciting. I see high schools . . . I see Mount Royal that’s 

done so well in terms of trades training and child care, 

providing training in that area. It’s a real rebirth of that school. 

But I also think about E.D. Feehan, the exciting things that are 

happening at E.D. Feehan and Bedford and the community 

schools in our schools.  

So it’s an exciting time. And it’s an exciting time to be in our 

province because we are seeing some amazing things happen. 

And it’s a good time to be here, but there are challenges 

because we know families are facing challenges daily that they 

think can be addressed by government and should be addressed 

by government and need to be addressed by government, but 

this government fails on those counts. And I will, I will get into 

it as we go forward. 

So in many ways it’s a disappointing speech. As I said, families 

are looking for more. They’re working harder than ever, but 

they’re not seeing this government step up to the plate and take 

responsibility. They’re seeing a lack of vision for what it means 

to be a family in Saskatchewan and what it means to be a senior 

in Saskatchewan and what it means to be a kid in 

Saskatchewan. These are real challenges that this government 

needs to take on and needs to take on as quickly as possible. 

And I think and I would argue that they should change their 

moniker, their motto, that there’s more work to do. We know 

there’s more work to do. I don’t know how many times I’ve 

heard it today, that there’s more work to do. We know that. 

Well we do know that. Let’s get on with it. And that’s what 

we’re talking about with this Throne Speech. 

So we see The StarPhoenix editorial from last week on October 

24th, the day after the Throne Speech, and it says, the headline 

is, “Detailed speech offers no vision.” And clearly that’s the 

problem. It’s more than just setting an agenda. This is where 

people get excited about seeing, hey I can get behind what this 

government’s doing. I can support what this government’s 

doing. 

But it was more like a job jar of things that they pulled out of 

both things they’re going to do — and I think of the Highway 

Traffic Safety report and that’s a good thing, but that needs to 

go further, that needs to go further — but they’re also pulling 

out things from the past. And people are getting this mixed 

message. Is that new money? Is that old money? What are they 

talking about here? It’s like you need some sort of road map to 

understand what this government is doing sometimes. 

But the other one that was interesting is this, and the member 

from Athabasca raised this today in a member’s statement, and 

that’s Bruce Johnstone’s column from October 12th, 2013. And 

the headline is “Sask. Party growth plan adrift.” And I thought 

it was a very thoughtful reflection on the past six years of this 

government and where they’ve come and where they’re going 

and what’s really happening. And I will quote from that 

column, and I quote: 

From where I sit, the government’s track record in 

economic development brings to mind Stephen Leacock’s 

famous phrase “riding madly off in all directions.” You 

could say it’s been two steps forward and three steps back. 

A harsh assessment perhaps, but let’s look at the record. 

[15:45] 

And really that’s what we need to do. Now whenever this 

government gets challenged, it says, let’s talk about the ’90s. 

Let’s talk about the ’90s. Let’s talk about the record. Let’s 

really talk about what this government has done, you know, 

whether it’s Enterprise Saskatchewan, the cornerstone of the 

Premier’s 2004 economic plan, the promise of Saskatchewan, 

all of these things. Where are they now? Where are they now? 

The film employment tax credit — where is that? What about 

the hostile takeover of Tourism Saskatchewan, the sacking of 

the CEO? All of these things indicate what this government’s 

track record is. 

And as Bruce Johnstone talks about, and I quote again: “What it 
suggests is a government that [as he says] ‘doesn’t play well 

with others.’” Doesn’t play well with others. “In other words, 

the Sask. Party doesn’t like sharing power or tax dollars with 

any organization they don’t have complete control over.” 

And so this is a problem, Mr. Speaker. And we have a real 

concern, a real concern about what is happening as we go 

forward in Saskatchewan, as we see record population 

happening in this province, but we see a government that’s 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3717 

economic plans are adrift, adrift. And that’s not us just saying 

that. This is a well-respected journalist in this province who’s 

been watching both when we were in government and now that 

this party is in government. 

 

So I think there is something to be learned from that column. 

Like really, what is the track record and what is this 

government all about? And I think the point about them not 

playing well together is something that we should all take to 

heart. So we have concerns, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll go through 

this. And as a critic of a few areas, I have some observations to 

make about many of these areas. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve been talking about education 

because it is so important. It really, truly is important. It’s an 

opportunity really, as I said, to make sure our province is 

sustainable. It’s more than just meeting a need. This is a part of 

where we really speak to the vision of what we see this 

province being. Do we see a province of just people who are 

doing the basic industries or do we see an economy that leads 

this province, leads this country, leads North America? What do 

we really see for the people of Saskatchewan? And it’s much 

more than just work. It’s the arts. It’s health care. It’s all of this. 

So education is critically, critically important. 

 

But we see a government that is chronically underfunded. The 

education system here in Saskatchewan has created a situation 

where we know there are students who are in hallways. We 

know that they’re taking classes in boot rooms, that this is . . . 

The lack of funding has impacted the kids’ learning. We know 

that there are cutbacks in educational assistants. We know that 

there are real challenges in terms of educational assistants 

making a real difference for those students who have special 

needs. We know this is a reality of far too many classrooms in 

this province. And we know particularly that there are specific 

barriers and challenges for students of First Nations and Métis 

descent. And what do we see with this government? We see a 

lack of willingness to really tackle this problem. 

 

And in fact last year, on April 15th, we saw the release of this 

report, the joint task force on improving education and 

employment outcomes for First Nations and Métis people. Do 

you remember that? That was April 15th, last year. Not a 

mention of this report. And this report was done by three 

well-respected citizens of this province, cost a lot of money. 

They were really committed to making sure that they would 

have an impact on the education of Aboriginal kids in 

Saskatchewan. But where is it? Where is it? It’s not even 

mentioned, not even mentioned in the Throne Speech. Now I 

can understand why it wasn’t mentioned so much in the Throne 

Speech a year ago because we were still waiting for it, but this 

is the time when it should have been incorporated into this 

year’s Throne Speech. And it’s not there. It’s not there. Why? 

Has the government lost that report? What happened to that 

report? What’s the game plan going forward with that report? 

 

Aboriginal kids, First Nations kids deserve so much better. And 

they see this report being shelved, sitting on a shelf and, as they 

say, gathering dust. Where is it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think 

this is appalling. And here we have an opportunity in a province 

that’s doing as well as we’re doing, and we have let that fall 

through the cracks. We’ve let that fall through the cracks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to just take a moment and talk a little 

bit about the P3s. And do you know this government is working 

very hard and we’re hearing every member so far, almost every 

member so far, get up and speak in favour of this. So clearly 

they want to create the idea on their side that this is the answer, 

and don’t think about it. Don’t be critical thinking on this one, 

especially in education around schools. Don’t do any critical 

thinking about whether this is a good idea or a bad idea. Just 

follow the lines, ideological lines around P3s when it comes to 

schools and bundling schools. 

 

And we see a lot of people asking questions about, really, is this 

the best way we should be doing this? We know we need new 

schools. There’s no argument there. We know we need to get 

on with the job. We all agree with that. There’s no argument 

there. But are P3s the way to go? Just what we’re hearing in 

The Calgary Herald where they’re having some real problems. 

 

And the minister talks about contractor fatigue, or there’s just 

too much work out there and people may not be interested. And 

we’re making a big investment. We’re going down this road for 

18 schools. We’re committing a lot of money, so we better 

make sure we get our value for that. And we see what happened 

in Nova Scotia when they bundled 50 schools together and they 

decided the last 20 or so, they’d better — or 12 — they should 

do on their own because it was cheaper, because the P3 model 

was not working. 

 

We saw what was happening in New Brunswick. And we saw 

what happened in Edmonton where we had these cookie-cutter 

style of schools. And we know in Saskatchewan, particularly in 

Saskatchewan where you see communities that have specific 

needs for schools that are different from each other, and a 

cookie-cutter model just won’t work. 

 

And so there’s a lot of questions about this, you know. And I 

think that it’s interesting that the Finance minister . . . And I’m 

going to quote from a column that actually came out today from 

Murray Mandryk. And this is . . . But we’ve known this, this 

has been the thinking of the Finance minister. But this is how 

Murray Mandryk quotes, and I quote, “Finance Minister Ken 

Krawetz — when education minister — rejected the P3 model 

for the Willowgrove school in 2008 because the cost was too 

high.” He said, and I quote: 

 

“It’s easy to say a P3 is a great idea in the first year when, 

in fact, over 25 years, it may not be such a great idea,” 

Krawetz said on Nov. 13, 2008. “So we’re not moving 

forward with P3s at this time.” 

 

So that’s what one of the former ministers of Education said. 

Now we’ve had a few ministers of Education, I have to say, so 

we’re going to go back a bit here. But he was the first one and 

he took a look at that, and I think you need to look at what he’s 

saying about that now. He took some time. He travelled down 

East, I understood, to take a look, to see how things were going 

with P3s. And he came back and said, that’s not a good idea. 

And I think it was down East where they came up with that 

phrase, debt is debt is debt. There’s no way of hiding it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And sometimes people . . . And I know the 

member from Nutana really actually said this quite eloquently 

last night about debt and P3s, that sometimes people are 

attracted to them because it’s a way of hiding debt or putting it 



3718 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

off to the side and it’s not counted. But truly we know the debt 

will come home because somebody has to pay, and it will be 

the taxpayers who pay. And so debt is debt is debt. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, we’ve been talking about 

our review of P3 school plans. We think it’s important to have 

an independent technical review of the government’s plans to 

make sure that we are getting value for money, that this is the 

best way to go, that we’re not making a commitment to a 

situation that will cause us a lot of problems further down the 

road. And we’ve got to make sure that we do that work, and I 

think a lot of people are asking the question about that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to have a lot of discussion 

about P3s, and I’ve got to tell you, this government’s track 

record when it comes to portables this fall . . . Now I haven’t 

heard many of the speakers from their side talk about or try to 

defend what happened with the portables this fall. But if that’s a 

sign of things to come, this is going to be the kind of message 

of what people can expect, we’ve got a lot to worry about, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as there is a lot of problems ahead if this is 

what P3s mean. When this government bundled those portables 

together thinking they were going to get a better deal, and that’s 

just not what happened at all. People had high hopes and people 

said, we’ll play along. The school board said, we’ll play along, 

you guys. We’ll give it a try . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — More of a bungle. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — More of a bungle than a bundle, that’s for sure. 

So I think there’s a little credibility issue here when it comes to 

this government. Now, Mr. Speaker, I do want to take a minute 

and talk about bullying. And I think that’s an important issue 

that we’ve all come to appreciate, that the time is now and that 

we need to act on it right away. And we were very encouraged 

this morning to see the headlines in The StarPhoenix that the 

minister, “Minister wants bully plan released.” And it was great 

to see that he says he wants it to be released as soon as possible, 

and that’s important that we have that. 

 

And we know that since we’ve been calling for this — and I 

want to talk a little bit about what our record is and how we’ve 

been talking about this — but it’s been over a year now, about a 

year that we’ve been talking about how important bullying is. 

So it’s important that this government get on track and get this 

happening because our province unfortunately has had a couple 

of suicides in the recent past that we just need to say, we’ve got 

to resolve this issue. We’ve got to get to work on this and get it 

resolved as soon as possible. We cannot be saying, there’s more 

work to be done, and we’re going to do it in the months ahead, 

or we’re going to wait for an appropriate timeline. That’s just 

not on. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know, and I just want to take a minute 

and say, you know, it was interesting that yesterday in question 

period I did raise this, and the minister had a couple of 

interesting answers that I just want to take a minute and reflect 

on, because I was a little surprised at his answers. And I 

appreciate the fact that he quoted our leader. And this is what 

he quotes our leader as saying, and I quote: 

 

The Leader of the Opposition had this to say on Twitter 

over the weekend: “Absolutely heartbreaking. I am 

committed to working with the government to ensure 

Saskatchewan does a better job of combatting bullying.” 

That was the member for Saskatoon Massey Place, the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

So true. We are committed to working with the Government of 

Saskatchewan to combat bullying. We’ve taken that position. 

That’s been our position, and that will be our position as we go 

forward to combat bullying so we don’t see the tragic results in 

teen suicides or teen violence or what happens in schools. We 

have to stop that. 

 

So I just want to underline that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 

was a little bit taken back when the minister then said, we have 

until October 31st to file our submission. And I have to say, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — and you’ve been here longer than I 

have — I was a little bit taken back because I think what’s 

important to all of us here is the debate that happens on this 

floor. And I look at Hansard, and I honour Hansard, because 

it’s a record of what all of us say. And that’s where we come to 

share our ideas — on the floor of this legislature. We do text 

people; we do phone people; but this is where the public 

expects us to do the work, on this floor. We ask questions to 

make sure people get answers because they want those answers. 

And when we do our Throne Speech responses, that’s our 

contribution to the work of the government. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, we have made a lot of contributions to the work of 

bullying to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now the Government of Saskatchewan may have a Legislative 

Secretary, and we wish her well in her deliberations, and we 

hope that her work is fruitful and productive. But as an 

opposition, as members of the legislature, the people of 

Saskatchewan have paid us to do our submissions, to do our 

work on the floor of this legislature. And that’s really 

important. 

 

We do it in a public place, in this beautiful place, and we have 

galleries for people to come and see us have this dialogue, this 

debate. We don’t do it by submissions. This is really critical, 

Mr. Speaker. And this is why we have Hansard. This is why 

this is televised. This is why we attend here, and we make it 

possible for people to attend to the legislature so we can have 

this debate. It’s not just something as an afterthought. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was surprised when the minister . . . 

I don’t know what he was saying, but I know the government 

has many, many researchers who read Hansard, and that’s our 

. . . and this will be . . . And we have contributed to this 

dialogue, this debate on bullying for many, many months. And 

I want to talk about a couple of them today. And the one that I 

wanted . . . I mean there’s three of them that I want to highlight. 

But the first one is is when the Minister of Justice, on April 

25th, wanted to go to the provincial-federal meetings about 

cyberbullying. And we had a special debate in the House that 

day. I hope this debate is not forgotten. It’s in Hansard, and I’m 

looking at it right now. And this is what the minister at the time 

said, and I quote: 

 

By pressing for an early report, the federal, provincial, and 

territorial ministers are sending a signal to Canadians that 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3719 

we take the issue of cyberbullying very seriously. 

 

And we agree with that. We agree with that and we supported it 

in that debate that day because we wanted him to go to his 

meetings fully supported by this legislature, by this floor, by 

this floor. 

 

Now this is what the Premier had to say, and this is what the 

Premier said: 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m grateful for the leave to discuss it, 

and [we are] grateful for the co-operation of the 

opposition when we asked if we could have this 

discussion just before we get into some other business on 

private members’ day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope we will send a strong and clear 

message to the federal governments that they need to look 

at all Criminal Code improvements that could put an end 

to this sort of thing . . . 

 

So the Premier even acknowledges that this is how this House 

works. We co-operate. When there’s good ideas that are 

common sense, we work together. And that’s the spirit in which 

we want to do this bullying initiative. So that’s why I have that 

question for the minister is, why he’s waiting for a submission. 

Our submission happened on April 25th. If they want a 

submission it’s April 25th and this is what we had to talk about. 

This is what our leader had in that speech of the day. He said, 

and he talked about the work in Nova Scotia, and I quote, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker: 

 

Nova Scotia’s also, Mr. Speaker, being proactive in 

combatting cyberbullying . . . 

 

This year’s Speak Up: An Action Plan To Address 

Bullying and Cyberbullying Behaviour lays out a solid 

timeline for new and expanded actions to combat 

cyberbullying. It’s a multi-year action plan that combines 

more than 40 actions involving police, schools, teachers, 

communities, health care providers, families, and 

government. So it’s comprehensive, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

going to places where children are and where change 

needs to happen. 

 

So we had quite a long, a good fruitful discussion on April 

25th. So I’m hoping that contribution has not been lost, because 

it was meaningful and I think the Minister of Justice 

appreciated the fact that we took this, we co-operated with the 

government on that. 

 

I also want to talk about the contribution that our Education 

critic made and this actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you might 

find interesting, goes back to November 29th, 11 months ago. 

In fact exactly 11 months ago when the member from 

Rosemont raised the question in the House about what’s going 

to happen about bullying and interjurisdictional work around 

bullying, and asks, and I will quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the consequences of bullying are devastating 

including depression, self-harm, addictions, and suicide. 

I’ve witnessed these first-hand as a teacher, as I know I’m 

sure the minister has as well. We support the work that the 

province has done to raise awareness about bullying, but 

unfortunately it still occurs. 

 

The Minister of Education said in mid-October the 

province could benefit from further coordinated national 

work. I certainly agree, and we also believe that there’s 

important work to be done here in the province. This is an 

issue that matters to all of us, that causes damage that’s 

simply unacceptable. 

 

What actions has the minister and his ministry taken since 

mid-October to protect students against bullying? 

 

So it’s been over a year that we’ve been asking these questions. 

Now we do this because we believe all of us are committed to 

protecting our youth. And this is our contribution on the floor 

of this House. And this is really important to understand. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s what two of my colleagues had to say. 

And I just want to highlight that in fact we had an interesting 

visitor back on April 16th. And this is Halla Scott. I don’t know 

if you remember the day that we had a visitor from one of the 

high schools in Regina here. And she had come because she 

really wanted to make sure that this government, through the 

Ministry of Education, promoted, acknowledged, supported 

gay-straight alliances in our schools. 

 

And our leader here had been raising this issue for two or three 

weeks in April about this very, very important issue. And so 

what was happening was, the government was saying, we’ll get 

to it. We’ll get to it. But this grade 11 student who I think is a 

real hero for stepping up to the plate and saying, this is what the 

kids want. This is what the kids want. Now this is Halla Scott 

from Regina, and I certainly hope this government hasn’t forgot 

what she was saying that day. 

 

Again I don’t know if she’s made an email contribution, but she 

came to this House, to this legislature, and we often say to their 

legislature. This is her place to come and make a statement, and 

so her government should listen to her. And to have the 

minister say, well the submissions are open until October 31st; 

you can email it, I hope he remembers to listen to Halla Scott. I 

truly hope that he does. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s been many different ways to make a 

contribution to the fight against bullying. And you’ve got to 

know and all the members on this House have got to know that 

we are committed to working with the Government of 

Saskatchewan if it makes common sense and it’s a good, solid 

approach. It’s our job as opposition to hold the government 

accountable, make sure they’re transparent. But we are there to 

make sure our kids in our schools, in our communities, are 

protected. And this is the place where I want to say that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because it’s a time for the response to the 

Throne Speech, and that’s the way it’s been in this province for 

over 100 years. I feel very strongly about that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So I want to talk, I want to shift to a couple of other points I 

want to say before we move on. 

 

But I want to talk about labour. And I was again disappointed, 

actually more than just disappointed, about what was in this 



3720 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

speech. Last year we had a record number of deaths in this 

province. We had 60 deaths in our workplaces — 60 

workplace-related deaths — and this government fails to 

mention any response in the Throne Speech about that situation. 

That is shameful, Mr. Speaker. That is our number one concern 

in our workplace. Sixty deaths. Sixty deaths. We usually have 

between 30 and maybe up to 40, 44. Sixty deaths, but not a 

mention in the Throne Speech about fighting that. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to make that a priority. 

In this side of the House, we will make that a priority for the 

weeks ahead. We have to do better than that. We just can’t say 

. . . We just can’t, on April 28th, have a day of mourning, 

acknowledge 60 names of people who’ve died, and then say 

nothing for the rest of the year. Is that responsible government? 

I don’t think so. I don’t think so at all. Sixty deaths in a 

booming economy like ours, we’ve got to do better. And you 

cannot say there’s more work to be done. The work has to be 

done today in that area. Truly it’s an important issue. 

 

I also want to talk about minimum wage because, as the 

government would know and the minister would know, many 

of the people who live in my riding live on minimum wage. 

And they’ve already got ahead of the bandwagon by saying it’s 

indexed. It’s not indexed. It hasn’t been indexed. The last 

increase of minimum wage in this province was last year. And 

the government made a big deal of rushing through the 

employment Act so they could get to indexing it. That’s why, 

on May 10th, when we had this discussion in committee about 

what was the rush, the minister said, well we have to get it done 

so we can index minimum wage. They were hoping they could 

do it for summer. Now we’re coming up to Christmas, and there 

is no sign of any indexation of minimum wage. So it rings a 

little hollow when this government gets out the PR [public 

relations] and says, we’re indexing minimum wage when, I 

have to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some real, real 

concerns about that. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also wanted to read into the record 

a very interesting letter that was caused by The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. The Archbishop of Regina, the Most 

Reverend Daniel J. Bohan, wrote a pastoral letter on work and 

worship to the Catholic people of the Archdiocese of Regina. 

This was distributed in the Catholic churches in Regina, I 

believe either on Labour Day Sunday or the Sunday following. 

And it’s the first one where we’ve seen this kind of public 

commentary about a government action. And I would really 

encourage the members opposite to reflect on what the 

Archbishop has to say. 

 

Now I have to tell you that I’m not Catholic but I did write all 

the churches about their concerns about the fact that this 

government was taking out the reflection or the connection with 

Sunday out of The Labour Standards Act, and what did that 

really mean for a province like Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the minister would say at the time that in fact actually 

most provinces have taken out Sunday. And that’s not accurate 

either. We know it’s about half and half — half taken out the 

Sunday, half still have it. And it’s how it’s framed. We 

understand the human rights implications of that and I’m totally 

understanding and support of that. But I do also understand that 

our province has been built around the five-day workweek. 

Schools operate on a five-day week, generally speaking. You 

can’t take classes on Saturday. But Sunday usually is 

considered a day that runs right across the spectrum. 

 

But I just want to, I just want to read parts of this letter which 

was so interesting that he circulated this or actually circulated 

through the churches this September. 

 

Dear friends and co-workers with our Lord Jesus; [I’m 

quoting here, with our Lord Jesus Christ] 

 

This past spring, the Saskatchewan Legislature passed Bill 

85. This Bill made wide-ranging changes to labour laws in 

Saskatchewan. As Archbishop of Regina, I wish to remind 

all Catholics, but especially employers and managers, that 

it is important to consider the greater flexibility granted by 

the revised law in view of the moral question of how we 

are to live out our Christian commitment to justice in the 

workplace. 

 

It goes on. 

 

The place of ethics is supremely important as we seek the 

authentic well-being of people in the work place. Our 

legislators [that’s us] need truly to be at the service of the 

common good of their people. Ethics enable us to create a 

balanced social order that is more centered on the human 

person and his or her good and thus promotes the dignity 

and rights of those who work. Every change in our labour 

laws needs to help our society move forwards in seeking 

just working conditions for all. 

 

[16:15] 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

The growing disparity of income in our Canadian society 

is a pointed reminder of the presence of this threat as the 

income of a small few is grows with noticeable rapidity 

while the income of the great majority stagnates. As we 

struggle to make our economy grow there is a noticeable 

tendency to reduce the human person to one of their 

needs: consumption. So people now are not only described 

but identified as “consumers.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to acknowledge and thank the 

Archbishop for . . . I mean it’s quite a thoughtful letter, and I 

would close with this. And he goes on to say: 

 

In this way employers and managers can promote the 

values of human work, recognizing that a person is “more 

precious for what he is than for what he has.” And they 

can promote a “greater justice, wider brotherhood, and a 

more humane ordering of social relationships . . . all of 

which supply the material for human progress.” 

 

So that was Most Reverend Daniel J. Bohan, Archbishop for 

Regina. And I thought that was very thoughtful and something 

that we should all think about as we as legislators do our work 

here, and we do it with a strong sense of ethics about how we 

advance the social condition in Saskatchewan. It is about 

dignity. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I know I’m taking . . . I’ve just got two more 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3721 

points on social services. I wanted to say that this report that 

came out this fall, Out of Sight: How One Aboriginal Child’s 

Best Interests Were Lost Between Two Provinces, not a 

message, not a mention in the Throne Speech about that. How 

did that happen? We need to do better. This is a big issue. I just 

want to say, last week was Foster Parent Week, and we 

acknowledge the good work that foster parents do. But I tell 

you, this is one of the biggest challenges that we have, and 

we’ve just got to step to the plate with that. 

 

I also wanted to say, it was interesting that the member from 

Greystone . . . And I hear this so often, and we’ll hear this more 

from this other side, how they’ve worked so hard for seniors on 

the senior income plan. And I think that it’s a wonderful 

program, and it’s great that it’s been raised up, but I have this 

big question. Four years ago they talked about 18,000 seniors 

being on that plan. They were doubling the number from 9,000 

to 18. Now it’s 16,000. So what happened to the other 2,000 

people? What happened to the other 2,000 people? It was four 

years ago, 18,000 numbers, 18,000. That’s what the rallying cry 

was on this side — doubling nine to 18,000. Now it’s 16,000. 

What happened to the 2,000 seniors that were cut off the 

program? We’ll have lots of questions about that in the weeks 

ahead. 

 

I want to talk about housing. And sadly this Throne Speech 

bundled the old messages that they’ve had, that they’ve brought 

forward but clearly that we need to do better. We need to do so 

much better. Here’s a story in The StarPhoenix just Tuesday, 

September 24th, 2013, when it talks about: 

 

More than 20 per cent of Saskatchewan households are 

living in “unaffordable housing,” [20 per cent] which is 

higher than the national average and Manitoba, but lower 

than Alberta, according to the August edition of Sask 

Trends Monitor. 

 

And Doug Elliott, the editor, this is what he had to say, and I 

quote, “‘This is during a period when incomes rose quite 

dramatically, so this wasn’t because we had less money. It’s 

because housing costs have increased more than incomes.’” 

 

So here we have, Mr. Speaker, a situation that’s facing 20 per 

cent of the people in this province. It’s probably more because 

of renters. It’s even more than 20 per cent. But you have a 

situation coupled with the SaskPower rates that we’re seeing, 

the rate increases. People are finding this a real challenge in 

Saskatchewan when it comes to affordability — a real, real 

challenge. 

 

The other issue I’m going to look a lot for: life lease, what that 

really means versus housing co-ops. And Housing First, we 

didn’t hear any mentions about that. Seniors, that’s a huge, 

huge issue. And I’m looking at the people from Prince Albert 

here. Last year there were four people who died over the winter 

months in Prince Albert of exposure. Now this is a situation 

where the vacancy rate in Prince Albert is 6.5 per cent, so it’s 

not because there’s no place to live, but it’s because of other 

challenges. But four people dying in a Saskatchewan winter in 

Prince Albert over the winter months, what’s happening with 

our housing strategy when that kind of thing can happen? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have some real concerns about housing, and 

affordability is a real issue. And the government can talk about 

their focus on the 3 per cent vacancy rate. We can look at 

what’s happening in Estevan where you have a zero vacancy 

rate. You can look at Prince Albert where it’s 6.5 per cent, but 

you have people dying on the streets because the housing just 

isn’t appropriate. So, Mr. Speaker, we expect more, and I think 

the families and the people of this province expect more for the 

province of Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I just want to say that we have 

an awesome responsibility. And I mean that in the old, classic 

sense, that this is a real huge responsibility to make sure this 

province and the people in the province are well looked after in 

a sustainable way. And there are challenges. And we see that 

there’s huge inequities, whether it’s income, whether it’s 

education, whether it’s care in our houses, care for our seniors 

in long-term care such as raised today with Sylvia Phillips and 

the situation that she finds herself. And we know that there are 

more seniors in that situation. 

 

So there are some real, real challenges that we expect, and the 

people of Saskatchewan expect better from the government that 

we have now. We know this government can do better. It has 

the resources to do better, and it should do better. And it can’t 

keep delaying the job. It needs to get on with it. 

 

We know that we’ll be hearing about the traffic report that was 

. . . the traffic safety report. We expect that there will be lots of 

discussion around that, and we support a lot of it. But I have to 

tell you that the member from Riversdale, who makes a very 

strong point about how we need to impound those cars of 

people who’s been drinking, that that can have a real impact. 

And we can’t understand why the government won’t step up to 

the plate and acknowledge that this has got to happen if we 

truly want to make sure our highways are safe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is something to be able to be in this House, to 

be on this floor, to contribute to the discussions, the debates, the 

dialogue around the issues of the day. We expect that this 

government will step up to the plate, take its work seriously and 

responsibly, and act immediately, as quickly as it can on the 

issues that are facing our families. And whether it be the kids in 

the school and making sure that they’re learning, that they feel 

safe, they have adequate facilities, and that bullying is not part 

of their reality, we can work on that as quickly as possible. We 

need to look after our seniors in a much better way. And we 

have to make sure our workplaces are safe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that, I’ll be voting for the amendment — I 

think it’s the one that makes the most sense — and voting 

against the main motion. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — The glass is half empty. A dollar short, a day 

late. Now for something totally different, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech I’m going to speak to in a 

couple of different segments. First off, a couple of thank yous. 

And I’m so appreciative of my wife, Danielle. And there’s 

some news for this year in our family is that we had our first 

child in June. So June 19th he arrived a couple of weeks early, 



3722 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

but that was all right. He was a healthy weight: 7 pounds, 6 

ounces. And mom did a fantastic job, and we are so happy to 

have Jacob in our life. 

 

And the part that is probably changing — and every father and 

mother has gone through this — is that after you have that first 

child, it’s kind of a different lens that you look at life. And 

that’s kind of the lens that I’m going to look at this Throne 

Speech is, what does it mean to Jacob? And what does it mean 

to Jacob when we’re done our growth plan of 2020? And he’s 

going to be roughly six years of age, and then also going further 

than that. What is life going to be like for Jacob because of the 

vision of this province and this government and what we can be 

as a province? 

 

And this Throne Speech falls on the back of our Saskatchewan 

growth plan that, Mr. Speaker, we introduced a year ago. And 

that is our vision for the province. And really this Throne 

Speech talks about specifics on how we are going to get to our 

objectives based in the growth plan. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going 

to go back — and I know a lot of people have read this 

document — and I’m just going to go back to the six points that 

kind of are the backbone of our growth plan, and then we’re 

going to get into how this Throne Speech speaks to those goals. 

 

Now we have the six areas, which is investing in the 

infrastructure required for growth, which is the first plank. Next 

one is education, training, and development of a skilled 

workforce. Third one, sharing the ongoing competitiveness of 

the Saskatchewan economy. Supporting increased trade, 

investment, and export through international engagement. 

Advancing Saskatchewan’s natural growth strengths, 

particularly through innovation, to build our next economy. 

And ensuring this is all done within a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it’s been a year, and how have we done? Well, Mr. Speaker, 

progress is being made. There is more work to be done for sure 

but for sure that we’re moving towards what those goals have 

laid out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the six areas. And how that relates 

to what we set as goals is important because, Mr. Speaker, we 

know the difference between this side of the House to that side. 

We set goals, Mr. Speaker. The other side wouldn’t set a goal 

because they were fearful that they may actually miss it, Mr. 

Speaker. How do you advance as a government, as a society, or 

even a party if you don’t set goals or benchmarks and work 

towards it. It’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. One of the most I think 

important goal and indicator of how we are doing as a province, 

are — it’s a simple one — are people coming or are people 

leaving? Mr. Speaker, we know that an important milestone 

was reached recently, and one that we stated that is a goal of 

this province to grow to 1.1 million people. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Jacob is one of those 1.1 million people. Mr. Speaker, he is one 

of the people that made up that 100,000 increase in population. 

Mr. Speaker, that took six years to grow. This party has stated 

that the goal was to do it within 10 years, and we have been 

noticing that right now that that growth is actually picking up. 

 

And there is challenges that come from that growth, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll rise to the occasion. These challenges are much 

better to face than the decline that the NDP put us in. If you go 

back to just the population number, just briefly to give a 

context, it took 77 years to grow the last 100,000 increase in 

population. Mr. Speaker, you know who was in charge for the 

vast majority of those 77 years? The NDP. And why is it, why 

was it so tough for this province with so much resources, so 

much opportunity that was squandered? And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe it’s firmly placed on governments past that were 

planning for decline, not planning for growth. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s an unfortunate reality in this province of what held us 

back was that government, when it was in power, the NDP and 

the decisions it made to hold back this province, that we talked 

about people moving in, moving out. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 

was their plan is move people out. 

 

When we talked about this goal and just briefly on this 1.1 

million, we all notice the national average is roughly 1 per cent, 

and it was well stated that the NDP believed that we could not 

grow at the average. We could not be average in the minds of 

the NDP. Not everyone in Saskatchewan believed that, not 

everybody. I know on this side we didn’t, and more importantly 

the people at home because the real thank you and the real 

people that made it possible are the people outside watching in 

right now. Or you know what? Probably they’re not watching. 

They’re at work. They’re creating jobs. They’re creating the 

economy. They’re creating the opportunity for more people, the 

next generation to live in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are the people that believed in what 

could possibly be in the province. 

 

Just briefly, what did the NDP think about when we came to the 

stated goal? Well this is a quote from them: 

 

. . . they [the Sask Party] propose to increase the 

population of Saskatchewan by 100,000 over . . . I forget 

what number of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it is so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, 

that it flies in the face of reality. 

 

That’s the NDP. We could not grow it at the average. We 

couldn’t be average in the Dominion of Canada. In the eyes of 

the NDP, is that it didn’t work. Why would we want to grow? 

You know, and that’s their view. And that’s what shaped this 

province for far, far too long, Mr. Speaker. That’s why it took 

77 years for this province to grow 100,000 people. It took now, 

under new management, it took 6 years. And, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’re just getting started. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And we’ve talked about growth and why it’s important because 

it’s a good indicator is, are people happy with what you’re 

doing? And, Mr. Speaker, it is important to set these goals, and 

we will be measured by it. The reason why we want growth, 

Mr. Speaker, isn’t for the sake of growth; it’s what we can do 

with it. And we’ve heard the other speakers speaking about this 

Throne Speech. And they talk about, well we could have done 

this or what we would have done is that or we would have spent 

more money here or we would have . . . You know what? They 

didn’t do anything for 16 years. 

 

But they didn’t have the ability because the ability to make 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3723 

change in this province is coming from the growth. It’s the 

economy that is creating the opportunity for further investment 

in education. It is affording us the opportunity to look at 

housing and improve the housing in this province .It is 

affording us the opportunity to put record investments in 

post-secondary education, record investments in K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12], Mr. Speaker. It is affording us the 

opportunity to address the deficit in schools. We’ve had 

countless schools that have been closed by the NDP when they 

were planning for decline and being in government. 

 

What did we just announce? Well nine buildings, which is 18 

new schools, that are getting built in Saskatchewan. That’s a far 

cry from what the NDP did when they were in government. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why we want to pursue growth. It lets 

us take the dividends of such growth and fix some of the 

problems that we have out there. And we’ve seen that in 

education. We’ve seen that in health care. 

 

Right now we’re talking about long-term care. And back to 

what I’m going to tell my son in six years when it’s 2020. He’ll 

be roughly 6 years, and a little bit older obviously from there. 

You know his grandparents are going to need some of the 

long-term facilities that are now finally getting built in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. Now this is a far cry. We’ve got 13 new 

long-term care facilities being built in this province, and that 

will help. But why we’re in such a tough situation, Mr. 

Speaker, is because of that party closing 1,200 long-term beds, 

Mr. Speaker. They also closed 16 facilities. So how would we 

be faring today if we had those beds, Mr. Speaker? How about 

those facilities we had on top of what we’re building, that we 

could have the capacity to actually provide the service that we 

all want for our grandparents and seniors? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s challenges in long-term care. 

There’s more work to be done. But you know, a telling, telling 

number is how many people are actually working in long-term 

care facilities. We’ve got 14 per cent more staff now working in 

long-term care facilities versus on the first day that we took 

over. That’s an increase. We know that we need more, but 

could you imagine if we’d continued down the path the NDP 

had us on, closing beds. Their view at the time, that we’re just 

always going to keep declining, that people will just keep 

fleeing the province. And you know what? That’s what they 

were doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’ll get into the Throne Speech here briefly, but I found a 

quote, and I think it sums up nicely on what the planning from 

the NDP was during that time period. It’s their government’s 

view on the economy should be summed up in a few short 

phrases, Mr. Speaker: if it moves, tax it. If it keeps moving, 

regulate it. And if it stops moving, subsidize it. That 

summarizes what the NDP did for those 16 years. That, Mr. 

Speaker, was from a fellow from California, Ronald Reagan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we laid forward is a plan for growth. And 

that plan is what’s our guiding star. We’re going to do what we 

say we’re going to do, and we’re going to achieve those goals 

that are outlined in this book. And we’re going to be held 

accountable. What this Throne Speech does is it starts the next 

page, the next goals that we need to accomplish to fulfill the 

promise of Saskatchewan and the vision that is 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne had some important 

highlights and important goals that we’re going to achieve in 

this session. In 2009 we announced the most aggressive 

strategy to significantly reduce surgical wait times. Mr. 

Speaker, this is probably one of the most important goals for 

Saskatoon Eastview. And it is a goal that we will reach, is that 

no surgery will wait more than three months. Now this is a far 

cry on what it was like a few short years ago under the NDP. 

We have commissioned, as you know, Mr. Speaker, created a 

$10-million Urgent Issues Action Fund to address the issues 

that our minister asked our CEOs to go out to their facilities and 

find out how we are doing. And we’ve drawn on that action 

fund that’s there to start immediately helping the situation. 

 

There’s also in this term where we got building our 

government’s $2-million investment in a Home First/Quick 

Response program launched in Regina this year. Another one 

that’s important is the personal care homes. We have them 

inspected but the people, the residents, and the public aren’t 

able to view those inspections. We’re going to change that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the overall health of the province is well and it’s 

growing. Improvements in health care, there’s an important 

indicator, I think, is how many doctors you have in the 

province. It’s a simple one but are we increasing? Are we going 

down? And what’s the goal? And we stated a goal of 200 new 

doctors. How did we do, Mr. Speaker? We’re at 300. More to 

do. We need more. 

 

We talk about some of the innovation that’s happening in health 

care. And we have the collaborative emergency centre being 

opened in Maidstone. In the coming months, we’re going to see 

Shaunavon’s, Spiritwood, Wakaw, Canora. We’re going to look 

around Canada, and if there’s a smart idea that is being 

implemented, we’re going to, you know, borrow that idea. And 

that’s where we got the hot-spotting program that we’re going 

to welcome to Saskatoon and Regina. This is high-risk, 

high-use patients who repeatedly show up in the emergency 

room. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what successful governments do. They set 

goals and they work to achieve them. Mr. Speaker, what we’re 

trying to do there is eliminate the wait time for emergency 

rooms, which makes sense. If you have an emergency, you need 

to see someone quickly. That’s the definition of emergency. 

And unfortunately, because of the lack of resources placed into 

our health care system from successive NDP governments, we 

were in a place that was very scary. And fortunately this is one 

of the initiatives we’re going to take forward in this year. It’s 

going to drive that wait time. If we can take out those high-use, 

high-risk individuals that are taking up resources and get them 

better health care in the proper setting, that’s just the smart idea 

to do. And that’s what we’re going to do as a government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to look at mental health and addiction 

issues in the province. We know that there is some gaps in how 

we treat addictions and mental health. And you’re going to see 

that roll out this year. 

 

Probably the most important thing now that I have a son, and in 

a few years he’s going to be starting school, is education. And 

we all want the best for our child or children, and I know that’s 



3724 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

what I want for Jacob. And I’m pretty proud of some of the 

initiatives that we’re doing in education, the student-first 

approach to building successes that are already being achieved 

in school divisions through the province. This assessment is 

helping school divisions such as Chinook increase the results of 

their children learning. And it’s working, Mr. Speaker. In 2008, 

63 per cent of the students were reading at grade level. By 

2012, so we’re looking at four years later, this number has 

increased to 84 per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, 63 per cent or 84 per 

cent. You know what? If I had a choice, I’d want my son to be 

at 84 per cent. This is a no-brainer. This is what we’re going to 

roll out. 

 

Another important program is pre-kindergarten and 

kindergarten students and Tell Them From Me surveys. This is 

getting front-line exposure to what students and parents are 

dealing with. Mr. Speaker, we have some pressures in 

education. We’ve seen that with capacity. We see that in 

Saskatoon. These are problems that, you know what, we’ll 

gladly take over the alternative. The alternative — and this is 

what the NDP brings forward — is a decline. Decline in 

enrolment, which results in decline in the ability to fix some of 

the problems out there, especially in education, which would be 

schools falling apart. We know that we’ve put record money 

into repairing schools, replacing schools. 

 

And that work will continue, and this announcement with these 

new elementary schools is much needed throughout the 

province. And you know what? I’ve yet to run into a parent that 

said, you know what, I don’t know. I don’t really want a new 

school. The only people I’ve ever seen or heard from are the 

NDP that don’t like these schools, Mr. Speaker. They’d rather 

not have this growth. They’d rather not have a new school. That 

was the old Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Something different is happening here, something that is going 

to . . . You know what? We’re on a different path in the new 

Saskatchewan. Our classrooms are, we are getting new 

classrooms built. If you start to look at, just since 2007, Mr. 

Speaker, these 18 schools in 9 buildings are important, but you 

look at what else we have done. Our government has invested 

more than $600 million to build 20 new schools and undertake 

23 major renovations in addition to completing approximately 

900 small capital projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our educational system was falling apart under the 

NDP Physically, we had schools that were being condemned. 

We had situations where it just wasn’t safe environment, that if 

we neglect the maintenance of these facilities, unfortunately no 

one would want to send their children to these schools. Mr. 

Speaker, we are addressing those. There is much to be done and 

more work to have for sure. 

 

Just on the pre-kindergarten programs and the development of 

500 new child care spaces bringing the total number of licensed 

child care spaces to more than 13,700 — a 48 per cent increase 

since 2007. Only ones that don’t like that are the NDP. Only 

people that I’ve ever heard of that are disappointed in a 48 per 

cent increase in child care spaces have been the old NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Important part of education now in the new Saskatchewan, and 

as technology increases, is we need better access to the Internet. 

We’ve heard this from front-line teachers is that the bandwidth 

just isn’t enough to deliver what they would like over the 

Internet. So, Mr. Speaker, in this budget or in this Throne 

Speech, what we’ll see in the budget is a $5 million increase 

over four years to CommunityNet which is going to help with 

the bandwidth issues in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that’s on the education side, and Jacob’s a few years 

away. And I can’t wait for that first day of school. I’m sure it’ll 

be an emotional day. My colleague from Walsh Acres is also a 

proud father, and it’s a wonderful time in our respective 

families. But sometime, you know, they’re going to have to go 

to school now too. So post-secondary, and this is an important 

part because when I went through university, it was the dark 

days in this province, the declines, the lack of investment in our 

post-secondary institutes. Mr. Speaker, I once wrote a 

university exam at the University of Saskatchewan in the gym. 

What the gyms were back then was two World War II aircraft 

hangers stacked on top of each other, Mr. Speaker. So you have 

one gym on the bottom, one on the top. Somehow they got that 

approved, and that was the NDP and the old Saskatchewan way 

of doing things, you know. Well we’ll just put the barns 

together and we’ll put that on top of this and it’ll make it all 

work. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Well it worked for a few years but, Mr. Speaker, the one day I 

went to write my final exam and the building was, I don’t 

know, not that it felt differently but there was, there was 

rumours around campus that it wasn’t the safest building. But 

you know what? I went in there in the morning and wrote my 

exam. Returned home at lunch and then I found out that 

afternoon the building was condemned. I was one of the last 

students ever to write in the old phys ed building at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]. That was what the state of the 

universities was back in the ’90s. 

 

So what did this government do? What, since forming 

government in 2007, what was our track record in 

post-secondary? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to state that we 

were able to put $4.6 billion into post-secondary education 

since 2008. More than 4,500 students have seen the tuition 

costs reduced through the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that would never happen under an NDP 

government. That money that came for that advantage 

scholarship was provided through by the dividends of growth, 

Mr. Speaker. Growth never happened under the NDP. So that 

scholarship, that would never happen and they’d probably still 

be in that airplane hangar. 

 

Since 2007 our government has provided $388 million in direct 

student support — 120 per cent increase over the previous six 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also had some pretty ambitious programs 

we rolled out. The student graduation retention program, that 

wouldn’t have cost, probably, the NDP that much money 

because grads never stayed here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve had close to 40,000 students that have taken advantage 

of that program and that’s a powerful success story, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’re making the decision. We talked about 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3725 

before, people making a decision. Is the area you represent or 

your province, how’s it doing? Are people moving out or in? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we used to have outmigration numbers the worst 

in the domain of Canada. Mr. Speaker, things have changed. 

Fortunately now Saskatchewan is growing. There’s 

opportunities for our grads. And that’s important because we 

have post-secondary investments that we’re making, but if there 

isn’t any opportunity for them afterwards, what’s the point? 

And, you know, I’m so thankful that that page of Saskatchewan 

has turned and we’re not going back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what else we got in this Throne Speech? Well 

another area . . . And as many of you guys know, I grew up in 

rural Saskatchewan and I experienced first-hand what the NDP 

used to do with highways — nothing, Mr. Speaker. The 

investment that the NDP had in roads is embarrassing. The lives 

unfortunately that were risked were a tragic part of life in rural 

Saskatchewan. And you know what? There’s no one more 

grateful if they have loved ones or . . . Myself, I got my parents 

that travel on roads in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And so how are we doing on our highways? Well this year we 

spent more than $500 million on highways, bringing total 

investment over the past six years, Mr. Speaker, to $3.7 billion. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s 76 per cent more than the previous six years 

of that government. The NDP would never have put that record 

investment in roads. And if they did, it would have been in debt 

because, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t have the money to because 

the province wasn’t growing. The province wasn’t growing 

because the people in charge, the NDP, had a plan for decline, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What they did to scare away people is embarrassing, and scare 

away businesses. We’re talking about taxation that was some of 

the highest in Canada. Well who would invest or who would 

move to a jurisdiction that had some of the highest property 

taxes in Canada? Who would invest if at the time their leaders 

of the day back then described our province as this wee little 

province that can or one that was always going to be in and out 

of equalization, always have not and maybe some day if we get 

lucky we’ll be a have province? But we’ll bumble along and, 

you know, maybe we’ll grow, maybe we won’t, but that will be 

fine. Well who in their right mind would move to that 

province? 

 

That’s not what I think attracts investment in this country, in 

this world. Mr. Speaker, we don’t take credit for the economy 

that is Saskatchewan. We’ve had a lot of good fortune. Mr. 

Speaker, the commodity prices have been strong and it’s really 

the people of Saskatchewan that is building this economy, 

that’s growing and it’s changing. 

 

Governments can do a lot of things. Growing the economy, 

they can get in the way, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we’ve 

seen in past years in past governments. But I’m pretty proud of 

the fact that this government believes in getting out of the way 

of private enterprise, getting out of the way of job creators out 

there that will go out there and can raise the capital, invest in 

their different plants. Look at potash being a prime example. 

 

You know what? I’ve been ragging on the NDP a little bit, but 

I’ll give them a little bit of credit. Yes, you know, they did 

some decent things. Royalties on potash, you know, they did 

re-examine what the royalties regime, and you know what? In 

opposition, the Sask Party, we supported it and thankfully so. 

And it’s important to stick to that plan. We’re seeing that. 

 

So a little bit of a thank you for thinking that those royalties 

might be knowledge that was there. But you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? Just as they learned that lesson that, you know what, 

if you tax people less, more investment will come, you think 

that that would be, you know, wait a minute, we found 

something here. The NDP has turned a new page. But then the 

last election came, and you know what? They talked about 

jacking up the rates and royalties, doubling the royalties, nickel 

to a dime. That was their famous leader at the time and it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who was that again? 

 

Mr. Tochor: — I believe that was Dwain Lingenfelter. But the 

idea, the idea for that came from the famous tree book, Mr. 

Speaker. You know who wrote that tree book? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who wrote the tree book? 

 

Mr. Tochor: — The new Leader of the Opposition, which is 

shocking but, you know, that’s the NDP for you, Mr. Speaker. 

So you’d think they would learn. And I’m being very thankful 

for some of the decisions they made in the past, but they 

haven’t learned from them, that this growth that we’re 

experiencing . . . 

 

And I’m just going to talk just briefly on the potash side, and 

that would’ve never have happened if we jacked up the rates. 

We’ve heard of a couple billion dollar investments from BHP 

that is so welcome in this province. And you know what? I fear 

for the day that if a party got in — and I’m not saying which 

party, but if a different party got in and jacked those rates that 

they were proposing — that investment, poof. Gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s an industry that really have had a hard time 

and this province had a hard time. We talk about the 100,000 

people that . . . it took the last time to grow 100,000 was 77 

years. I believe that one of the main reasons why that happened 

was the NDP’s government of the day decision to nationalize 

potash in this province. It killed, it killed investments dead, that 

why would anyone ever invest in a jurisdiction such as 

Saskatchewan if they were fearful that their hard . . . their 

capital investment that they made, such as all those potash 

mines, were just going to get stolen? And that’s what it was. It 

was the government of the day, the NDP government, said you 

know what? That’s mine and we nationalized your industry. 

That killed investment. That killed investment in not only 

potash but any other project in this province. 

 

We’ve turned the corner. Some of those people that have had 

their investments stolen by the NDP such as K+S just 

announced that, within the last couple of years, that they’re 

going ahead with their project. And we welcome them back to 

the province. And I don’t have their direct quote in front of me 

but pretty much at their major announcement that they’re back 

they said, you know what? We’ve forgiven Saskatchewan. 

We’ve forgiven. Bygones being bygones. 

 

So how long did that take? So when did the nationalization 



3726 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

start? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, no, yes. It was back 

then. So we’re at 50-some years for one company to say, you 

know what? After being burnt by the NDP, I’m ready to come 

back. I wonder how long the voters of this province is going to 

stay away from the NDP. Fifty years, Mr. Speaker? We can 

only hope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that all this growth is because of the 

hard work of the people of Saskatchewan. They are the ones out 

there laying it on the line. We can make the right climates and 

we can help with some of the training and the labour side and 

we’ve done that as a government. We’re going to keep taxes 

competitive, Mr. Speaker. This is something that, you know, 

past governments would jack up the personal tax rate or the 

PST and they would decide to take that money from one person 

and give it to a potato farmer or a hog farmer or bingo hall. It’s 

the examples of, ludicrous, of taking money from one side of 

the economy to put it on the other to hopefully have something 

grow. 

 

That is the economic development that the NDP were known 

for. There are some unfortunately in this province that think 

that governments, if they’re not putting direct taxpayers’ dollars 

into investments or into the private enterprise, that they don’t 

have an economic plan. Mr. Speaker, that’s ridiculous. 

Governments should not be risking taxpayers’ dollars in these 

initiatives. 

 

What governments should be doing is making the right climate 

so that all the industries, all companies can grow. Not just the 

select few, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one area that I think this 

province and this government can be very proud of is that by 

making that climate better, making that climate ripe for 

investment to happen, for job creation to happen, we’re all 

going to benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our economy grows and as we reach for the 

goals that were stated in the growth plan 2020, we’re going to 

achieve what we’ve laid out in the Throne Speech that it’s 

going to meet the challenges. We know we have challenges on 

education. I’ve talked about that. We have also apprenticeships 

— very important. We have announced 1,000 new seats. That’s 

going to go a long way. 

 

Another important part is our manufacturing centre of 

excellence, Mr. Speaker. This is an idea that, you know, it’s . . . 

A lot of governments that fail think that they have the right 

ideas. Governments don’t have the right ideas. It’s listening to 

the people, Mr. Speaker. Listening to people out there every 

day working. What can government, what ideas can come up 

with. And that’s where the solutions that we’re going to find are 

out there. And that’s where this manufacturing centre of 

excellence came from, Mr. Speaker, is that they said, why don’t 

we have something similar to this? 

 

We have a fantastic opportunity for manufacturing in this 

province. Only ones that don’t believe in manufacturing in 

Saskatchewan are the NDP or their federal leader, Thomas 

Mulcair. They think that our economy is a disease and that it 

affects manufacturing. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen record 

money poured into manufacturing. We’ve seen record results 

with employment and exports that are driving the new 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So we’re going to move forward 

with that, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of challenges that come 

with growth. But thankfully we are given the opportunity to 

address those versus the decline that would happen if the NDP 

ever got into power again. 

 

So with that I am pleased to have a glass of water here quickly. 

Mr. Speaker, just briefly, we’re going really quick here, but you 

look at the record investments in housing and competitiveness 

that this province . . . You look at adult-based education. There 

used to be a wait-list, and there still is unfortunately, which is 

embarrassing. That if you want an education — just basic 

education — you shouldn’t have to wait. We’re making record 

investments. That’s going to change in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and with international engagement. And I can’t think 

of another government . . . And I’m very thankful for our leader 

and our Premier to the important work that he’s done telling the 

Saskatchewan story. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to support the motion. And 

I will not be supporting the amendment to the Speech from the 

Throne. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being near the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3697 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3697 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3697 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3697 

 Autism Awareness Month 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3697 

 Helipad Certified for St. Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3698 

 Comments on Government Economic Track Record 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3698 

 Saskatoon Ensemble Tours Ukraine 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3698 

 Habitat for Humanity Home in Nipawin 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3699 

 Melfort Business Wins Pizza with a Purpose Award 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3699 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Special Care Standards and Staffing 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3699 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3699 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3701 

 Provision of New Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3702 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3702 

 SaskPower Rate Increase 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3703 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3703 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3704 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3706 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3710 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3715 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3721 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


