




















































Hansard: October 29, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 4B  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 29, 2013, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3727 

 October 29, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — It now being 7 o’clock, 

the debate will continue on the special order. I recognize the 

member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure to rise in the House, especially on the third session of 

the twenty-seventh legislature. 

 

First of all I would like to thank my family for their support. As 

we all know, we’re away quite a bit from our family, so they 

take on the brunt of looking after the children and the 

grandchildren and everyone else that comes in the yard. So I 

would like to thank my husband, Douglas, and my four children 

and my six grandchildren, who are usually at home too. 

 

And my CAs [constituency assistant] for their excellent skills 

on the casework and looking after the constituents of 

Saskatchewan Rivers. Marcus is in my main office and Jason is 

in my sub-office over at Big River. I have quite a long 

constituency. It’s about 200 miles wide, so I have several CAs 

and I commend them for looking after the constituents of 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

And I’m very privileged to represent the beautiful 

Saskatchewan Rivers. It’s home of one of two national parks. 

Prince Albert National Park resides right of the middle of the 

constituency. We have also have many provincial and regional 

parks in Sask Rivers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also must mention it’s a privilege to 

work with the very fine men and women in this House, all of 

my colleagues. I enjoy working with them and they too realize 

what it’s like to be away from home and working for this 

beautiful province of Saskatchewan. So it is a privilege to be 

here. They are all dedicated to Saskatchewan, I believe, on both 

sides of the House. We are very passionate about the people we 

work for and the province of Saskatchewan. I’ve gotten to know 

my seatmate and I’m also very honoured to be beside her. We 

discuss provincial issues and she has some great insight into 

what she believes is important to her life and her constituents. 

So thank you for being there. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my grandparents came from the old 

country, as they called it, from Eastern Europe, and they came 

over for the opportunity that Saskatchewan had to offer. So I’m 

sure they would be thrilled to see the Speech from the Throne 

2013, “Meeting the Challenges of Growth.” They would 

envision what has gone on — the growth, the optimism in the 

province. I’m sure if they were here today, they would be very 

proud of the direction and vision that our province has gone. 

My grandparents came with absolutely nothing after the war 

and they would be very happy to see the next generations, the 

future generations, how the family has thrived and contributed 

and is enjoying the benefits of Saskatchewan. We live in a very 

beautiful country. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech demonstrates the 

business of getting to work on growing and managing the 

province, and this is what we are here to do. This is our attitude 

of managing growth, and that’s what we’re addressing in this 

Throne Speech. 

 

In my travels, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I came across a very 

interesting person. He once told me there are three types of 

people. The first group is the caretakers. These are the people 

who take care of other people’s business other than their own. 

He then said the second group is the undertakers. These are the 

people who take things under, even if it must be in the open. 

And the last group is the risk takers. These are the open-minded 

visionaries, the people who believe in possibility in the midst of 

impossibility. These are the people who realize that they can 

turn their test of the past into testimonies of the future. And 

these are the people who daily work in the government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our province population has surpassed 

over 1 million people, contrary to the naysayers who said it 

wasn’t possible. The Speech from the Throne describes our plan 

for continued growth and how the government is meeting the 

challenges of growth. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I . . . I was just thinking growth. We 

had another baby in our family. One more grandchild, number 

six. So we are growing the province. And this grandchild was 

born on Canada Day. The last one was born on Remembrance 

Day; this one was born on Canada Day. So I have to remember 

that date. This baby is called Jane Christie De Villiers, and the 

proud parents are Brigitt, my daughter, and Dr. Chris De 

Villiers, who is a newcomer, a doctor, and we are very happy to 

have him as a son-in-law. He’s a great addition to our family. 

He came from South Africa. So they have two little girls now. 

So as I said, that grandbaby rounds it out to number six. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Big River saw mill in Saskatchewan 

Rivers constituency is now operating. It was closed in 2006 and 

it’s now open on our watch, creating economy and jobs. Big 

River is not only a mill town, though. It’s a very nice place to 

go for tourism and fishing. It’s a very beautiful spot. It’s a town 

surrounded by lakes, so it’s a pleasure to visit, work, and raise 

the family. So I had to mention Big River. It’s way over on the 

left side of my constituency and it’s just a very beautiful spot. 

Not enough people in Saskatchewan have probably gone there. 

 

In the middle of the constituency, we have a new park, the 

creation of the Great Blue Heron Provincial Park. 

 

An Hon. Member: — First one in 20 years. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Well it’s the 35th provincial park and the first 

new park in almost 20 years. You’re right — 20 years. So we 



3728 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

have that in the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers and we’re 

very honoured to have this beautiful area close to our homes. 

We are very proud to welcome more tourists to enjoy the 

uniqueness of this region. 

 

Almost 44 million has been invested in our provincial park 

system since 2008 and I do believe that this showcases the 

beauty of Saskatchewan for both Saskatchewan residents and 

international tourists. Our government will also display an 

event-hosting strategy through Tourism Saskatchewan, and this 

will show Saskatchewan’s targeted locations and facilities for 

national and global events. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our growth 

in Saskatchewan has brought many exciting opportunities for 

people and business alike. 

 

As some of my colleagues have mentioned, a few of us were 

honoured to work on the Legislative Assembly’s Special 

Committee on Traffic Safety. So as my colleagues and I 

travelled this vast province it became apparent, not only was 

this province huge and diverse, but a reoccurring theme in 

traffic safety occurred. It didn’t matter if we were in the south, 

north, east, western parts of the province, but a pattern emerged. 

The focus on tougher penalties for drinking and driving was 

recommended, as many accidents involved alcohol. We talked 

to bus drivers; we talked to RM [rural municipality] councillors; 

we talked to police officers, parents, MADD [Mothers Against 

Drunk Driving]parents. And so a lot of people came together 

and discussed what they thought we could do to improve. So I 

was very honoured to be on this traffic safety board and give 

some recommendations to help improve the lives of all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Our government will spend more than 500 million on highways, 

and a portion of that was spent right in Saskatchewan Rivers. I 

must commend Water Security, Highways, and the RM of 

Buckland for engineering a drainage plan for Highway No. 2 

flooding issues that we experienced this summer. The repair 

work is almost completed, to the delight of tourists and 

constituents who depend on travelling this road back and forth 

in that particular area. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government consulted on agriculture 

drainage in the province and I was very happy to hear of new 

regulation development. And it’s very welcome in our region 

where we had so much flooding along the central part of 

Saskatchewan Rivers. So we do look forward to the continued 

work with all levels of government on that. 

 

I was also very pleased to hear in the Throne Speech, “Meeting 

the Challenges of Growth,” that a 25-year Saskatchewan water 

security plan was implemented by our government to ensure 

that our water resources are used in a very effective manner. 

And as we all know, drought can be a terrible thing. I’ve lived 

through drought as well. But water, having an excess water 

amount, can be very challenging to all levels of government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was also privileged, along with some 

members from Rosthern-Shellbrook, Biggar, and Weyburn, as 

well as the Premier, to attend the opening of the new hospital in 

Shellbrook. It’s a beautiful facility. And this facility will for 

years to come provide care for all the neighbours in the nearby 

communities, so it was an honour to be there with my 

colleagues and the Premier. 

Over the past six years, doctors practising in Saskatchewan has 

increased by 300 and I was very pleased to see that the Speech 

from the Throne included that. As I said before, my son-in-law 

is one of those new doctors that did come to Saskatchewan to 

stay, and we are very thankful that the newcomers are finding 

Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and raise a family. 

 

There is also a new approach to delivering emergency and 

primary care in our countryside. Our government established a 

new record — over 4 million invested in health care with more 

initiatives such as the hot-spotting pilot program to assist 

high-risk patients. Mr. Deputy Speaker, being able to see the 

positive impact that this government is making is very 

important to measure results. 

 

Saskatchewan has one of the fastest growing economies in 

Canada, and this government is working with employers and 

schools to create 1,000 new training seats. This will provide 

skilled labour for all the people that are in need of it. I know a 

lot of employers have come to me and said, gee, you know, I’ve 

got this huge business in the constituency and we’re looking for 

employees. So this is one of the great advantages in this Speech 

from the Throne is to help the businesses not only in the 

constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers but the entire province. So 

if you are competitive in this province, this is the place to be. 

 

An important part of the province’s economy is the 

manufacturing industry, and it continues to grow, providing 

over 14 billion in annual sales. So the creation of a new 

manufacturing centre of excellence will focus on labour market 

development and innovation. That’s very important to the 

business sector as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, based on extensive consultations, our 

government will respond to anti-bullying recommendations. My 

seatmate and the member from Saskatoon Fairview has been 

tasked with this challenge. All of us come from a background 

where we’ve gone to school and we have seen this happen, 

which is unfortunate. But it is a reality of today so I’m very 

pleased that we are addressing it and we are meeting the 

challenges, not only of growth, but of working with human 

beings. And of course that’s why we’re here. It’s all about 

people. It’s about our families and our neighbours and our 

constituents. It’s about the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:15] 

 

I was also very pleased to see, in addition, our government will 

host a forum during national Anti-Bullying Week in November 

to discuss the prevention measures. Earlier this month I was 

privileged to co-host the Dove Self-Esteem Workshop for 

young women, along with the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. So we had a lot of fun working together, and we had 

over 200 young women attend. So these women were there to 

address and seek solutions on these very important issues of 

self-esteem and bullying. It seems to be a common theme in 

today’s society, so I’m happy that some of us are addressing it, 

whether it be young men or women. 

 

As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our roles as female mentors or 

male mentors and community leaders should be to engage 

young people in becoming the best they can be by giving them 

the tools they need. Our government is ensuring future 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3729 

generations thrive by providing support in post-secondary 

institutions — tuition costs were reduced and investing more 

than 600 million to build 20 new schools. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this Speech from the Throne is about people and helping our 

people of Saskatchewan. So I’m very pleased that a lot of these 

things are being addressed in this speech. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our future is in the hands of future 

generations. We all realize that. The smallest of ripples can 

create currents that will carry on. If we provide the education 

and support to young people, the outcome will be very positive. 

Our government has provided record support to post-secondary 

institutions and students — a total of $4.6 billion since 2008. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, meeting the challenges of growth, this 

government will not look back. Forward ever, backward never. 

If you want to touch the past, touch a rock. If you want to touch 

the future, touch a life. Touch our future generations. We are 

instruments of change to make our province a better place to 

live, work, and raise our families. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

believe our government has demonstrated it can be the catalyst 

towards positive change and growth. As all of my colleagues 

have gotten up and said their speech, it’s about growth and 

moving forward. It’s about making Saskatchewan a better place 

to live. I hope this Throne Speech reaches out to the people of 

Saskatchewan, enriching their lives and interacting with the 

power of great opportunities. 

 

Our government connects. Our government listens to people. 

We share information. We have dialogue. If the truth be told, 1 

per cent of the people make 90 per cent of the noise on 

Facebook and chatter on coffee row. I myself like to go out into 

my constituency and touch base with the people there. I like to 

make eye contact and view the new investments or the 

businesses, the new additions to their family, the housing, the 

infrastructure. I like to do that myself. 

 

We are committed to this province and to creating growth. This 

government continues to make more accountability by 

establishing an independent officer of the Legislative Assembly 

to oversee its records and share that with the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is committed to the 

values and principles of growth. It’s benefiting all the people of 

Saskatchewan in ensuring that our natural resources become a 

source of wealth for our future generations. 

 

Constituents are urging us legislators to develop policies that 

speak to quality of health and education, so building healthy, 

educated communities in the province is our mandate. We must 

not always bear that it’s an easy thing to do, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s a difficult thing to do. It’s hard work, but we must 

bear that being a politician is not about yourself but the people 

in whose honour you serve. In this case, I speak of the 

constituents who use their democratic rights to vote us in and 

instill governments. This Throne Speech shall remind us to 

always think of the privilege and confidence that we have 

voluntarily been given by the people of this province. Let’s not 

just have democracy. Let’s build it and continue to grow for our 

collective prosperity. We shall meet the challenges of growth 

with solutions. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion, I do support the Throne 

Speech but not the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Chair. It is indeed an honour and a privilege to rise in the 

Assembly this evening and again this year. I have been very 

fortunate to represent the constituency of Canora-Pelly for I 

guess a little over 18 years. And of course that would mean that 

I should probably have about 18 years of throne speeches that 

I’ve listened to from members, and I’ve listened to the actual 

throne speeches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few moments talking about the 

kinds of things that are happening with Saskatchewan that 

probably people didn’t anticipate, didn’t anticipate in 

Canora-Pelly, because unfortunately over a long period of time 

the province was not only stagnated; it was in fact declining. 

And we’re seeing a change. And we’re seeing a change, and it’s 

a change in probably the attitude of people. It’s a change in how 

people are reacting to Saskatchewan. And I want to congratulate 

the people of Saskatchewan for building a province now that 

has a population of in excess of one point million people. It’s 

one of the provinces that you hear very positive comments 

about. And I’m going to share some of those things with you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But before I begin, it’s very . . . I think we don’t get this 

opportunity often to publicly thank the people that support us. 

First of all within my constituency, as every MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] on both sides of the House will 

indicate, the staff that we have back in the constituency office 

that respond to cases, that keep us informed, because we don’t 

always get back to the constituency on that much of a basis that 

they would like us, a frequent basis. 

 

So I want to thank Carol Sleeva and Michele Wiwchar who are 

my two CAs. Carol does just an outstanding job. She’s been 

with me a long time and probably understands me and my 

thinking a lot because that’s, as my colleagues would say, that 

might be a little scary at times too. But I do want to thank her 

for not only doing the great work that she does but also 

supporting me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as many have indicated of course, family is very, 

very important to every one of us. And you know, I’m no 

different from my colleagues. It’s a pleasure to have been the 

dad to my daughter, Lindsay. Lindsay is of course unfortunately 

not a resident of Saskatchewan, and I say yet because I do hope 

that she will consider coming back to a growing province, but 

she does work in Calgary. And, Mr. Speaker, she did take the 

opportunity to I think do some self-education in that she left her 

employment in Calgary and travelled the world, travelled the 

world for 10 months. And I had the fortune of being on a 

mission, on a trade mission, to Ukraine. And actually having 

not seen her for 10 months, it was quite a pleasure to see her, 

come to visit me, while we were in Ukraine. That’s where she 

met us, and she spent some time with my wife and I as we were 

doing the business of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So she’s back in Calgary, back working for the very same 



3730 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

company that she left. And I want to congratulate her for not 

only what she did in terms of venturing off by herself — she’s a 

very independent person — but she made me very proud. 

Of course our son, Bryce, and his wife, Olivia, and our two 

little granddaughters. And, Mr. Speaker, many people in the 

Canora-Pelly constituency have just received my latest MLA 

report, and I’ve got to tell you that on the back page I had to put 

a picture of my two little granddaughters on budget day as I was 

preparing myself to get ready to come into the House. Of course 

my youngest granddaughter, Scarlett, had to check my flower 

just to make sure that it was in the right position. So it’s great to 

have a family so close. They live in Yorkton which of course 

from Invermay is only about an hour away. 

And then also our son, Bryce, was very fortunate to I think 

receive what I would call a promotion. He is a teacher, 

educator, principal, administrator in the Good Spirit School 

Division, and he was fortunate to have been the principal in 

Springside School for I think three years, and now he is the 

principal for Columbia Elementary school right in the city of 

Yorkton. So I want to also congratulate him and say, good job. 

But most importantly to me of course, the other half. It is my 

wife Gail. Gail has been so supportive of everything I do. She 

tries to be with me on many events in my constituency as well 

here in Regina, whether it be here in the legislature or whether 

it be attending events which relate to me being a minister. 

And also for her she’s, as I think many know, she’s a 

superannuated teacher. But she also has started off I think with 

her dream, and now she writes an article. She writes an article 

every second week that’s published in the Canora Courier. And 

just the other day she was fortunate enough now to have another 

article printed in More of Our Canada. So I want to say 

congratulations, dear, and keep up the good work. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about a few things that 

happened in Canora-Pelly this past summer because I think this 

will clearly show what growth means to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, on July 12th I had the privilege of being in the 

Preeceville community. In Preeceville we have the Mackenzie 
Society, where of course there are many people who, with 

disabilities, that are looked after by the Mackenzie Society. And 
what they decided to do was they decided to purchase a 

miniature golf course that existed already. It had fallen into a 

state of disrepair. They purchased it and now it’s been 

revamped. There’s a brand new little building there. And on 

July the 12th, we had the opportunity of opening that, where 

now clients of Mackenzie Society are actually working there. 
They enjoy it because it’s now something that they could do on 

a regular basis. So I want to thank, you know, the Mackenzie 
Society for the efforts that they have put in in dealing with 

people with disabilities. 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t too long ago that our 

government took the stand that said that people who work in 

those types of jobs that offer assistance to people with 

disabilities need to be paid in a larger amount. And we changed, 

and we changed that, Mr. Speaker. And we’re seeing now I 

think a little bit more of a situation where the people are able to 

stay because the dollars that they receive is a little bit more 

comparable to what other jobs in the community would be. 

Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to be also involved in 

something that occurred in Canora on July 19th. The 

community of Canora, along with the Kraynick family, that is 

Chase Kraynick’s family, we opened up something called the 

Chase Kraynick Pay It Forward Splash Park. It’s a great splash 

park for children. And unfortunately it occurred because Chase 

Kraynick unfortunately was killed in an accident. But now 

there’s something there. Initially the thoughts were that this 

project would be built. It was going to cost around $350,000 

and, Mr. Speaker, with the support of individuals, of businesses, 

of communities, in fact the Aviva competition where the Aviva 

insurance company . . . Actually the town of Canora won first 

prize and were awarded $90,000. So anyone travelling in 

Canora during the summer will see the Chase Kraynick Park, 

and it’s great that the community responded the way they did. 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that occurred in my 

constituency was on August 9th, where in Kamsack the 

Yorkton Co-op opened a brand new food store, a $4 million 

food store to serve not only the community of Kamsack but as 

everyone knows, Kamsack is probably what I’ll call the 

gateway to the provincial park, to Duck Mountain Provincial 

Park. And as a result of that, they understand that there is now a 

much more significant group of people that need to have the 

services of a good food store. And I want to congratulate the 

board and all of the people in, not only in Yorkton and 

Kamsack, but all of those involved in making that project a 

reality. 

[19:30] 

Mr. Speaker, more good news in Canora-Pelly. This summer I 

had the honour of representing the government at Sturgis, 

where the 123 Care For Me Child Care centre was opened. The 

centre was opened on August 26th. And what has occurred, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is that within the Sturgis Elementary school 

there has been a renovation, there has been construction of a 

new daycare within the elementary school. And now parents 

who want to have their child in a daycare — whether they are 

from Preeceville or Sturgis or Stenen or Endeavour — now 

have an opportunity to take their children to a first-class 

daycare; the tremendous work by a chairperson there by the 

name of Lisa Serdachny to bring this about, to ensure that it was 

constructed. Yes, there were tremendous amounts of volunteer 

labour but, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan also 

contributed well over $700,000 to make this a reality in Sturgis. 

Mr. Speaker, in Canora, again it’s very fortunate, I was very 

fortunate to be involved in the opening of three relocatable 

classrooms. Mr. Speaker, this occurred on September 6th at the 

Canora Junior Elementary where because of growing enrolment 

there was a need to ensure that additional classrooms were 

constructed. And this was done with their opening on 

September 6th. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a far cry from the days in fact when I was a 

school board member back in what was referred to as the old 

Canora school division where we had to, we had to pass 

resolutions to close schools. And we were closing schools, Mr. 

Speaker, because unfortunately enrolments were dropping. 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3731 

Enrolments were dropping in Saskatchewan to the tune of about 

3,500 students per year, and as a result of that, you know, the 

movement of families out of rural Saskatchewan because there 

were no jobs. We lost a lot of families and we had to close 

schools. Not a very pleasant task, Mr. Speaker. So I can tell you 

it’s a lot better cutting a ribbon to open relocatables than it is to 

pass a motion to close schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a broader note, our government implemented a 

project or a change to how we would offer assistance to 

individual communities. And it’s through the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport, and it’s referred to as the community rink 

affordability grant. We heard for years that it was very difficult 

for communities, whether they be really, really small, as in the 

case of Togo, Saskatchewan in my constituency, or whether 

they be a bigger community as is the town of Canora, which of 

course is my largest community. We implemented a grant 

where an operational rink, whether that be a curling rink or 

whether that be a skating rink, we would be granting them up to 

$2,500 each so that they could take advantage of lowering their 

costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this last fiscal year in my constituency, 23 

different rinks took advantage of that, including the Cote First 

Nation who operates an arena. And as a result of that, the 

monies that were transferred to the Canora-Pelly constituency 

alone was $57,500, Mr. Speaker. So again, we are trying to 

ensure that communities are able to meet their challenges. We 

have increased revenue sharing. We’ve done a number of things 

to ensure that the challenges that communities face are indeed 

met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that has happened is of 

course close to my constituency but not directly in my 

constituency, and that’s in the community of Invermay. The 

minister, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, I’m sure will not 

mind me talking a little bit about Invermay because what 

happened there, Mr. Speaker, I think shows the commitment of 

the Minister of Health and Sunrise Regional Health Authority 

and all of the people in Invermay. 

 

What occurred of course is there’s a long-term care facility 

there. It was constructed in the early ’80s. But unfortunately in 

January of this year there was a failure, a structural failure, as 

well as there was recognition that there was an air quality 

problem. So all of the residents — and at that time I believe 

there were 25 residents — were moved temporarily, relocated to 

other facilities, whether they were in Foam Lake or whether 

they were in Canora or elsewhere. And the analysis was done of 

that facility and the Minister of Health was asked to support a 

remodelling — I’ll call it a remodelling; it’s a very extensive 

project — to ensure that it became again home to so many 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know the exact numbers as to the total 

cost, but the cost is in excess of $2 million. Those renovations 

and repairs have been completed throughout the summer. There 

are a few small things to go yet, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you 

that the residents started to return to their home, as they call it, 

yesterday. And we’re probably going to see full occupancy 

today and tomorrow. 

 

So I want to thank Suann Laurent, the president and CEO [chief 

executive officer] of Sunrise, for recognizing that in a smaller 

community there still is just tremendous need for ensuring that 

services are delivered. And the Minister of Health again stood 

firmly behind this project to ensure that it would go. 

 

So when I listen to the concerns raised by many about what’s 

wrong with our health system in some instances, I can tell you 

this is what’s right in our health system, where we recognize 

that there needs to be . . . There’s a challenge and it needs to be 

met with a commitment. And indeed the government made that 

commitment and now we’re fully operational again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a community in what I’ll call the regional 

community that serves the Canora-Pelly constituents, that’s 

Yorkton. Yorkton had an announcement not too long ago, and 

of course government has been involved in this discussion for a 

while, and that’s called the Parkland Trades and Technology 

Centre. Mr. Speaker, this is a project that is going to occur 

within the city of Yorkton, but it is going to have tremendous 

impact on many, many people. I dare say there might even be 

people from the Cannington constituency that will benefit from 

a trades and technology centre that’s near us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new project will cost anywhere from $17 to 

$18 million, and government has committed our share of $10 

million to this project over a period of time. And my 

understanding is that they’re preparing their documents and will 

be going to tender in the month of November. So I want to 

congratulate the Parkland Regional College Board. I want to 

congratulate the member for Yorkton who has worked tirelessly 

to move this project forward because it will be of tremendous 

value to so many. It is anticipated that an additional 360 

students will graduate from this expanded facility and the 

expanded programs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we look at what can we do better to serve 

our Aboriginal students and our Aboriginal population, what 

can we do better to enhance the ability to meet the challenge of 

an inadequate labour force. Mr. Speaker, we recognize that 

we’re going to need tens of thousands of new people that are 

going to move into jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to provide 

that education for them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to again congratulate the 

Ministry of Advanced Education for making that a priority, for 

ensuring that we move forward on that project and that the end 

result will be I think a better facility for so many. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move to some issues that of course are a 

little more provincial in nature, and that of course is all around 

taxation, Mr. Speaker. As many know, we have made some 

very significant changes to the taxation system over the last six 

years. And each and every year, Mr. Speaker, because of 

something that is called indexation we change the amount of 

taxes that people will be required to pay in Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s usually lower, and it’s lower because we 

index for the cost of living. 

 

So this last year, Mr. Speaker, on January 1st, again about $20 

million of tax savings was passed on to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to put that in relative 

terms because people have to understand that as they’re going 

to fill out their 2013 tax notices and their income tax forms 



3732 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2013 

early in 2014, they’re going to look back and they’re going to 

see that the personal exemption for this year is $15,241. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to understand where that was, you have to 

realize that in 2007 the personal exemption was just under 

$9,000. So, Mr. Speaker, what that means is that $6,000 — 

more than $6,000 — of people’s money is now not taxed one 

cent, Mr. Speaker. So that has put significant dollars into the 

hands of people. In fact, Mr. Speaker, a family of four now in 

the province of Saskatchewan, earning nearly $48,000, will not 

pay any provincial tax. So that’s very significant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many economic indicators that are 

pointing to Saskatchewan that indicate that we’re going to lead. 

We’re going to lead, Mr. Speaker, in many areas — key 

economic indicators like the highest increase in employment, 

the highest increase in wholesale trade, in manufacturing sales. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re the second highest percentage increase in 

average weekly earnings. Now that’s pretty significant for a 

province who, not long ago, where people were leaving because 

number one, there wasn’t too many jobs. But number two, there 

wasn’t a great amount of money to be earned. And now of 

course we’re seeing the second highest percentage increase. We 

have the third highest percentage increase in retail sales and 

investment in new housing construction. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I think the final indicator is something that 

the Canadian Federation of Independent Businesses does. And 

they of course have many, many members, and those members 

now rank Saskatchewan as the second-best small 

business-friendly tax system in Canada, behind only Alberta. So 

that’s some pretty significant numbers for the province of 

Saskatchewan and some pretty significant statistics that have 

now put us into the position that we are today. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, when others look at Saskatchewan, we of 

course are concerned about the financial institutions. What do 

they say about Saskatchewan now? What is their position? But 

one of the more important groups are the bond rating agencies, 

Mr. Speaker. There are three bond rating agencies that have 

been the bond rating agencies of Saskatchewan for a long, long 

period of time, and they are of course Moody’s, S & P 

[Standard & Poor’s], and DBRS, which of course means 

Dominion Bond Rating Service. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, all three of them have changed the rating for 

the province of Saskatchewan. I’m going to begin with 

Moody’s, and indicate that Moody’s now has rated 

Saskatchewan as a Aa1. And this is an upgrade that they also 

changed it to something called positive from stable on July 

26th, 2012. So now we have a Aa1 positive from Moody’s. 

From DBRS, from the Dominion Bond Rating Service, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a Aa. And Mr. Speaker, that change occurred 

on May 24th, 2011, when they changed our position to Aa 

positive, Mr. Speaker. The third one is S & P, Standard & 

Poor’s, Mr. Speaker, on not too long ago have indicated of 

course that Saskatchewan for the first time is now AAA. 

 

Now AAA, Mr. Speaker, to maybe people who don’t look at, 

you know, the economics of the province or the need to borrow, 

have to recognize that when you have a AAA, you have a 

competition, and that competition is of course amongst a 

number of provinces. We have a fair number that have been 

rated AAA, and as a result of that you now, when you go to the 

lending institutions, you’re in a competition as to whether or not 

the financial institutions are going to take up your debt. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, we know that we continue to borrow. 

We continue to borrow especially for our Crown corporations, 

whether they’re SaskPower or SaskTel. We are a growing 

province and we need to replace the infrastructure of the past, 

and we do that by borrowing. And what we have seen, Mr. 

Speaker, in the last little while is that there has been tremendous 

interest. There has been tremendous interest in what the 

financial institutions think about Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being in Toronto 

on Thursday and Friday of last week and I had the opportunity 

to meet with the financial members of the financial syndicate, 

as it’s referred to. But I also had the opportunity to meet with 

officials from our co-managers. And in Saskatchewan we have 

two co-managers. They are RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] and 

CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce]. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the phrases, the comments that I heard over and over 

again for that 48 hours was things like this: Saskatchewan has a 

realistic, achievable plan. Next quote was again, Saskatchewan 

is doing a good job in diversifying the economy. And finally, 

Mr. Speaker, from one of the members I spoke to who said, 

Saskatchewan is the envy of other provinces. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a very positive thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the people of the province 

understand that as we look to growth — and that’s the whole, I 

think, conditions of this Throne Speech — we recognize that 

growth brings challenges. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a 

coincidence that the theme of the Throne Speech is “Meeting 

the Challenges of Growth.” Because, Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated and others have indicated, we’re lucky. We’re lucky 

that the province of Saskatchewan is growing. We have 1.1 

million people, and with that comes challenges of growth. 

 

They are in many instances infrastructure challenges. Whether 

that infrastructure is highways . . . and we look at the fact that 

we have the Global Transportation Hub occurring just out on 

the west side of Regina here to meet the challenges of 

enhancing trade and the ability to move our product through 

container shipment, but that brings the need for bypasses. That 

brings the need for interchanges, for all of those things that cost 

millions and millions, in fact hundreds of millions of dollars, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to look at the 

challenge of growth. We’re going to continue to spend many 

dollars on infrastructure. As indicated, our budget this year 

contains $847 million for infrastructure, for the building. And 

we know from the demands, Mr. Speaker, that’s not sufficient. 

And the one that really pops out, and it’s something that I’ve 

been involved with for a long period of time as an educator and 

as a school board Chair, is around the construction of schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we became government in 2007, one of the 

first things that I was asked to do as minister of Education was 

to allocate additional dollars to see the completion of the 

Nutana school. The Nutana school, as everyone knows, is in 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, that project was announced in 2002 



October 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3733 

and it wasn’t finished. So that tells you, Mr. Speaker, that the 

former government really didn’t have a plan for building 

schools. They didn’t have a plan for growth. Mr. Speaker, there 

needs to be, there needs to be a better emphasis on construction 

of schools. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we allocated $13 million in that very first year 

just to take care of the projects from before. Since then, Mr. 

Speaker, $600 million, 20 new schools, significant number of 

renovated projects. And, Mr. Speaker, have we caught up? 

Absolutely not. Mr. Speaker, there still is a need. There still is a 

need because now for the first time . . . As I indicated in my 

earlier comments, school divisions were declining across the 

entire province by about 3,500 students per year. Mr. Speaker, 

for the first time in a long time, this last year the statistics are 

showing us in the month of September that we have 2,140 new 

students, additional students in the province of Saskatchewan. 

That’s going to mean that we’re going to have to build schools. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re not stuck in an ideology as the members 

opposite are. We recognize that the need is there; that we have 

to build these schools. We can’t wait to build one school every 

10 years or one school every eight years. We’re going to have 

to build a number of schools. 

 

And that is one of the reasons why we’re pursuing the 

investigation of bundling of schools, first of all, Mr. Speaker. 

And I want to clarify for people who may not understand the 

difference between bundling and P3s [public–private 

partnership]. Bundling means we’re going to look at similar 

type schools. They’re not going to be identical but they’re going 

to be similar. They’re going to be joint-use. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to congratulate, I want to congratulate the 

public school boards who are involved in these nine projects, 

and the Catholic school boards for being . . . looking at and 

being able to consider a joint-use school because that’s . . . Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to have to move forward with those 

projects, and it’s great to see the boards of education working 

on those projects. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if we were going to rely on the traditional 

method of build, the NDP [New Democratic Party] didn’t build. 

So as a result of that, now we’ve been trying to catch up, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ve been doing as many as three schools per 

year on average. Some years we’ve announced a few more. But, 

Mr. Speaker, dollars today mean that a school of any significant 

size, you’re talking between 20 and $25 million per school. 

Now when we talk about nine joint-use projects, of course, 

where there’s two schools in each of these projects, you’re 

talking anywhere between 40 and 50 million per project. So 

with nine projects, Mr. Speaker, we know that we’re going to 

be looking at in excess of $400 million. So if we were going to 

look at only the traditional method of building, we wouldn’t 

build these schools for another 10 years. And in fact, you know, 

one of the members opposite, there will be a school in his 

constituency. We wouldn’t be building that school. We 

wouldn’t be building that school for another 8 years, 10 years, 

12 years. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the initiative that has 

been shown by the Ministry of Education, by the position of 

SaskBuilds as we look at how do we become more competitive 

in this province, how are we able to meet the challenges of 

infrastructure, I think are very, very significant. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks this evening 

by ensuring the people of Saskatchewan that we have made a 

number of commitments. We have made a number of 

commitments that we are going to budget on a basis where 

revenue is going to exceed expenditures, Mr. Speaker — in 

other words, a balanced budget. That’s critical, Mr. Speaker, 

because we’re still struggling with the $6.8 billion worth of 

government debt that the former government left us. Yes, we 

have been successful in paying off $3 billion of that, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, $3 billion of that has been paid off and 

we’re very fortunate because the end result is we have $600 

million worth of interest saved, and we’re building a school in 

La Ronge, Mr. Speaker, because of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many more things that we’re going to 

have to do in this province, but, Mr. Speaker, one of the things 

that we’re going to have to do is to continue to move forward. 

We’re going to have to continue to move forward with 

innovative ways of ensuring that we meet the challenges of 

today. But, Mr. Speaker, I know from my discussions with so 

many people across this province, one thing that people will tell 

me all the time is we can never move forward if indeed we have 

the NDP in control because they’re always looking backwards, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those few comments and my remarks, I 

would like to take my place but before I do I would move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 19:55.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3727 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3729 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




