




















































Hansard: May 13, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 62A  MONDAY, MAY 13, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3547 

 May 13, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

gives me great privilege to introduce the reason that I’m here, 

certainly not in this House but on this planet, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to introduce my parents, Ted Merriman and Marie 

Merriman. My father, as everybody I think in this House 

knows, was a member from 2003-2007 representing Saskatoon 

Northwest, which unfortunately at the time never saw this side 

of the House, but certainly appreciated his time down here. 

 

And I just wanted to put a little thanks out to my parents. 

They’ve been very supportive of me through some difficult 

times in my life. Certainly with my children and just various 

times of my life, my parents were always there, Mr. Speaker. 

They supported me during my campaign, were very supportive 

of me in helping out while I’m down in Regina working for the 

people of Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

And certainly my dad is a very inspiring man and very well 

knowledged in what’s going on in the province, as well as 

what’s going on in politics. And my mom is my mom. She has 

always been there doing everything for me, so that’s all I could 

say about that. And thank you very much. I love you both, and 

thanks for coming down and seeing me. And I’d like to 

welcome you to your Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to 

introduce two special guests in your gallery, if they could give a 

wave when I talk a little bit about them.  

 

First is Chandra McIvor, and she’s the department head of 

youth development education at the Avenue Community Centre 

in Saskatoon. She works with both the public and separate 

schools in Saskatoon to ensure our school communities are safe, 

inclusive spaces for all diversity, especially for our gender and 

sexually diverse youth. She is currently the go-to resource 

person within the Saskatoon Public School Board with respect 

to gender and sexual diversity positive skill development, 

including GSA [gay-straight alliance] implementation and 

sustainability. And she runs a city-wide network of GSA 

members and allies known as the Rainbow Coffee youth group 

of Saskatoon. 

 

And as well we have Fran Forsberg. And, Mr. Speaker — Fran 

can give us a wave — she is a force of nature, Mr. Speaker. For 

all 125 foster children she has lovingly cared for, she has 

searched for their unique potential and helped them find their 

place. She gives completely of her time and experience 

educating foster parents, giving pride training, lecturing on 

gender creativity in the schools, and promoting understanding 

and respect for children who could otherwise be neglected. She 

has passionately supported the Lighthouse, Breaking the 

Silence Conference, policing for diversities board, CNIB 

[Canadian National Institute for the Blind], and many other 

community groups. And, Mr. Speaker, she has been nominated 

this year for YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] 

woman of the year as well. 

 

So I’d ask all members in joining me welcoming them to their 

legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to join with the member opposite in 

welcoming these individuals to their legislature. The work that 

they do to build increasingly inclusive communities across our 

province is vitally important. So I’d like to ask you, Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members, to help me 

welcome these individuals to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly, three key team members 

from the Saskatchewan disease control lab here in Regina who 

are joining us in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, with us today are 

the medical director, Dr. Greg Horsman; Dr. Paul Levett, the 

assistant clinical director; and Dr. Nick Antonishyn, the 

manager of the molecular diagnostics section. And I had the 

opportunity to join with them late last week for a very exciting 

announcement for the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are key players, as I said, in an exciting 

project that we recently announced at the lab late last week. 

And we’ll be hearing from the, I believe, the member from 

Regina South in a member’s statement shortly. And I would ask 

all members to join with me in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Minister of Health in welcoming the representatives from 

the provincial lab, the disease control laboratory or centre. It’s 

with great pride that all of us in Saskatchewan drive by your 

building, even though we know we can’t get in there very easily 

because of all of the controls to make sure it’s a very 

appropriate lab. But we very much appreciate the work that you 

do, and we also appreciate the fact that you’re going to get the 

best technology, the best ideas to make sure that all of our 

Saskatchewan citizens are well protected. So thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a privilege to introduce a great 

group from the Canora-Pelly constituency. Seated in the west 



3548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2013 

gallery are a group of 13 grade 6 to 8 students from the 

NorthStar School. The NorthStar School is an affiliate of the 

NorthStar Mennonite Church in Hyas. 

 

Along with the 13 grade 6 to 8 students are a teacher, Mrs. Jan 

Penner, and her husband, Quinten — if you could give us a 

wave there, right there — and six chaperones: Mr. and Mrs. 

Verle Penner from Stenen, Mr. and Mrs. Norman Fehr from 

Hyas, and Mr. and Mrs. Grant Penner from Norquay. 

 

This group is very conscientious about coming to the legislature 

on an annual basis. I think I’d say annual even though there 

may have been a year or two that we’ve missed over the last 

while, but always here, always interested in the affairs of the 

Legislative Assembly. And I want to thank them for coming, 

and I want to ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to all the members of 

the Assembly, 34 grade 10 students from Melville 

Comprehensive High. They’re accompanied by their teachers: 

Andy Rondeau, Dan Alspach, and Stuart Wilson. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this is another group that’s been pretty faithful, grade 

10’s from Melville coming in every year, and thanks to their 

teachers for that. So I’d ask everyone to help me welcome them 

to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the member opposite and welcome these 

students and teachers from Melville. And I want to give a quick 

hello to my friend, Mr. Wilson, who’s up here today, and as 

well his wife, Ms. Theresa Wilson, who serves on the Christ 

The Teacher board back in Melville. Certainly they provide a 

lot of leadership to the community and to education within the 

region. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this advantage to introduce a 

new employee to the library, Greg Salmers, director of library 

support services. Greg, if you could stand. Greg has 30 years 

experience in the library system, including Estevan and the 

Southeast Regional Library. His latest role has been with the 

Moose Jaw Public Library and he serves as a reservist in Moose 

Jaw as well. I would ask the members to welcome him to his 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased and honoured to stand today to present a petition in 

relation to cellphone coverage for northwestern Saskatchewan. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

those areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as indicated before, the people that have 

signed this petition have come from all throughout 

Saskatchewan where we have thousands of names. And the 

particular petition I’m presenting today are primarily from 

Buchanan and Yorkton. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better care of our seniors here in 

Saskatchewan: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 

quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 

more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 

standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 

for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in 

senior care facilities; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 

as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today presenting a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

We know since the employment Act was introduced in 

December, literally hundreds of hours of study and comparison 

have been carried out in the interest of due diligence. But we 

know there’s no labour relations crisis affixed and no necessity 

to rush this omnibus through that will likely govern workplace 

relations for decades to come, and stable labour relations in all 

sectors run the risk of being thrown into turmoil as a result of 

Bill 85’s sweeping changes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the Government of Saskatchewan 

to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act in 

this current session before the end of May and to place it 

on a much longer legislative track to ensure greater 

understanding and support for the new labour law. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Arcola, Carlyle, Oxbow, Alameda, Carnduff, Glen Ewen, 

Lloydminster, Meadow Lake, Loon Lake, Green Lake, Canoe 

Lake, Kamsack, Yorkton, Canora, Stornoway, Veregin, Togo, 

Pelly, Churchbridge, Melville, Stockholm, Goodeve, Neudorf, 



May 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3549 

Willowbrook, Glenavon, Dubuc, Duff, Regina, Battleford, 

Lanigan, Guernsey, Drake, Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon. 

 

I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present this 

petition to the Legislative Assembly. Northern Saskatchewan is 

being targeted by the Nuclear Waste Management Organization 

to become a storage site for millions of used irradiated nuclear 

fuel bundles. These radioactive nuclear bundles would be 

shipped on provincial highways, and some provinces have 

already banned the storage or transport of used nuclear bundles. 

I’d like to read the petition. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly pass legislation to 

permanently ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

of nuclear waste into, out of, and through Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Disease Control Laboratory’s Groundbreaking Work 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we have 

the opportunity to recognize and celebrate some outstanding 

groundbreaking work that’s being done right here at our 

provincial disease control laboratory which, as the Minister of 

Health mentioned a moment ago, is here in Regina. 

 

This past Thursday, our government announced that the 

Saskatchewan disease control lab has developed a new way to 

test lab samples for many infectious diseases at one time. The 

testing process is called BioMark. It allows the lab to take a tiny 

sample and test it for multiple infectious diseases. BioMark’s 

use in the health sector is a world first, Mr. Speaker, and it will 

make a great difference for patients. 

 

This new testing method is faster, more accurate, and less 

expensive than the current testing process. Definitive test results 

will be available much more quickly, allowing physicians to 

provide better care to patients. Regina’s own Dr. Nick 

Antonishyn in the gallery today, as was mentioned, is the team 

lead on this exciting project and the one who developed and 

adapted the technology to serve our residents. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, nowhere else in the world is this being 

done. The Saskatchewan disease control laboratory supports our 

plan for growth and our desire to offer new opportunities for a 

highly trained, innovative workforce. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members to join me in recognizing the talented staff at the lab 

for their hard work in providing Saskatchewan people with 

high-quality testing, screening, and disease surveillance 

services. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Leaders Make Communities Better 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, each of our communities 

are made better by local leaders that make a difference. That 

difference was on full display this past Saturday in Regina 

Rosemont. The sun was shining and the community was alive 

with thanks to local leaders. 

 

I began the day with hundreds of runners hitting the roads for 

the Royal Road Race 10-K, at the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] depot, thanks to the Jaleta Pacers. Following, I 

joined the always dedicated McNab Community Association for 

its annual cleanup. We lifted and hauled our way to clean streets 

and alleys. This association has revitalized McNab Park with 

trees, promenade pots, and paths over the past few years. 

 

Next up was the Rosemont craft flea market at Martin 

Collegiate, bringing together more than 800 people, organized 

by Wilma Whyte and the Rosemont/Mount Royal Community 

Association, an association that offers programming and 

activities year-round. Later in the day, a stone’s throw away, I 

observed talent and pride on display at the First Nations 

University Pow Wow. And Stephanie and I took in an inspiring 

message and evening at the Grandmothers 4 Grandmothers’ 

dinner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was one of those days that demonstrated 

first-hand the difference made by local leaders, many of whom 

are building our strong, vibrant, diverse community year-round. 

I ask members to join with me to simply say to those leaders, 

thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Stepping Stones Career Fair 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

happy to rise in the Assembly today to recognize the volunteers 

and sponsors behind the Stepping Stones Career Fair which was 

held in Regina last week. The Stepping Stones Career Fair was 

established over a decade ago by a group of young volunteers in 

partnership with the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council. 

Today it’s a well-organized, interactive, and fun event for 

Aboriginal youth, attracting First Nations and Métis youth as 

well as others from across the southern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

This year there was a total attendance of over 1,500 students, 

including some enrolled in adult basic education and SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

courses. Mr. Speaker, there were also 97 information booths 

covering a wide range of employment and educational 

opportunities, from potash companies and others in the private 

sector, to health regions, post-secondary educational 

institutions, the Government of Canada including the Canadian 

Forces, and of course the Government of Saskatchewan. 

Students also had an opportunity to try their hand at various 

construction and interactive activities. 

 

The major sponsorship was provided by PotashCorp and 

additional sponsorship was provided by ISC [Information 



3550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2013 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], News Talk CJME, Jack 

FM, and Z99. Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members to join me in 

recognizing this important event and thanking all of the 

exhibitors, sponsors, volunteers, and attendees for supporting 

our Aboriginal young people in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Fifth Annual Camp Fyrefly 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As summer 

approaches, many of us start thinking back to our own time at 

summer camp or preparing to send our own children to camp. 

The Fifth Annual Camp Fyrefly in Saskatchewan will be 

operating from August 15th to 18th. Camp Fyrefly is a camp for 

gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, two-spirited, intersexed 

youth and their allies between the ages of 14 and 24.  

 

The camp’s director and co-founder, Kris Wells, says the reason 

behind the theme Camp Fyrefly: 

 

The firefly is one of the only animals that produces its own 

energy, which I think is a . . . [beautiful] symbol for the 

camp. We want to move youth from feeling at risk to 

feeling resilient in their communities so that their own 

light can glow in dark times. 

 

The camp is youth-focused with older youth doing 

programming and mentoring for younger youth. The model is 

one that allows youth a voice in how the camp is run and the 

activities that take place. Camp Fyrefly exists because caring 

adults believe that all youth are entitled to live fully in a world 

that embraces diversity rather than fearing or opposing it. For 

four days each year, Camp Fyrefly tries to create that world, a 

world that lives out the Fyrefly acronym, which the youth say 

stands for fostering, youth, resiliency, energy, fun, leadership, 

yeah! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House join with me in 

wishing Camp Fyrefly another successful summer. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Housing Development Provides Safe Environment 

for Youth 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise in this House today to celebrate the start of a new 

housing development that will create eight new homes for 

homeless and at-risk youth in Regina. 

 

The new homes are to be called Chaz Court and are being 

constructed in partnership with the province, the city of Regina, 

and Ranch Ehrlo Society. These homes will allow residents to 

share their lives and support one another. They will provide a 

safe home for them. They will be a place where young people 

can learn, grow, and respect one another in a caring 

environment. In turn that allows us to improve the quality of 

life for the young people of today and for those of tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud that our government is partnering with 

the Government of Canada by contributing 768,000 towards 

this project. I also think we should thank Malcolm Neill and the 

Ranch Ehrlo Society for their commitment to the people that 

they serve every day, and Dale Chastkiewicz, who is one of the 

Ranch Ehrlo’s dedicated volunteers and the namesake of this 

project, Chaz Court. 

 

These partners are a wonderful example of what must take place 

in order to support Saskatchewan’s growing population and 

ensure that housing is accessible for everyone. Mr. Speaker, 

Chaz Court will be a testament to the people who conceived of 

this project and those who it will serve in the future and to 

Saskatchewan’s growth plan. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, last week Lieutenant 

Governor Vaughn Solomon Schofield hosted the 22nd annual 

Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit, which I had the 

privilege to attend. These awards were hosted by the 

Saskatchewan Literacy Network with Cameco sponsoring the 

Cameco Literacy Learner Award and Bursary. 

 

The Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit honour and 

acknowledge the outstanding contributions by Saskatchewan 

citizens, organizations, and businesses for the advancement and 

development of literacy and essential skills in our province. Six 

awards were presented to individual champions of literacy, 

programs devoted to encouraging lifelong and life wide 

learning as well as those organizations which encourage the 

inclusion of literacy and essential skills programming as part of 

their workplace training. 

 

This year’s recipients are, in the Workplace Award category, 

Vecima Networks Workplace essential skills training project in 

Saskatoon; the Professional Award went to Denise Cote of 

Kamsack who spoke passionately about the needs and 

conditions which exist on the reserve; the Program or Project 

Award went to the Northwest Regional College and St. Mary’s 

Community School essential skills for the workplace program 

from North Battleford; the Giggle Factory in Saskatoon won the 

Business Award; Jim Slough of Regina, the Volunteer Award; 

and Nicole Behr of Regina won the Cameco Literacy Learner 

Award and Bursary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to 

congratulate and recognize this year’s award winners and 

nominees. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Opposition Statements 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, once again the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] has embarrassed themselves by making 

statements in question period that just aren’t true. Last week the 

NDP Environment critic claimed that Oregon was only using 

fire detection cameras as a pilot project in one small test area. 



May 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3551 

She said there was only one unit that was completely automated 

and she said the rest still use human observers — wrong, 

wrong, and wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have received an email from Mr. Doug Grafe, interim 

deputy chief of the Oregon fire protection division. Mr. Grafe 

confirms that the fire detection cameras are a state-wide 

program in Oregon. He said, and I quote: 

 

We operate over 30 detection cameras state wide and 

continue to expand annually. Cameras are mounted on a 

tower that does not have a person staffed. There is one 

tower in Oregon that has both a person and a camera in 

place, but this is not the intent for the camera detection 

system and not how we’re operating our detection system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP critic said this was a pilot project in one 

small area of the state — wrong. She also said there was only 

one completely automated unit — wrong. And she also said the 

rest were still manned by human observers — wrong again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s the opposition’s job to raise important issues 

in this Assembly, but it is also their job to get their facts 

straight. And they’re not doing their job. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Pediatric Health Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last several 

weeks, we’ve heard many concerns about the health care for 

children here in our province. Many of these concerns relate to 

the possible closure of the pediatric intensive care unit and the 

pediatric cancer ward here in the capital city, Mr. Speaker. But 

there are also significant concerns in Saskatoon, particularly 

with regard to the shortage of pediatric neurologists. In fact 

Saskatoon will soon have no pediatric neurologists, as one is on 

indefinite leave and the other has recently accepted a job in 

Australia, Mr. Speaker. That will mean that children requiring 

these services, the services of a pediatric neurologist, will be 

required to go out of province. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: at a time when our 

economy is so strong, why has the Sask Party government 

failed to recruit enough pediatric neurologists here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for his question. Certainly we know that this is an issue 

that is facing the Saskatoon Health Region and has for several 

years now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have provided 

funding for the Saskatoon Health Region to recruit and retain 

three full-time pediatric neurologists, Mr. Speaker, and my 

understanding is that they in fact, to this point, have at least two 

that they are actively recruiting to fill those positions. But we 

know, Mr. Speaker, that this certainly is not an ideal situation to 

be in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other pediatric specialists that are 

available in Saskatoon to deal with the less complex issues in 

the interim. As well, Mr. Speaker, if need be, the more complex 

cases in the interim may need to be referred out of province. We 

hope that that is a situation that isn’t a long-term solution to this 

issue. The long-term solution, Mr. Speaker, which the region is 

working at, is to ensure that we have those positions filled. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know from media 

reports that May de Freitas’s grandson Matthew had the 

appointment to discuss his brain scan results cancelled due to 

the pediatric neurology shortage. May said, “This is just 

appalling. There is nobody to see my grandson.” 

 

But we know it’s not just Matthew who’s been affected by this 

shortage. Brian Michasiw’s 15-month-old daughter Harriette 

has suffered neurological damage due to an overactive 

pancreas. And Brian tells me that for the most part they’ve been 

pleased with the care that they’ve received from their pediatric 

neurologist, but they’ve recently had challenges receiving 

information about the appropriate medications for their 

daughter. And now with the shortage of pediatric neurologists 

and the possible absence of a neurologist in Saskatoon, the 

family is concerned about what this means for them as a family, 

as they may be faced with taking Harriette to Calgary every six 

weeks in order to see a pediatric neurologist. 

 

So my question to the Deputy Premier: at a time when our 

economy is so strong, why should Harriette and her family be 

forced to travel to Calgary to see a pediatric neurologist? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

ensuring that we have a proper complement of specialists to 

serve all the people of Saskatchewan, including the children of 

Saskatchewan, is a priority for this government, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s why from March of 2008, not long after the NDP left 

office, to December of 2012, just this past year, we’ve seen an 

increase in specialists across Saskatchewan of 173. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that that’s a significant increase in 

specialists, but we do know that there are some specialty 

positions and subspecialty that still do need to be filled, Mr. 

Speaker. Over the last two years just in pediatrics, we’ve seen 

additional resources put in for pediatric nephrology, 

respirology, endocrinology, and general pediatrics, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We know that we rely heavily in this province on general 

pediatrics. That will continue, Mr. Speaker. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, in the interim, we know that the Saskatoon Health 

Region needs to recruit in this specific subspecialty, Mr. 

Speaker, and they are actively doing that. We hope to have 

those positions filled soon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Brian’s daughter 

Harriette is 15 months old. She has neurological damage and 

suffers from seizures. She requires the ongoing care of a 

pediatric neurologist, but because the government has failed to 



3552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2013 

recruit pediatric neurologists here to the province, Mr. Speaker, 

their family is faced with the situation where they may have to 

take Harriette to Calgary simply to see a doctor. And this 

doesn’t make sense to Saskatchewan people when times are 

going well, when the economy is doing well, why the 

government has failed to recruit the necessary pediatric 

neurologists to Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s also tied in to the discussions we’ve had here in Regina and 

with the possible closure of the pediatric intensive care unit. 

Government officials have said this is no big deal because 

there’s a critical mass of the necessary specialists in Saskatoon. 

But now we see, Mr. Speaker, and we hear from families that 

there’s a shortage of the important specialists that we need, 

especially for pediatric care here in the province. This has 

concerns for the entire province. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: when our economy is 

doing well, when the Sask Party has had years to fix this 

problem, Mr. Speaker, why have they failed to recruit and retain 

the necessary specialists here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in relation to, with respect 

to the member’s question and the premise of his question, 

particularly as it relates to the work that is being done by 

Regina Qu’Appelle in this health region, I don’t think I’ve ever 

referred to it as no big deal. Mr. Speaker, we take these issues 

very seriously. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we know that a purpose-built facility like 

the children’s hospital which is being built in Saskatoon, which 

this government supported while the NDP government did not 

support, Mr. Speaker, with capital funding . . . This government 

is going to build that. 

 

[14:00] 

 

We know that, according to a February 2012 news release, that 

the head of pediatrics in Saskatoon has indicated that “We have 

increased the number of physicians in our department [meaning 

pediatrics] by 40 per cent over the last two years,” Mr. Speaker. 

We know that at that same time they were able to attract a joint 

academic and clinical pediatric hematologist/oncologist, the 

first in the province, Mr. Speaker, because of that very 

announcement that we’re going to have a children’s hospital in 

this province. And we believe that, based on the experience in 

other jurisdictions, that that children’s hospital will be a hub for 

retaining and recruiting other pediatric specialists. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company Bus Routes 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, two months ago we raised 

concerns of Saskatchewan people about cutting STC 

[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] routes. For many 

seniors and other rural people, travelling on STC is one of the 

few ways they can get around. When the Sask Party cuts off 

transportation for rural communities, they are telling seniors to 

hitchhike. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week the route from Blaine Lake to North 

Battleford will end for good. Now the people of Hafford, 

Krydor, and Speers have no access to the bus. How can the 

minister for STC justify shutting down this route in northwest 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll say on the outset that these decisions are not come 

by lightly. Mr. Speaker, we certainly realize that when you 

discontinue a route, there will be some people affected. Having 

said that, Mr. Speaker, we also realize that the subsidy that has 

gone to STC to make sure that it is functioning in the province 

has increased substantially over the last number of years. 

 

It would only be prudent for a business to look at its services 

that it provides. And when it looks at a few routes — for 

example these three routes that will be discontinued — and you 

see a ridership of about one to two people per trip, Mr. Speaker, 

I think a decision had to be made. And certainly we’ve come to 

that decision, not lightly. We know it’ll affect some people. 

 

But I would say, Mr. Speaker, at least half of the communities 

in the province don’t have STC service now, and people in 

those communities have made arrangements of other 

transportation. And we would expect the same or similar in 

these communities that will be affected with this route 

discontinuation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, there are only five days left of 

service for this route. And one of the biggest impacts to be felt 

will be the rural businesses who use affordable STC freight 

services to ship parts and equipment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it costs about $31 to ship a 50-pound parcel from 

a small community to the city, using STC. Now for rural 

businesses the cost will go up. To ship that same parcel with 

Canada Post, it will cost about $67. Mr. Speaker, why would 

the Sask Party ask rural businesses to more than double their 

shipping costs when STC can provide a valuable and affordable 

service? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that STC not 

only provides passenger service, but obviously courier service 

as well. We do know again, Mr. Speaker, of half the 

communities in the province right now are serviced by courier 

companies — in fact more than half. There are a number of 

communities that are serviced by STC as well as a courier 

company. But those that don’t have STC, have access to courier 

companies. There is Canada Post. There are a number of ways, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yes STC may be convenient for some. It may have changed, 

but I don’t know if you can start pricing how much it’s going to 

cost on a courier service depending on the size of the parcel and 

everything else, Mr. Speaker. There are many communities that 



May 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3553 

receive goods to and from their community on a daily basis, Mr. 

Speaker, that don’t have STC. We would expect the courier 

service to be filled in by private companies just as what’s done 

in many other rural communities in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the end of the cuts. 

The Sask Party has announced two more routes will be shut 

down on January the 1st. They already reduced services in the 

last year to La Loche, Nipawin, and Melfort. And, Mr. Speaker, 

service was eliminated to Carievale and to Gainsborough just 

last year. You can only imagine what other routes they say 

won’t have enough passengers to operate the bus. 

 

To the minister: what other routes will STC, will the Sask Party 

be considering to next year’s cuts or this year’s cuts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, these decisions 

don’t come by lightly. We certainly are challenging STC to 

look at all the efficiencies they can possibly find so that we can 

continue serving the communities that they do. 

 

We do know that, Mr. Speaker, there have been route 

discontinuations or reductions over the last . . . well actually 

none over the last number of years. But there were many years 

ago, Mr. Speaker. In fact under the NDP — and they don’t 

seem to want to acknowledge it; in fact the critic didn’t even 

know this, Mr. Speaker, when he first brought it up — that 

under the NDP, they shut down 13 routes, Mr. Speaker, 

throughout rural Saskatchewan, in fact one that went really 

close to the community that I farm by, around Sedley and 

Francis. There was a bus route through there. The NDP closed it 

down, Mr. Speaker. People in those communities have made 

other arrangements. Businesses have made other arrangements. 

 

For him to stand here and question whether we’d be looking at 

further route cuts, we’ll be a long ways from the 13 that they 

cut. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Standardized Testing and Student Achievement 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While no one from 

the Sask Party can explain their expensive standardized testing 

scheme, they do know it’ll cost $12 million in the first three 

years alone. And when people have concerns about this expense 

and the usefulness about these tests, the Sask Party government 

just doesn’t seem to listen. 

 

The Premier admitted in his estimates last week, he has not met 

with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation about standardized 

tests. And, Mr. Speaker, because teachers will be giving the 

tests, it just makes sense their concerns about standardized 

testing should be listened to. Mr. Speaker, why won’t the Sask 

Party government listen to the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] and talk with the STF when it comes to their 

expensive standardized testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, we do have 

a student advisory committee that we have been in constant 

consultation with since the announcement last spring, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the student achievement initiative is really an 

investment in students. It’s a consistent process, Mr. Speaker, 

for gathering data about student learning. It’s about informing 

the instructional process, Mr. Speaker. It’s a comprehensive 

program that will span all of the grades from pre-kindergarten 

to grade 12, Mr. Speaker. And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

balanced approach to student success. It involves the 

curriculum, it involves assessment, and it involves instruction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, parents want to know, teachers want to know, 

students want to know how they’re doing. And we will continue 

that investment in our children’s education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it isn’t just the 

STF the Sask Party government ignores. There’s a wide 

agreement among educators and professors at our universities 

that standardized testing is not the way to go. 

 

Professors at both of the province’s universities have spoken 

out against the tests, and over 1,700 members of the public have 

signed a petition opposed to the Sask Party plan. And even 

when the ministry prepared a list of the academic research to 

show the minister, he hasn’t read them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the research showed that the overwhelming 

consensus from education experts is that standardized testing 

just doesn’t make sense. So, Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask 

Party rush, rush ahead with standardized testing when so many 

people are against it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again 

thanks to the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, 

student achievement, the program that we are proposing, does 

work. We have evidence of that throughout our province. To 

cite a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker, Chinook School 

Division, with its balanced literacy approach to reading, has 

seen an increase of 21 per cent over its four years, Mr. Speaker, 

in reading levels. In 2008, Mr. Speaker, they had 63 per cent of 

students meeting or exceeding grade level in reading. Four 

years later, 84 per cent increase in reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, the student achievement initiative is not 

just about testing or assessments. It’s about finding information 

out about student engagement. Without student engagement, 

Mr. Speaker, students simply don’t succeed. The Tell Them 

from Me survey, which is part of the student achievement 

initiative, will provide us invaluable information as to how 

students see their school, see the health of their community in 

the school, etc. Mr. Speaker, It’s not just about an assessment 

program. 



3554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, we know 

there are gaps in education, especially when it comes to 

education outcomes for First Nations and Métis students. And 

that’s exactly why teachers and parents want to identify the 

gaps and work to close them and not waste precious resources 

on the Sask Party’s pet project of standardized testing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now know it’ll cost $12 million in the first 

three years alone and millions more in the following years, just 

for the software. The Sask Party’s expensive standardized 

testing will take precious resources away from the priorities of 

today’s classrooms in Saskatchewan. And teachers and 

educators and parents believe the Sask Party’s standardized 

testing just doesn’t make any sense. So why is the Sask Party so 

focused on standardized testing when there’s so many other 

areas in education they should be paying attention to? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again 

thanks to the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, 

student achievement is not just about assessment. Mr. Speaker, 

this is an investment in our students’ future. It’s about investing 

in our students and how they move forward. And it’s about 

allowing us to gather the kinds of information that is going to 

be necessary to provide the supports that teachers need to 

inform instruction, that parents will need to help with their 

students at home, Mr. Speaker, and for students themselves to 

be able to look at what they’re doing so that they can move 

from one level to the next with the proper supports, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we need this information so that we’re 

able to track progress year over year, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

important initiative. It’s not an either-or, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

investment in our students’ success as they move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Education for First Nations and Métis People 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For two years, Mr. 

Speaker, since May 2011, every single time the opposition has 

raised concerns about the education and employment outcomes 

for First Nations and Métis people, the Sask Party government 

has repeatedly pointed at the joint task force on improving 

education and employment outcomes for First Nations and 

Métis people. 

 

Time and time again the Premier and government members 

have talked about the importance of this task force and the 

quality of the individuals who are serving on the task force. But 

last week we learned from the Premier that he plans to ignore at 

least one of the very key recommendations from the task force, 

and that is the recommendation to provide interim funding to 

provincial school divisions to reduce tuition costs charged to 

First Nations educational authorities for First Nations students 

that attend off-reserve schools — a very important 

recommendation. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: how many of the task 

force’s 25 recommendations will the Sask Party government be 

ignoring? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

Leader of the Opposition for the question. Mr. Speaker, the 

short answer to that question is we’re not going to ignore any of 

them. We will take every single one of those recommendations, 

Mr. Speaker, and we will consider those recommendations. We 

have acted on a couple of them, Mr. Speaker, especially with 

regards to the on-reserve driver training instructor, Mr. Speaker. 

We will not ignore the recommendation as it pertains to unequal 

funding of on-reserve students. Mr. Speaker, that is 

recommendation no. 4 a. and we will consider that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In fact, next week Mr. Reiter and I are on our way to Ottawa to 

talk with the . . . Error. My colleague next to me and I will be 

travelling to Ottawa next week to meet with Minister Valcourt 

to bring those discussions to bear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very different story than 

in Premier’s estimates when I asked the Premier very clearly if 

they were considering this recommendation, and the Premier 

said no. And now we have the Education minister, Mr. Speaker, 

who either was not informed about the Premier’s decision, does 

not know his file, or he’s making up the policy as he goes 

along, Mr. Speaker. Last week . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Oh, maybe modified, says the Deputy Premier. They’re making 

this up as they go along, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Two weeks ago I was at the NORTEP [northern teacher 

education program] grad in La Ronge and I heard, Mr. Speaker, 

about the disparity of funding for on-reserve and off-reserve 

schools. I heard from people on off-reserve schools, Mr. 

Speaker, who talked about how a funding shortfall means that 

their curriculum is outdated, that they operate out of old 

textbooks. 

 

Part of the problem with the funding disparity is the amount that 

First Nations pay whenever their students attend off-reserve 

schools because they pay more per student than they receive 

from the federal government. That’s why the task force 

recommended that the provincial government provide interim 

funding to school divisions to reduce the tuition that First 

Nations pay when their students are at an off-reserve school. 

That would help them, Mr. Speaker, have current textbooks. 

 

[14:15] 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: why will he not listen to 

the common sense, practical recommendations from the task 

force? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

let me be very clear. We are not funding, we are not providing 

the interim funding of that $1,000, Mr. Speaker. That is 

perfectly clear. That is a federal responsibility, Mr. Speaker, 

and we are going to discuss that issue with the federal 

government when we go to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3555 

As well, the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 

has been in contact with my office. The new vice-chief of 

education, Vice-chief Bob Cameron, has been in contact with 

our office, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue the dialogue with 

them to come to grips with the disparity in the funding, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, as the so-called dialogue 

continues, the Sask Party government can’t get its story straight. 

The Premier is saying that they’re not going to do this 

recommendation. Now the Education minister is saying it’s on 

the table. The task force members, Gary Merasty, Rita Bouvier, 

and Don Hoium, are highly respected individuals and they 

worked hard to provide concrete, practical recommendations to 

the government. 

 

The Premier has claimed, as just reiterated by the Education 

minister, that this particular recommendation would be $1,000 

per student. The most recent numbers from the federal 

government show that there are 3,400 First Nations students 

who live on-reserve attending provincial off-reserve schools. So 

by the Premier’s own math, this recommendation, Mr. Speaker, 

would cost $3.4 million. And this is something that the Premier 

would have known because the task force provided midpoint 

costing estimates in order to allow the Sask Party government 

to make the right decisions and respect the recommendations in 

the budget that was just released. Instead, Mr. Speaker, we see 

$6 million for a computer system for standardized testing. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: how is it they have $6 

million for a computer system for standardized testing but they 

don’t have $3.4 million to carry out a recommendation from the 

task force that they were so proud to champion? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, again we 

have received the report from the task force, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve allocated an additional $3 million to help institute some 

of the recommendations of the joint task force, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, there are over $22 million in this 

budget for First Nations and Métis initiatives, Mr. Speaker — 

$4.3 million for First Nations and Métis specific initiatives for 

school divisions; $500,000 for summer literacy camps, Mr. 

Speaker; $500,000 for the Community Literacy Fund; $268 

million, Mr. Speaker, for supports for learning of which our 

school divisions have access to, to provide that extra support for 

intensive needs children, etc. Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. 

When students arrive on our doorstep, they all get a first-class 

education, Mr. Speaker, and that’s because of our investment in 

the students. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] economist Eric Howe has studied how much 

we’re wasting by not properly educating and employing First 

Nations and Métis people here in the province. Dr. Howe says 

that by bridging the Aboriginal education gap here in 

Saskatchewan, it would be $90 billion for our province. The 

Sask Party government’s approach is very short-sighted. They 

do not realize this is our biggest economic challenge but is also 

our greatest economic opportunity that we have here in the 

province. 

 

Last week when I brought up Dr. Howe’s $90 billion figure and 

the work and the study that he has done, the Premier 

dismissively shook his head, indicating he did not agree with 

this. It’s no wonder we see so little action from the Sask Party 

government on this. It’s no wonder we see the Sask Party 

government ignoring the recommendations from the task force, 

something that they were very proud and something which they 

used as a defence for their inaction for over two years. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: when the economy is doing 

well, when experts tell us we can benefit $90 billion if we 

address this issue as we ought to, why is it the Sask Party 

government doesn’t have $3.4 million to address this 

recommendation, but they have $6 million for standardized 

testing, something of which everyone sees as folly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the opposition for the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is exactly why we have started the student 

achievement initiative, Mr. Speaker. We have invested in the 

early years, Mr. Speaker. We’ve increased the number of 

pre-kindergarten spaces, Mr. Speaker. We are looking at the 

early years evaluation tool, Mr. Speaker, because we know, we 

know that if children don’t come to school ready to learn, if 

they haven’t made that transition from learning to read, to 

reading to learn by age 8, Mr. Speaker, we are going to lose 

them. That’s the importance of the student achievement 

initiative, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’re going to continue 

to move forward with that initiative. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman for the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act and 

that this bill and its amendments be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 



3556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the amendments be read 

the first time? I recognize the Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education that the amendments be now read the first 

and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education that Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Tuesday. 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:23.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3547 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3547 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3547 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3547 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3547 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3547 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3548 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3548 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3548 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3548 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3548 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3548 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3549 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Disease Control Laboratory’s Groundbreaking Work 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3549 

 Leaders Make Communities Better 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3549 

 Stepping Stones Career Fair 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3549 

 Fifth Annual Camp Fyrefly 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3550 

 Housing Development Provides Safe Environment for Youth 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3550 

 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3550 

 Opposition Statements 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3550 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Pediatric Health Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3551 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3551 

 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Bus Routes 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3552 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3552 

 Standardized Testing and Student Achievement 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3553 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3553 

 Education for First Nations and Métis People 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3554 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3554 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3555 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3556 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3556 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


