




















































Hansard: March 12, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 31A  TUESDAY, MARCH 12, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2629 

 March 12, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, through you I request leave 

from my colleagues for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Members of the House will know that for some time our 

government’s made a priority of working with our federal 

government to try to secure a nuclear co-operation agreement 

with China that our uranium might be sold into that very, very 

robust nuclear program, the most robust program in the world 

for civilian use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to our provincial economy to have 

this done. It represents maybe $3 billion worth of uranium 

sales. And we know that particular industry employs, in terms 

of the front-line mining staff, about 44 per cent Aboriginal, 

First Nations, and Métis employed in this important industry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today in the legislature we have a delegation 

from the China National Nuclear Company, CNNC. The 

delegation is led by Vice-President Qiu. And joining 

Vice-President Qiu are Mr. Lin Sen, director general of the 

company’s department of international business; Mr. Chen 

Yuehui, deputy director for the department of mining and 

geology; Mr. Liu Yaoquan, vice general manager for the China 

Nuclear Energy Industry Corporation; as well as Mr. Wang Bo, 

secretary with CNNC; and Mr. Zhang Zhangbo, project 

manager with the company’s department of international 

business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CNNC is responsible for all aspects of the nuclear 

cycle in China and is one of China’s largest companies, 

employing more than 100,000 people in that country. It operates 

nine reactors with a generating capacity of 6000 megawatts. It 

has nine reactors under construction, Mr. Speaker, which will 

add another 10 000 megawatts of capacity. By 2020 CNNC 

expects to be one of the world’s leading nuclear power 

companies. I would submit they are that already. To make this 

happen, the company is going to need uranium. And that’s why 

we’re very pleased that we can welcome these guests here to the 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Assembly should be aware that in 2010 CNNC signed an 

agreement with Cameco to buy 23 million pounds of uranium 

by 2020. Cameco, Saskatoon headquartered, of course has 

uranium operations around the world and, as a result, that 

uranium deal can be made. But now, Mr. Speaker, because of 

an agreement the federal government has forged — one that we 

asked for, one that we have requested for a number of years, 

and one for which we are thankful to the federal government — 

we now will see Saskatchewan uranium moving into that very, 

very robust market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to our knowledge, it is the first time a prime 

minister has made a priority of Saskatchewan uranium. 

Uranium is a very important Canadian resource, but heretofore 

— maybe because it’s only in Saskatchewan principally and we 

only have the 14 seats — it’s not been on the radar of federal 

governments. This federal government, this Prime Minister has 

made it a priority, as have we, and we’re very, very grateful for 

the nuclear co-operation agreement and what that means for 

northern development, for new mine expansion, Mr. Speaker, 

and what it means for the partnership that we seek with 

organizations like CNNC. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I want to welcome our guests here to 

the Assembly. We look forward to building on this relationship. 

And I invite all members to join me in welcoming them to the 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Premier this afternoon in welcoming the delegation 

from CNNC. We know the development of our resources here 

in Saskatchewan is hugely important. It’s hugely important to 

our citizens here in the province for our long-term well-being 

and it’s important to our trading partners as well, Mr. Speaker. 

And whenever those discussions occur, we must have those 

discussions in the context of how we can develop our resources 

in a sustainable and safe manner. 

 

So I welcome the delegation here today. I hope they have 

fruitful discussions. I hope they have a good stay here in 

Saskatchewan, and I hope they enjoy the proceedings of the 

Legislative Assembly this afternoon. I’d ask all members to join 

me in welcoming them. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’m pleased to welcome members of the Women in the 

Legislature program. Monday morning we met with them, 

several of the colleagues on both sides, and we had a great 

panel discussion, lots of good questions, and I know we’re in 

very good hands. This group is based out of the University of 

Saskatchewan and aims to increase awareness about the 

under-representation of women in politics. And they are seated 

in the Speaker’s gallery. I hope they enjoy their time, and I ask 

all members to give them a warm welcome to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 

with the member in welcoming the participants in the Women 



2630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

in the Legislature group to their legislature here. I know they’ve 

had two really great days of not just meeting with politicians or 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] but also with 

political staff and with civil servants to learn a little bit more 

about how government and how politics works here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is a bit of a passion of mine. I’m so thrilled to always 

see women who are interested in learning more about our 

political process. So it’s great to have you here today. 

 

And I’d actually like to give an especially big shout out to the 

executive of WiL [Women in the Legislature]: Danielle Clark, 

Samantha Gauvin, Erica Lee, Rebecca Margaret, Bryn Rees, 

Natasha Steinback, Sara Waldbillig, and Emma York. Your 

leadership in ensuring other women have an opportunity to 

learn about our political system is greatly appreciated, and I 

know that you’ll keep your work up going forward. And we 

look forward to seeing you next year too. So thank you for all 

that you do. I’d ask all my colleagues to welcome them to their 

legislature as well. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition on cellphone coverage for northern 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service in the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring communities 

in this region. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition 

today are primarily from Canoe Lake. And also I notice on the 

petition, Mr. Speaker, is my good friend, Colin Yew. And this 

petition is being signed all throughout the province, and I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to introduce a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know since the employment Act was introduced in December, 

literally hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been 

carried out in the interests of due diligence. But we know, Mr. 

Speaker, there is no labour relations crisis to fix and no 

necessity to rush this omnibus bill through that will likely 

govern workplace relations for decades to come. And this bill 

threatens stable relations, and all sectors have been thrown into 

turmoil as a result of its sweeping changes. Thousands of 

represented workers stand to lose their rights to bargain 

collectively and be represented by the union of their choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act, in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Rent Increases Rescinded 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to invite my colleagues to join with me in congratulating 

the residents of the Robinson Street building in Regina that had 

recently received rent hikes. Yesterday on Monday, residents 

were informed that their rent hikes had been rescinded. 

 

The tenants of this building on Robinson Street had received 

notice of rent hikes that would have seen one resident’s rent 

increase by $520. Many residents, especially seniors on a fixed 

income, saw this as an eviction notice and contacted the media 

for help in raising awareness on this issue. The residents 

worked together with the official opposition to address these 

unfair and unreasonable hikes. And, Mr. Speaker, some of my 

fellow members may remember last Wednesday when we raised 

this issue in question period. Tenants shouldn’t have to come to 

the legislature to find affordable housing in Saskatchewan, and 

this problem cannot continue. 

 

The residents of this building are excited and proud of their 

advocacy on this issue, but are worried about what will happen 

to other tenants who are being gouged. They wonder how they 

can share their success throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents want to know if this government will 

do anything on a permanent basis to address rent gouging in this 

province, or will the Sask Party continue to deal with this issue 

on a case-by-case issue and worrying about bad PR [public 

relations]? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members of the legislature to join 

with me in congratulating the residents of the Robinson Street 

building on their successful advocacy. We are proud to have 

stood with them on this issue, and we’ll continue to listen and 

act on the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

2013 Farm Family of the Year 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

happy to rise today to recognize constituents of mine, Stan and 

Paula Lainton, who received the 2013 Farm Family of the Year 

Award. Mr. Speaker, the Laintons received this award on 

February 28th at the 48th annual Estevan Chamber of 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

Commerce Farmers Appreciation Dinner, which I and the 

Minister of Government Relations were happy to attend. 

 

The Laintons, who have three daughters and two sons, run a 

farming operation with just under 3,000 acres of land where 

they grow wheat, canola, oats, flax, peas, and barley and have 

80 Simmental-cross cows. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Stan and Paula Lainton are also very involved in 

their community. Stan has been involved with the RM [rural 

municipality] of Coalfields for 17 years, including 14 years as 

reeve, and is on numerous local boards and committees. Paula 

is a substitute teacher, treasurer for the Estevan Wildlife 

Federation, and acts with local community theatre groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Laintons are very well known and respected in 

their community for their extensive community involvement, all 

while running their farming operation. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members to join me in recognizing the Lainton family on 

receiving the 2013 Farm Family of the Year Award. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Premiere of Saskatoon-Made Film 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

congratulate the Saskatoon-born and -raised actors, Kim Coates 

and Michael Eklund, on the premiere of Ferocious, which 

opened this past weekend. Ferocious tells the story of Leigh 

Parrish — Amanda Crew — a celebrity who returns to her 

hometown and has to confront her past. 

 

Kim Coates and Michael Eklund were in attendance at the 

theatre in Saskatoon at the premiere on Saturday night 

answering questions from the audience, while Eklund attended 

the Regina premiere of the film the night before. Ferocious will 

be showing at the Galaxy theatres in both cities all week. It’s 

important to note this is a first for a Saskatoon-made movie to 

make it into a mainstream theatre. 

 

Ferocious is an Alberta-Saskatchewan co-production by 

Alberta’s Carolyn McMaster of Chaos, a film company, and 

award-winning Anand Ramayya of Saskatoon’s Karma Film. 

Ferocious was filmed in Saskatoon in December of 2012. 

Alberta-born director Robert Cuffley was quoted in the Calgary 

Sun as saying, “I go where my producers can find funding and 

we were lucky to be the last film funded under the old 

Saskatchewan film incentive program.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of our members may remember Kim 

Coates’s outspoken defence of the Saskatchewan film 

employment tax credit. He has described the film industry in 

Saskatchewan as creative, energetic, and successful. 

 

I would ask all members to join with me in celebrating the 

creativity and work of the Saskatchewan film industry. I look 

forward to seeing my colleagues in the popcorn lineup this 

weekend as we all show our support for locally made films 

which are unfortunately now going to be much further and 

farther between. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

Camping Reservation System Exceeds Expectations 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

we eagerly anticipate spring, a great many of us are already 

securing the perfect place to enjoy our summer vacation right 

here in our beautiful province. 

 

As you may know, our government launched season 2 of the 

Saskatchewan provincial parks online camping reservation 

system through the Sask Parks website a week ago. I’m very 

pleased to announce today that in just this first week we have 

exceeded our expectations and in fact have surpassed the 2012 

launch record. So far we’ve had 19,436 bookings, which is 

almost a 30 per cent increase over last year’s result. The online 

reservation system continues to grow in popularity because 

campers are able to make campsite reservations from their 

desktop computers and also their laptops and smart phones as 

well. 

 

Because the computerized system saves staff time, our very 

dedicated provincial parks personnel have been able to return 

more customer calls and reply to more emails, raising the bar on 

customer service to new levels and resulting in a lot of 

compliments from our campers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reservation system will remain open until after 

the September long weekend, and I encourage all members to 

share the news about this great service with their constituents. 

Thank you very much. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Nutrition Month 2013 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 

today to recognize that March is national Nutrition Month. Mr. 

Speaker, Nutrition Month is promoted by Dietitians of Canada 

and thousands of dietitians across Canada, including dietitians 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

During Nutrition Month, dietitians take an aspect of nutrition 

and advocate on behalf of it. Mr. Speaker, Dietitians of Canada 

recently conducted a survey and found that Canadians struggle 

with making healthier food choices in the grocery store. That is 

why the Dietitians of Canada have dedicated Nutrition Month 

2013 to helping Canadians make healthy food choices when 

grocery shopping, and encouraging people to seek advice from 

dietitians, the food and nutrition experts. Research shows that a 

dietitian is the most trusted source of nutrition advice and 

medical nutrition therapy. Mr. Speaker, dietitians are highly 

specialized and regulated health professionals. Their work 

advocating national Nutrition Month is extremely important for 

promoting healthy living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this month is important for promoting wellness 

and preventative care through education, nutrition, and physical 

activity. Mr. Speaker, I would ask this Assembly to recognize 

the importance of Nutrition Month and the important work 

dietitians do in providing nutrition advice and helping us live 

healthy lives. Thank you. 



2632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Report Highlights Strong Economy 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in the House today to recognize a recent report by the 

Conference Board of Canada, which highlights Saskatchewan’s 

strong economic future and prospects going forward. Mr. 

Speaker, the Conference Board’s winter 2013 Metropolitan 

Outlook forecasts our gross domestic product to grow to 3.4 per 

cent in 2013 and 3.5 per cent in 2014, which is the fastest 

projected expansion within the Dominion of Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, this report also projects growth in many of our 

industries, including potash, uranium, construction, 

transportation, and manufacturing, which also leads to projected 

employment growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is now the place to be. An 

international migration to our great province is forecasted to 

grow, which would add to our current record-breaking 

population growth. Our province’s two largest cities, Saskatoon 

and Regina, are projected to continue impressive GDP [gross 

domestic product] growth into the future which is on top of 

tremendous growth over the past few years. This Conference 

Board report shows that Saskatchewan is moving forward. It 

will continue to be a great place to live, work, and raise a 

family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members, including the negative nine, 

to join me in recognizing this report which highlights the 

economic strengths and future prospects of this great province. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Election Platform and Policy Review Documents 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] was twisting themselves into 

knots trying to distance the NDP leader from Dwain 

Lingenfelter and his disastrous 2011 election platform. The 

problem is, Lingenfelter’s platform was based on the policy 

review led by the now Leader of the NDP, the infamous tree 

book. So then the NDP staffers tried to tell the media he didn’t 

actually write the tree book. Well, Mr. Speaker, he signed it. He 

signed his name on it on the right hand side of the bottom of 

page 3. 

 

And he wrote, and I quote, “This report will assist the election 

planning committee and the New Democratic caucus in the 

lead-up to the 2011 election.” But now they’re saying, yes, but 

he didn’t actually write it. It’s like trying to convince a judge, I 

didn’t actually write that contract; I just signed it. I don’t think 

that’s going to fly. And on top of that, as Erin Weir pointed out, 

the NDP leader took major portions of that document, cut and 

pasted them into his own leadership platform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is he trying to run away from Dwain 

Lingenfelter’s policies, now he’s trying to run away from his 

own policies. And it’s worth noting that Mr. Lingenfelter was 

not the first to call for government to cut a special deal on First 

Nations revenue sharing — oh no. The first person in the NDP 

to call for that was the current leader of the NDP on page 45 of 

his tree book. Mr. Speaker, he can run, but he can’t hide. They 

may have a different leader, but it’s the same old NDP. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, people who need access to 

long-term care are very vulnerable. They must be treated with 

compassion, dignity, and respect. And it’s horribly distressing, 

Mr. Speaker, when we hear of situations where this is not the 

case. We know the situation of the Saskatoon Health Region 

facing charges because of three individuals who passed away 

because of carbon monoxide exposure. That is completely 

unacceptable. 

 

Last week we also learned of another situation, Mr. Speaker, at 

the Parkridge Centre in Saskatoon. After putting up for five 

years with a leaky roof and problems growing, Mr. Speaker, 

mould had taken hold in a number of rooms and concerns with 

the health of residents, Mr. Speaker, are very, very real. 

 

My question to the Premier: why has his government allowed 

some of our most vulnerable citizens here in the province to be 

living in mouldy and unhealthy conditions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

fact the issue that the member raises, this government is well 

under way in working with the Saskatoon Health Region to 

remedy this situation. In fact in 2010, $10 million was provided 

to the Saskatoon Health Region to deal with this facility. Mr. 

Speaker, the bulk of the work, including the roof replacement, 

the tender is going out shortly. In fact it might have already 

gone out. And that work will be completed this summer, Mr. 

Speaker. This government is making a significant investment to 

improve the life of seniors that are living in long-term care and 

this is just one example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the roof had been leaking for five 

years and it should not have come to this. Vulnerable people 

and those with complex needs, Mr. Speaker, should not be 

living with a leaky roof in care facilities, Mr. Speaker, without 

the proper level of care that is needed. And we don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker, how many other facilities are facing problems like 

this. We can all think of loved ones in our own families, 

whether it’s a mom or a dad a grandma or a grandpa who are in 

a vulnerable position and need to be living in a long-term care 

facility. 

 

We also had a report, Mr. Speaker, from the Provincial Auditor 

saying that in many situations the correct and necessary 

processes were not in place in order to properly, properly 

regulate care homes. Mr. Speaker, this is a key responsibility of 

the Ministry of Health in order to ensure that the highest 

standards are followed and that those who are most vulnerable 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

are properly taken care of. 

 

My question to the minister: why was the roof allowed to leak 

for five years? Why were individuals living under conditions 

that were not healthy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition will know and if he doesn’t, he should perhaps ask 

his Health critic. The fact of the matter is this, Mr. Speaker: the 

NDP government had the foresight to commission a study on all 

health care facilities in this province. They spent $2 million to 

do that work, Mr. Speaker, and what that work told us was that 

we had a $1.2 billion deficit on the day that this government 

took office in 2007, Mr. Speaker. It would have been more 

useful if those members would have put more money into 

health care facilities across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact in the last five years of that government, they spent just 

over $300 million on capital, Mr. Speaker. On the first five 

years of this government, we’ve spent well over $800 million, 

Mr. Speaker, including $100 million in our first budget to deal 

with safety issues across our province in health care facilities.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that this facility is one that needs some 

remediation work and that’s why we’ve provided $10 million in 

2010 to begin that work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to improving, 

when it comes to expanding care facilities in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re seeing a very disturbing pattern from the Sask 

Party Government. We are seeing a pattern, Mr. Speaker, that is 

not based on common sense. We can think of the Amicus 

situation where it has been revealed that this cost taxpayers, the 

people of Saskatchewan, millions of extra dollars than it needed 

to, Mr. Speaker, because of the special arrangement that the 

Sask Party stubbornly pursued. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact this approach, this lack of accountability, 

this lack of transparency increasingly is being consistent with 

the Sask Party brand of plowing ahead and not using a common 

sense approach. The auditor went on, Mr. Speaker, to say, on 

the topic of care homes, that there were many seniors who did 

not have many of the basic necessities — and we discussed this 

in last December — things such as soap. 

 

My question to the minister: when will the Sask Party 

Government treat the most vulnerable, treat seniors, treat our 

grandma and grandpas with the highest level of respect? When 

will they take correct, common sense approach to expanding 

and improving care facilities here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to the 

Leader of the Opposition, I don’t think that this government 

should take any lessons from the NDP when it comes to 

long-term care and the health of our seniors in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. They closed 1,200 beds over a period of 16 years 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, and they closed 16 health 

care, long-term care facilities alone, Mr. Speaker, not even 

talking about the 52 hospitals across rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We are in the process of renewing 13 long-term care facilities in 

Saskatchewan. The first one in Watrous opened last year, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think we’re going to see more of those coming 

up this year, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, with the addition 

to Samaritan Place in Saskatoon, 100 long-term care facilities 

will be added to the system which has cut in half the number of 

seniors living in acute-care beds in Saskatoon hospitals. Do 

they think it’s appropriate for seniors to be living in acute-care 

beds, Mr. Speaker? I certainly don’t think it is. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the facts and the pattern of 

behaviour, the topics that we have covered in this legislature 

through question period, Mr. Speaker, show a very different 

story when it comes to how seniors in care facilities have been 

treated. 

 

We can see the most recent example, Parkridge, Mr. Speaker — 

a leaky roof, mould being allowed to grow, and people living in 

unhealthy conditions. We see the Amicus approach, Mr. 

Speaker, that has cost us millions more than necessary. We see 

St. Mary’s Villain Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, where seniors were 

not treated with dignity, were not treated with respect when 

repairs were needed to the building and when asbestos was 

found. We had the auditor, Mr. Speaker, saying proper 

standards are not being followed, things like soap in care 

homes. We also see the auditor saying that the ministry is not 

doing the proper follow-up in order to ensure that standards are 

being followed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can think of our grandmas and grandpas, our 

moms and dads. These individuals deserve and need the best 

possible care. When will this minister, when will this Sask 

Party government take that seriously and come forward with a 

common sense approach that actually improves the situation for 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly our primary, paramount focus is on the safety and the 

well-being of the residents of our long-term care facilities and 

the staff that work in them, Mr. Speaker. That’s why this 

government has, several years ago, forwarded $10 million to the 

Saskatoon Health Region to deal with some of these issues that 

we knew were going to present themselves at, for instance, 

Parkridge in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the roof was 

going to be replaced. In fact they’ve taken additional steps, Mr. 

Speaker, even before that is going to take place. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would say this: that this government 

certainly has a very strong record when it comes to the renewal 

of long-term care facilities across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

As I said, we’re seeing 13 new long-term care facilities, 

renewals in communities that either have already taken place, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to see more this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know full well the legacy 



2634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

that they left when it comes to long-term care of leaving people 

in hospital beds and inappropriate settings, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’re certainly going to work hard to correct that issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Status of College of Medicine 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in July of 2011 the College of 

Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan was placed under a 

warning of probation. Today the survey team from the 

accreditation committee of Canadian medical schools begins 

work on evaluating the situation throughout the college. They 

will report on their findings in the summer at the earliest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government promised to ensure 

that the College of Medicine at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] would never again be placed on probation. The 

former minister assured the people of Saskatchewan steps had 

been taken so that the probation, and I quote, “never happens 

again.” Given that the U of S and the College of Medicine have 

been placed on warning of probation, what is the Sask Party 

government doing to keep their word and ensure that probation 

on the College of Medicine never happens again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member opposite for the question and congratulate him on his 

new role as critic in this area. And I know that it’s an area that 

he held as minister, so some of the issues and problems there go 

back a long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say this. This is a situation that the 

government takes very seriously. We know that the Academic 

Health Sciences Building, we know that the issues with the 

College of Medicine are something that must be addressed. It is 

something that is absolutely imperative to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I met with the university 

president about a week and a half ago. She assured me that this 

is not a matter of funding or a matter of resources. This is a 

matter of administration and governance. They are working 

with the College of Medicine to try and work their way through 

it and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll stand behind them and work with 

them to ensure that this does fall in place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Academic Health Sciences Building and University Funding  

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, another problem at the 

University of Saskatchewan that is very much originating with 

this government. Before last year’s provincial election, the Sask 

Party government assured the university that the health sciences 

complex would be fully funded. There was even a nice photo op 

with the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

After the election, that government broke its word and forced 

the University of Saskatchewan to borrow an unplanned $100 

million, leaving the university with nearly $200 million in 

capital debt that, to quote the university’s 2011-12 annual 

report, “. . . will far exceed debt compared to peer universities.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a problem that was created in last year’s 

budget when that government broke its word. Will they finally 

live up to their word in this year’s budget and help them to 

address the mess that that government created? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that 

members opposite would actually raise that issue again. We 

made a platform commitment in 2007 to complete the 

University of Saskatchewan Health Sciences Building. We are 

committed to that project and will continue to work with the 

University of Saskatchewan to ensure completion. 

 

Our government has provided $213.2 million to date, Mr. 

Speaker. In addition to that, the university has borrowed slightly 

in excess of $70 million. Mr. Speaker, that means there has 

been investment made in the Academic Health Sciences 

Building to date in excess of a quarter of a billion dollars. Had 

the members opposite chosen to complete that project while 

they were in government, it could have at that time been 

completed for $120 million. The cost has, through their delays, 

more than doubled, Mr. Speaker. We are working with it and 

that is a project that is well under way. I toured the facility 

about a week ago and, Mr. Speaker, it is well on the way to 

completion and we take a great deal of pride in that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the actions of that government 

have seen the capital debt load increase almost double, Mr. 

Speaker, to $200 million, which again is a huge problem for the 

university. But it wasn’t just on the capital side where this 

government broke its word to the University of Saskatchewan, 

or indeed to the other university in this province. 

 

A recent story from The Globe and Mail states that the University 

of Saskatchewan was counting on a 5.8 per cent funding increase 

for last year’s budget and that they had reason to be hopeful for 

receiving the amount. To quote from the article: “Then, mere 

weeks before last year’s budget, the ‘generous’ provincial 

government abruptly changed course, offering a lesser, 2-per-cent 

funding boost that threw years of budget assumptions off kilter.” 

Close the quote from the story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly one of the problems that the universities in 

our province face is that the Sask Party likes to say one thing 

before the election and then does something very different after. 

And it is simply not fair that students and educators and 

middle-class families will pay the price for this government’s bad 

faith. Will this government be helping Saskatchewan students and 

universities in next week’s budget, or will they be continuing to 

hurt them? 

 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I continue to be surprised by 

the nature of the questions that are coming across. We are a 

government that has never decreased funding to universities. We 

have only increased it. 

 

The same cannot be said for other provinces. British Columbia 

announced in their budget that they will cut funding to 

post-secondary institutions by $46 million over the next three 

years. In Quebec, universities are being forced to cut $124 million 

by April. In Alberta, they are cutting operating funding to 

post-secondary institutions by $147 million, some 7 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, in 1993-94 and ’97-98, the NDP cut operating 

funding to the two universities by nearly $10 million, a 5.5 per 

cent cut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no advice from them. We provide 

adequate funding for the universities. They are working well 

through their various processes to ensure that the monies are 

spent adequately and appropriately. We are standing behind our 

universities and our students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Provincial Disaster Assistance Program 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Water 

Security Agency said there’s a huge potential for more 

disastrous flooding in the province. The report points out that 

the areas around Moose Jaw, Regina, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, 

and along the rivers have a very high potential for flooding. 

Spring run off shouldn’t be a shock anymore, Mr. Speaker, to 

anybody in the province, following disastrous flooding in the 

past few years. 

 

The province’s role should be helping people deal with the huge 

costs of the damage. As of April 2012, more than half of the 

claims through the province’s 2011 disaster assistance program 

had yet to be settled. And we know, in the third quarter report 

just tabled a month ago, the province is still paying out those 

claims and the projections were off by $110 million from 

budget. To the minister: how many claims remain outstanding 

from 2011’s flooding, and what’s the timeline to pay out those 

outstanding claims? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes indeed, the Water Security Agency had a chance 

to articulate the spring run off forecast for the month of March 

in the province. We are concerned. We want to be there for the 

Saskatchewan people as we were in 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last two years, this government has 

undertaken some 580 permanent projects, spent some 25 to $30 

million to ensure that Saskatchewan is better prepared for any 

emergencies that might present themselves. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we are concerned. We are working with 

previous claims. We are looking towards the future, and we are 

communicating with Saskatchewan people. That’s what they 

want; that’s what they’re getting from this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, year after year the flooding 

seems to surprise the province, and the ministers all scramble to 

explain how unpredictable the payments are, and how they poke 

holes in the province’s books. What is needed is a solid plan for 

water security for our province, something the Sask Party needs 

to take seriously. 

 

Flood claims that take years to settle leave families with 

uncertainty. The PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] 

program needs to be responsive and respectful so that when 

people are pumping the water out of their basements, they’re 

not worried about how they can afford the clean up. One has to 

wonder how this government was $110 million off in their 

estimates in the third quarter of this fiscal year for flooding 

from 2011. It hardly inspires confidence in their ability to plan 

and budget. 

 

To the minister: what is the government’s projections for PDAP 

assistance in the upcoming budget, knowing there are 

predictions for heavy flooding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, once again the 

member opposite has her facts wrong. Ninety-six per cent of the 

2010 claims have been closed through PDAP. Eighty-two per 

cent of the 2011 claims have been closed by PDAP, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government understands the anguish 

and frustration that comes with losing your homes or losing 

your possessions, and that’s why we are taking a proactive 

approach. Mr. Speaker, we increased the advance payments 

from 40 to 60 per cent under PDAP. We reduced the deductible 

from 20 to 5 per cent. The maximum amount of assistance 

increased from 160 to $240,000 for residence, businesses 160 to 

$500,000. And, Mr. Speaker, we instituted the emergency flood 

damage reduction program, the first of its kind in the country, 

the best in the country. Other provinces are following. We’re 

leading the way once again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately the 

minister didn’t explain why they’re $110 million off in their 

estimates. That’s the question. 

 

The 25-year plan for the Water Security Agency seems to be a 

good start, but much of the action to deal with flooding is taking 

place in the future. Back to today, the reality is the claims have 

been slow to process and people need to know the government 

has their back when disaster strikes. No one wants to see 

flooding happen in a single community in our province, but it’s 

becoming a frequent reality in Saskatchewan. 

 

We need to know that the plan for financial assistance matches 



2636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

up with the plan for community preparations, that while we 

have to wait until next year for the provincial emergency flood 

response plan 2014 and the provincial strategy for community 

awareness coming in 2014, we want to know that people will be 

looked after this year. What is the minister’s assurance to the 

people of Saskatchewan that PDAP will flow on time this year 

if flooding hits our communities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. In 2011 this government came to the aid of the people 

of Saskatchewan, especially in rural areas. Ministers on this of 

the House toured. They looked, they saw, and they enacted 

plans that we are benefiting from today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is sadly a different story than we would’ve 

seen from members opposite. Based on members opposite 

record in rural Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan people 

would’ve been ignored. In fact the former interim leader of the 

opposition said that he would take money from programs like 

this to fund, to fund ideas such as First Nations revenue sharing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the emergency flood damage reduction program 

was the first of its kind in the country. Over 25 to $30 million 

was spent on flood mitigation. Mr. Speaker, if there is a 

situation like that again this year, we will be there for them. 

You can’t budget for emergencies, but you can rely on a 

government that listens to the people of Saskatchewan. And 

that’s what the people of Saskatchewan have today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Financial Management and Reporting 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 

of Finance is making lots of noise from his seat, so I’ll give him 

a chance to speak from his feet here in a moment. 

 

Last week while the media was away in Saskatoon covering 

important stories and while government was travelling, the Sask 

Party decided to sneak out $10 million in new fees late on a 

Friday afternoon. It’s a clear case of trying to hide bad news. 

They did the same thing at the same time last year, Mr. Speaker. 

No wonder people in our province are questioning their 

commitment towards transparency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the minister choose a sneaky, surprise hit 

of $10 million on our producers and entrepreneurs to scrape 

together his books? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing secretive 

about releasing the fees and the fee schedule. We do that before 

the budget. We do that before the budget each and every year. 

The NDP did that when they were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to inform the people about what will 

take place in the next year, and there have been changes to 

various fees that have already circulated throughout. The media 

has distributed the information about those fees and, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s nothing secretive about it. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister is 

scrambling. He’s taking millions of dollars from producers and 

entrepreneurs to scrape together the books. The third-quarter 

report was released less than a month ago, Mr. Speaker, the 

perfect opportunity for the government to come clean on the 

numbers. But instead they’re taking another $120 million from 

our Crowns, raising debt by almost $950 million this year alone 

and cutting services in education and health. And now they’re 

up to another sneaky cash grab even though his budget’s just a 

week away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why when the minister had a chance to be straight 

with Saskatchewan people in next week’s budget would he try 

to sweep these recent hikes under the rug and out of the public’s 

attention? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated 

in my first answer, there’s nothing secretive about it. We have 

released the information before the budget, which is customary 

for the previous governments and of the NDP, and we do the 

same process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting the member asked a question about 

Q3 [third quarter], by the way, Mr. Speaker, which is, you 

know, that ended on December 31st. We indicated to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan that we’re still the only 

province that has been very successful in paying down debt. We 

are the only province that has a balanced budget, both on the 

General Revenue Fund and the summary financial basis, Mr. 

Speaker — the only province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact in the last number of years we’re a 

province that has been raised by the bond-rating agencies to 

have a AAA status, Mr. Speaker, the only time that the province 

of Saskatchewan has had a AAA rating. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with those sort of 

answers that it’s no wonder that that minister won the Pinocchio 

Award for how it manages our finances. The most transparent 

time to introduce spending and revenue changes is at budget, 

but the sneaky $10 million cash grab also highlights some 

interesting priorities. 

 

Let’s take a look: hiking fees on local car dealerships by 

$18,000, almost enough to pay for the Premier’s hardwood 

floors; jacking up the costs to our producers to graze cattle by 

$1.7 million, I suppose to pay for the unneeded three more 

MLAs, Mr. Speaker; increasing filing fees on entrepreneurs of 

$70,000, almost enough for the expensive pre-budget ads being 

run right now to spin the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why doesn’t this Finance minister get that 

Saskatchewan people deserve better than a sneaky cash grab to 

pay for his mixed up priorities? 

 

[14:15] 

 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

was wondering when the member opposite would get around to 

the C.D. Howe Institute’s report, which I have in my hand, and 

I’ve had it in my hand since we began this session, hoping that 

he’d ask a question about the fact that this report comments on 

the last 10 years of fiscal reporting, five years by the NDP. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it comments how poorly the 

statistics were developed by the first five years of this report by 

the province of Saskatchewan and then says that the province of 

Saskatchewan, in the last five years, is improving. And Mr. 

Speaker, I want to quote directly from the report on page 4, and 

it says this: “Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 

Columbia also get an A for preparing their budgets and public 

accounts on a common accounting basis . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so the member opposite can scream all he wants 

about the reporting. We do it on a basis of transparency and 

accountability to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave at this 

point to move a motion, move several motions of condolence. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to move 

motions of condolence. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Beverly Milton Dyck 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is 

an important day in the life of the Legislative Assembly, one 

that we experience together every spring where we are able to 

acknowledge those who have stepped forward in service to their 

province here in this Legislative Assembly as members of the 

Assembly, and those who have passed since we last got together 

to express condolences to previous members. And, Mr. 

Speaker, today is that day. 

 

There are a number of former members of this House who have 

passed since that time, and we want to acknowledge them 

today. We want to acknowledge the commitment they’ve made 

to the Legislative Assembly, both during their careers here but 

also their contributions to their respective communities. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very typical of this Assembly 

that it would include members, women and men who are 

contributing today perhaps or contributed as members of the 

Assembly, but prior to being elected they were involved in the 

life of their respective communities, and after they chose to step 

away from politics, or in some cases had the decision made for 

them, that they continued that involvement in local 

governments, in school boards, and in charities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin today with the following 

motion: 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Beverly Milton Dyck, who passed away on August 11, 

2012 at the age of 76, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly from 1971 until 1982, representing the 

constituencies of Saskatoon City Park and Saskatoon 

Mayfair for the New Democratic Party. 

 

Prior to becoming a member, Bev Dyck received a 

Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of 

Saskatchewan. He taught in the communities of Meadow 

Lake, Biggar, Battleford, and Saskatoon at Bedford Road 

Collegiate. 

 

While a member, Bev Dyck served as Deputy Speaker 

from February 24, 1972 until November 12, 1975. 

 

After his time in the legislature, Bev was elected to the 

Saskatoon City Council, first in 1985 and he served there 

until 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is my recollection of Mr. Dyck. I was a 

university student during that time that he . . . well not for all of 

the years that he was a city councillor — was able to graduate 

before that — but during much of the time that he was a city 

councillor, Mr. Speaker. And then, as now, I followed politics. I 

followed local politics and provincial politics and federal 

politics and, as was the case for many of his colleagues on 

council at the time, and still today, here was someone who was 

very much dedicated to the city of Saskatoon, to the citizens of 

his ward, and prior to that obviously to constituents in two 

different ridings, in City Park and in Mayfair. And as I 

mentioned off the top, Mr. Speaker, here’s an individual who 

wasn’t just contributing during his time in the legislature, but 

did so prior to his time here and then after as a member of the 

city council. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I continue with the motion: 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Beverly Milton Dyck, who passed away on August 11, 

2012 at the age of 76, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly from 1971 until 1982, representing the 

constituencies of Saskatoon City Park and Saskatoon 

Mayfair for the New Democratic Party. 

 

Prior to becoming a member, Bev Dyck received a 

Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of 



2638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

Saskatchewan. He taught in the communities of Meadow 

Lake, Biggar, Battleford, and Saskatoon at Bedford Road 

Collegiate. 

 

While a member, Bev Dyck served as Deputy Speaker 

from February 24, 1972 until November 12, 1975. 

 

After his time in this legislature, Bev was elected to the 

Saskatoon City Council in 1985 and served until 1994. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to add 

my condolences to the Dyck family. 

 

Mr. Dyck was a teacher. He had a commerce degree, but he was 

a teacher. And I think we all need to remember that in the late 

’60s the teachers were very concerned about what was 

happening within the education system of the province. And 

Mr. Dyck was one of those teachers who said, we have to do 

something about this by going and getting elected. And I think 

it’s quite telling that in The StarPhoenix on the day or two after 

the election, Mr. Dyck was asked about his election victory in 

City Park, and he described it very briefly. He said, “We had 

the better organization.” And what happened was that the 

fellow who ran against him, Mr. Lloyd Saunders, says, “How 

can we beat an organization like that?” 

 

I think Mr. Dyck took on tasks and dealt with them in a very 

straightforward fashion. And from that initial political entry into 

provincial politics, he served well and long with the Allan 

Blakeney government. I know that Mr. Romanow worked 

closely with him. And Mr. Romanow is quoted in The 

StarPhoenix last summer as saying, “Bev was always a person 

with a great deal of enthusiasm and exuberance.” 

 

I think that what we need to recognize is that people like Mr. 

Dyck are extremely important for our legislature, and we need 

to thank his family for his contribution here. He also obviously 

went on to contribute in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

We looked at some of the Hansard to see some of Mr. Dyck’s 

quotations. And I think it’s quite interesting to use this 

quotation that he made on March 31st, 1981, when we were 

dealing in this House here with a resolution about the 

Canadianization of the oil industry. And he says, and this is on 

page 1602 of Hansard: 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, it is all very well to talk about 

how much we earn from our resources and how we 

allocate that money, but regarding our petroleum energy 

resources, we must be at least as concerned about their 

depletion, because they are running out very fast. As our 

conventional reserves of energy run out, the price per 

gallon at the pumps can only escalate. As the price to 

consumers goes up, it becomes more and more obvious 

that we must become more efficient in the use of energy 

that we have. 

We have been far too unconcerned about conservation 

over the years . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Dyck was pointing out then a very similar 

discussion that we’re having now. I want to say once again, 

thank you to the Dyck family, and offer our condolences to 

them and thank them for his service in this legislature. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to enter into this condolence motion for Bev Dyck, 

the MLA for Mayfair and City Park. And I feel in many ways 

our careers — I’ve never met the gentleman — but in many 

ways we’ve had parallel experiences because his riding overlaid 

my riding, and I happened to show up maybe 30 years after he 

was elected. He was elected in ’71; of course, I was in 2001. 

 

And I just want to say that, you know, from what I know and 

what I hear on the doorstep when I’m knocking on doors, his 

memory was still there. He was active and committed to his 

constituents. In fact he served a term as Deputy Speaker, but 

then he chose to work more in his constituency because he 

believed that’s where the action is. And I think that we all know 

that that’s the truth and that sometimes we stray a bit from that. 

But we should focus on our constituency, and clearly Bev Dyck 

was a man who believed in that. 

 

He was an idealist. He believed in social justice and many of 

the issues that New Democrats fight hard for. And I just wanted 

to say that particularly labour appreciated the work that he had 

done for them in raising their concerns. 

 

And I also want to say that we see his family still actively 

involved in the world of politics. His nieces, Stacey and 

Melanie, are active, carrying on fighting for the causes of the 

New Democratic Party and the movement that we believe in. 

 

So I would like to join in our motion here, expressing 

condolences to Bev Dyck’s family. He certainly served his 

constituency in this province well. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Paul Mostoway 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and his 

province. 

 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

Paul Mostoway, who passed away on March 19, 2012 at 

the age of 83, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 

from 1971 until 1982 representing the constituencies of 

Hanley and Saskatoon Centre for the New Democratic 

Party. He served as the Legislative Whip and was the 

chairman of the Special Committee on Welfare. 

 

Mr. Mostoway was born on 16 October 1929 in Mayfair, 

Saskatchewan. He grew up in Guernsey and Saskatoon. 

He attended St. Paul School and City Park Collegiate. He 

later attended the University of Saskatchewan and 

received a Bachelor of Arts and a Bachelor of Education 

degree. He started work as a teacher in 1956, retiring in 

1988. 

 

He continued his public service as a Catholic school 

board trustee and a city councillor in Saskatoon. He 

served as a trustee from 1985 to 1994 and then a 

councillor from 1988 to 1994. Mr. Mostoway was 

involved in many organizations, including the senate of 

the University of Saskatchewan and on the board of the 

Mendel Art Gallery. 

 

He is sadly missed by his wife of 57 years, Victoria, and 

their children and grandchildren. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Paul Mostoway, who passed away on March 19, 2012 at 

the age of 83, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 

from 1971 until 1982 representing the constituencies of 

Hanley and Saskatoon Centre for the New Democratic 

Party. He served as the Legislative Whip and as the 

chairman of the Special Committee on Welfare. 

 

Mr. Mostoway was born on October 16th, 1929 in 

Mayfair, Saskatchewan. He grew up in Guernsey and 

Saskatoon. He attended St. Paul School and City Park 

Collegiate. He later attended the University of 

Saskatchewan and received a Bachelor of Arts and 

Bachelor of Education degree. He started work as a 

teacher in 1956 and retired in 1988. 

 

Mr. Mostoway continued his public service as a Catholic 

school board trustee and city councillor in Saskatoon. He 

served as a trustee from 1985 to 1994 and councillor from 

1988 to 1994. Mr. Mostoway was involved in many 

organizations including the senate of the University of 

Saskatchewan and on the board of the Mendel Art 

Gallery. 

 

He is sadly missed by his wife of 57 years, Victoria, and 

their children and grandchildren. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would also like to 

offer our condolences to the Mostoway family on the death of 

Paul Mostoway. 

 

Mr. Mostoway was another teacher who was very concerned 

about the issues in education in the late ’60s and got involved in 

politics. And he ended up doing many things and, as they’ve set 

out in his obituary, he attended many fall suppers as he sought 

the nomination. 

 

But what’s really interesting about Mr. Mostoway and his 

nomination is that he ran against Mr. Robert Walker. And Mr. 

Robert Walker was the attorney general under all of the years of 

the Tommy Douglas government and actually was continued as 

a member in opposition up until 1967. And he then sought the 

nomination again to run in 1971 and Mr. Paul Mostoway, as a 

younger, new generation politician, ended up defeating him. 

And he then went on to win that particular seat. 

 

Now one of the things that’s quite interesting about Paul 

Mostoway in the political situation is that even though he was a 

teacher and he was involved in the, I guess, politicization or the 

efforts by the teachers to get involved in politics, he brought his 

own personal experience in a number of other unionized jobs — 

especially with the Seafarers Union which was the union for the 

sailors on the Great Lakes. He’d also worked as a construction 

worker in BC [British Columbia] and he’d worked in a General 

Motors plant. And some of those skills that he learned when he 

was working those other jobs he then brought into his role as a 

teacher. 

 

There are many activities that he was involved with and it was 

very clear he enjoyed many things. But one of the descriptions 

of him that his family put in the paper which I really liked was 

that he was a history buff. And what they said was when he was 

teaching, the students soon figured out if they could talk about 

history or politics, they could derail the lesson plans and have a 

good discussion in the classroom. And I think that that ability to 

be a teacher that allows for your students to understand how 

society works is another gift that Mr. Paul Mostoway brought to 

Saskatchewan. And I’m not sure if there are politicians that 

were his students that are in the legislature now but I know that 

that particular skill of his is something that many people 

cherished. 

 

And I know that Mr. Mostoway also was somebody who was 

always reading and looking at issues and I think it’s quite 

interesting, once again, looking at Hansard, that on April 29, 

1974, Mr. Mostoway got up in this legislature and said, I’d like 

to, you know, give a few words on the cost of prescription 

drugs. And he goes on in his comments that are page 2756 of 

Hansard, April 29, 1974, to talk about generic drugs, and he 

says: 



2640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, there seems to be some sort of unspoken 

hesitance on the part of people to use generic drugs. I 

suppose one could say this is sort of a filtering down to 

the public from manufacturers and processing companies 

who find that brand name drugs bring them more profits. 

Nine times out of ten brand name drugs and generic drugs 

come from exactly the same bulk stock. Nine times out of 

ten they are exactly the same except in name and price, 

with the brand name drug being much higher in price than 

the generic drug with the brand name drug being 

distributed by large corporations and in turn bringing 

excessive profits to these corporations. 

 

This is almost 40 years ago that he talked about this. And part 

of the present discussion of the Premier and the Minister of 

Health is exactly on these kinds of issues about the purchasing 

of generic drugs across the West. So once again, the discussion 

in this legislature many years ago by people who were looking 

at a number of issues identifies issues that are important. 

 

Mr. Mostoway was, as I say, a history buff, somebody who was 

interested in many, many things. And it’s very clear that he 

influenced the lives of many people. And I’d like to conclude 

my remarks by thanking his family for sharing him with us in 

the legislature and in other aspects of public life in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to rise and 

also give my condolences. I never knew Mr. Mostoway, but he 

represented a part of my constituency, a very huge part of it, 

and I have the utmost respect for anybody that does what we do. 

And he’d have did it at a difficult more time when there was no 

emails, faxes. If he lived in the rural part of the Hanley 

constituency, he’d have been on a party line even. And I don’t 

think there were CAs [constituency assistant] at that time to 

help the members as it is now. 

 

So I noticed in some of the remarks from his family that he was 

an avid . . . went to a lot of fall suppers, and that’s how you did 

politics back then was one-on-one, mainstreeting, fall suppers 

because your constituents . . . That’s the only way you could 

reach them at that time. I think right now we probably have it a 

lot easier. There’s a lot more avenues we have than for anybody 

that served at that time. 

 

I’m looking at the obituary. You know, he was a volunteer in 

his community — also in Hanley, but more in Saskatoon — as 

we all are, that we’ve served in this role. You find that you’re 

just automatically a part of the community and helping even in 

other ways other than an MLA. And with that, it’s your family 

that has given up a big part of things that you share with your 

family because you’re on the road lots. Whether you’re actually 

as an MLA or if you’re with the many organizations that you’ve 

volunteered, either before you were an MLA or even after, 

seems like you’re always involved in the communities and so 

on. 

 

I know that many of my constituents would still have 

remembered him. And now occasionally they always speak of 

the past and have mentioned, you know, of any of the MLAs 

that have served throughout my constituency, and there’s been 

many of them, over the many years, they’ve all — my 

constituents — talk highly of every MLA that served 

throughout my part of my constituency and I hope when I am 

gone that they speak highly of me. That we try to do the best 

that we can while we’re here serving, and I think they realize 

that. 

 

So on behalf of the members, of myself as MLA for Arm 

River-Watrous constituency, and my constituents that he served 

— and served very well, from what I understand — I would like 

to send my condolences to the family for myself and my 

constituents. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and enter into this debate in honour of Paul 

Mostoway for the work that he’s done. I have a couple of 

things. Clearly again Mr. Mostoway represented the area, in his 

later terms, of Saskatoon Centre and of course I would hear an 

awful lot about the good work that he had done. And he was a 

strong, passionate man, believing in the ideals of people in our 

communities, and as our colleagues have talked earlier, his 

commitment to sport and recreation and education. And so 

those are things that were clear that drove him to his belief in 

public service and that that was how he felt, how he could 

express his belief in how we should all be in our communities. 

 

I just want to relate two stories, one about the first time I 

actually met Paul Mostoway. And he didn’t know I met him. 

But it was in the ’70s, and I was, I guess I’d been . . . Well I 

would be a lot younger at that point. And I was riding the STC 

[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] bus from Saskatoon 

to Regina, and on walks Paul Mostoway. And as an MLA, he 

knew many people and he would walk up that aisle saying hello 

to everybody on that bus. So as my colleague talked about the 

fall suppers, the other way to get to know people is on the bus. 

And he would get on that bus and it was a way of connecting 

with the people of Saskatoon and people in our community. 

And I made a mental note. I didn’t think I would be in politics 

later on, but I try to ride the bus every once in a while so I 

would get to know people, and it was because of Paul’s 

example. And we should look to people like Paul about how did 

they get to know their constituents. And we should do that kind 

of thing, do what our constituents do. And that’s very 

important. 

 

The other thing I want to relate about Mr. Mostoway’s career 

here at the legislature is this report. It’s referenced in his 

obituary, the Final Report of the Special Committee on Welfare, 

November 13, 1973. Now a former minister of Social Services 

on our side had said, you really should read this report. And I 

actually have the original report back in Saskatoon; this one is 

in the library. But it was an exciting time in the early 1970s 

about what people were doing about social programming right 

across Canada. And he chaired this report and it is actually a 

very interesting report because so many of the issues that we’re 

dealing with today seem to continue to rise to the front. And 

whether it’s daycare or families in stress, the working poor — 

these are some of the things that he was dealing with. And I just 

want to . . . It was interesting. 

 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2641 

So Mr. Mostoway chaired the committee but some of the other 

people that were on that committee were Jack Wiebe — and of 

course we know what lay ahead for Mr. Wiebe as lieutenant 

governor — as well we had Mr. Alex Taylor. Now Mr. Alex 

Taylor was at our supper last night at the Canadian 

Parliamentary Association dinner, and I had a chance to talk to 

him about this report, and he remembers that fondly. And of 

course on the staff side, Dr. Gordon Barnhart was the staff 

person on this report. So it was very interesting. 

 

And one of the things that was very interesting was that this 

report was looking ahead in the early ’70s about what we could 

do better in terms of serving people, vulnerable people, in our 

communities. And they were talking about the guaranteed 

annual income and a project they were going to do in Manitoba, 

except for they were talking about it looking ahead to what 

would happen with it, and we all know what happened. I think 

it was in Dauphin. I’m not sure what city in Manitoba that the 

experiment with guaranteed annual income actually happened, 

but it’s still an issue, and it was really interesting that Mr. 

Mostoway was writing about it back in 1973. 

 

So I think it’s worthwhile that we look at these things, and we 

think about what people like Mr. Mostoway was writing about 

. . . Mr. Taylor, what they were thinking about. And it was a 

pleasure to read this. So his work will live on in some way, 

shape, or form. He definitely will not be forgotten in this 

legislature. I think that he was an honourable gentleman who 

did an awful lot to benefit the people of Saskatchewan. I look at 

this report. We could talk about many things, but I wanted to 

highlight this as one of his contributions to the province of 

Saskatchewan, and it hasn’t been forgotten. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I join in the condolence motion and 

wish his family our heartfelt condolences. Thank you. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Roy Nelson 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and the 

province. 

 

Roy Nelson, who passed away on 26 March, 2012 at the 

age of 86, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 

from 1975 until 1978, representing the constituency of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for the Liberal Party. 

Mr. Nelson was born on December 3, 1925. He attended 

the Moose Jaw Normal School and the University of 

Saskatchewan. As a farmer and a rancher, he was 

committed to many organizations in his community. In 

1997 Mr. Nelson received a Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal which formally recognized his dedication to local 

agriculture, to sports, veterans, and civic associations. 

 

He is sadly missed by his wife of 62 years, Kay, and their 

children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Roy Nelson, who passed away on March 26, 2012, at the 

age of 86, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 

from 1975 until 1978, representing the constituency of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for the Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Nelson was born on December 3rd, 1925. He 

attended the Moose Jaw Normal School and the 

University of Saskatchewan. As a farmer and rancher, he 

was committed to many organizations in his community. 

In 1997 Mr. Nelson received a Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal which formally recognized his dedication to local 

agriculture, sports, veterans, and civic associations. 

 

He is sadly missed by his wife of 62 years, Kay, and their 

children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to get 

up today and share a few thoughts and memories about the 

former member, Roy Nelson. 

 

And I have lots of fond memories of Mr. Nelson coming to my 

house when I was a young kid. Him and my dad were political 

opponents, and they loved nothing more than to get together 

and share a couple of glasses of refreshments and really just get 

into it. And I think this is certainly one of the things that many 

of us have as memories from our childhood, Mr. Speaker, are 

those political discussions that our parents were passionate 

about. 

 

And certainly with my dad having run for the NDP in 1964, his 

political stripes were well-known in the community. And our 

farm was probably about 10 miles north of the town of 

Glentworth, and so we had lots of interactions with the people 



2642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

from Glentworth, with Roy and Kay and their children. I 

remember Ricky quite well. And those kinds of discussions I 

think really sort of informed how us, the children in my family 

for sure, carried forward with our political beliefs. And many, I 

think, of Roy’s political arguments were probably honed at our 

kitchen table because I certainly remember him and dad getting 

into it and having a lot of fun doing it. 

 

For example, those were the years of the land bank. And there 

was a lot of passionate feelings about the land bank on both 

sides. And certainly I know my family was able to take 

advantage of that institution and my brother was able to secure 

some land through that, so it was something that was positive 

for our family. But Roy hated the land bank, Mr. Speaker, with 

every ounce of his soul. And you can see in some of his 

comments, I had a chance to look at his maiden speech in 1975 

and he certainly had no shortage of thoughts about how that 

wasn’t a good program. 

 

And the other thing I guess that I noticed in his maiden speech 

is some of the language there sounds very familiar to some of 

the language I used in 2011 when I gave my maiden speech, so 

it makes me feel like politics is a sort of a timeless vocation. 

And I think, as advocates for political views and our partisan 

views and also for the views that we feel are most appropriate 

for the citizens of our riding, I feel somewhat comforted that 

those were the same words that Roy would have used back in 

1975. 

 

So I just wanted to have an opportunity to get up and talk about 

that a little bit. I remember Roy and his family being involved 

in all the local sports, and the notes that we have here indicate 

that he was a very active citizen of his community in 

Glentworth. And again, I think that’s a sign that political 

activism was part of the water that we drank when we grew up. 

And sometimes I’m not sure if families do that anymore. There 

probably are a lot of families doing that, but it seems to be a lost 

art where people looked nothing more forward to than an 

evening of sitting down and talking politics. 

 

We also have comments here from Ralph Goodale, who was an 

MLA in the area around the same time before he went into 

federal politics. And it was the same thing, Ralph used to come 

by the house. He knew darn well if he was politicking that he 

wasn’t going to get my dad’s vote, but he loved to come and 

talk politics. And that was really part of the culture of where I 

grew up. 

 

So I have a lot of fond memories of Roy and of Kay and of their 

family and of those times when my dad was in a farming co-op 

for machinery. And he was, you know, one of the members was 

a strong member of the Waffle movement, and all those things 

were going on in the ’70s. So it was an exciting time, and I 

think it certainly informs a lot of what we are doing today. 

 

In fact David referred to a report that Mr. Mostoway was 

involved in. Yesterday I was looking at a report from the Farm 

Land Security Board in the 1970s. And I will not refer to the 

members by names anymore, Mr. Speaker, thank you. But the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale was referring to that report. 

I was reading one on the Farm Land Security Board. And those 

thoughts really do have relevance for today. And it never hurts 

for us to sort of revisit the thinking that led to some of the 

programs that came about and the political thinking of the time 

because it helps us make better decisions when we look at 

history rather than ignore it. 

 

So I thank the folks from the . . . Or I certainly thank the Nelson 

family for allowing him to participate in politics. And I have 

many fond memories of Roy Nelson when he was an MLA for 

my area as I was growing up, and as such, I wish to offer my 

condolences to the family and am pleased to be able to be part 

of this condolence motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join in and say a few words to the condolence motion for Mr. 

Roy Nelson. 

 

Roy was a long-time friend of mine. I knew Roy I guess most 

of my life, back from the very early days when he was very 

much involved in sports. I remember he coached me in playing 

pony league. And I started curling at a very young age, and Roy 

was a very avid curler, a very good curler. And I remember 

even in my younger days having the opportunity to curl against 

Roy, and he was very good and quite feared within the local 

area as a curler because he had a very strong team and was very 

difficult to beat. 

 

Roy was a very, very strong advocate of the community. He 

promoted the community of Glentworth as far back as I can 

remember, whether it was working hard to get the new school 

back in 1960-61 era, he fought for that because at that time 

there was amalgamation of schools, and Roy was really set on 

having a school built in Glentworth, which it eventually was. 

 

I remember even discussions when the highway was going 

through, where he wanted the highway to go through the town 

of Glentworth because it would be good for businesses, rather 

than bypass the town, which happened in a lot of cases. And he 

was successful in doing that and to this day, the highway, 

Highway 18, goes through the town of Glentworth. 

 

Roy was also a businessman. I know it’s mentioned he was a 

rancher, farmer, but Roy also had a business in Glentworth. It 

was an implement and vehicle dealership that he ran extremely 

successfully, and because of his involvement in the community, 

his business did quite well. Roy was extremely, extremely 

well-liked. 

 

What wasn’t mentioned in his condolence motion was Roy 

served in the Navy during World War II as a very, very young 

individual. And as a result of his time served in the Navy, when 

he moved back to Glentworth, he was a very, very strong 

supporter of the Legion, and he promoted the Legion at every 

opportunity that he could. 

 

And I do have a story about how Roy operated. When I moved 

back to Glentworth in 1994, the boxes had arrived, the furniture 

had arrived. The house was just packed up with all of the 

furniture. And I got a phone call from Roy, and he said, there’s 

a Legion meeting tonight at 8 o’clock. And I said, Roy, I just 

haven’t got time to go. I’m unpacking, and I don’t have time. 

He said, you have to; you’re the president. They had voted me 

in as president once they had found out that I was moving back 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

to Glentworth. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleague on the other side talked 

about politics. Roy was a Liberal through and through. And he 

and I could sit and talk politics, and we could agree on a 

number of things but we couldn’t agree on how we voted. And 

when there was items within the Liberal party platform that I 

would take a stand against, Roy’s comeback was always, well 

I’ll talk to Ralph, we’ll get that changed. I’d say, well you 

change it first and then come back and talk to me about politics. 

And I may change my mind, but I doubt it. But Roy was 

extremely active in politics, and he was a very, very strong 

Liberal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to join in and express my 

condolences to Kay, the children, grandchildren, 

great-grandchildren, and also to the number of family members 

that still reside in the Glentworth area. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

add my condolences to the family of Roy Nelson. When I was 

in law practice, I met Roy a few times. But it wasn’t until he 

received the Volunteer Medal in 1997 that I really had a chance 

to visit with him about his political career and about how he 

represented that area. 

 

And I know on a number of the official events that come after 

you’re a member of that group of people who have received 

medals, he would always seek me out either so we could sit 

together or we could talk. And I always remember and will 

remember his passion for that part of Saskatchewan. And I 

know that the member opposite shares that and continues that 

passion, and my seatmate has a passion. And I actually too also 

find that part of Saskatchewan to be one of the most beautiful 

areas and the most interesting. 

 

And when you talked with Roy about that area, well the stories 

would come, the interest in the people. But more importantly, 

he would talk about how he was advocating around the national 

park that came into that area to make sure that people were 

properly dealt with and to make sure that the policies that were 

part of the federal government at that time . . . And Mr. 

Goodale’s name often came up, there’s no question about that, 

and also, I think, Mr. Harold MacKay who was my law partner 

because there were many, many issues that Liberals could solve 

that Conservatives or NDP couldn’t solve. And so I agree with 

the member opposite that that was often the response. 

 

Mr. Nelson was at a couple of the dinners over the last couple 

of years. And it was clear that he was getting older, but he so 

enjoyed being part of the community that he made sure that he 

got to visit with everybody. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have many people as passionate about politics 

as Roy. I don’t think we have quite as many people as 

passionate about their community and all of their neighbours in 

making sure that they were included in the broader community 

of Saskatchewan. And so I want to offer my condolences to the 

Roy Nelson family. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the question as read? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

[15:00] 

 

John Skoberg 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to his 

province. 

 

John Skoberg, who passed away on 12 August, 2012 at 

the age of 86, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 

from 1975 until 1982, representing the constituency of 

Moose Jaw North for the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Skoberg was born on 2 February, 1926 in Lougheed, 

Alberta. He joined the Canadian Pacific Railway at the 

age of 18 and was transferred to Moose Jaw in 1950 

where he became a locomotive engineer. Prior to 

becoming an MLA, he served as a Moose Jaw city 

councillor from 1965 to 1968 and as a Member of 

Parliament from 1968 to 1972. He also returned to city 

council during his time as an MLA and he held both 

offices simultaneously. 

 

He is sadly missed by his wife of 63 years, Margaret Ann, 

and their three children, Dana, Diane, and Vicki, as well 

as several grandchildren and great grandchildren. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

John Skoberg, who passed away on August 12th, 2012 at 

the age of 86, was a Member of this Legislative Assembly 

from 1975 until 1982, representing the constituency of 

Moose Jaw North for the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Skoberg was born on February 2nd, 1926 in 

Lougheed, Alberta. He joined the Canadian Pacific 

Railway at the age of 18 and was transferred to Moose 

Jaw in 1950 where he became a locomotive engineer. 

Prior to becoming an MLA, he served as a Moose Jaw 

city councillor from 1965 to 1968 and as a Member of 

Parliament from 1968 to 1972. He also returned to city 



2644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

council during his time as an MLA and held both offices 

simultaneously. 

 

He is sadly missed by his wife of 63 years, Margaret Ann, 

and their three children, Dana, Diane, and Vicki, as well 

as several grandchildren and great grandchildren. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

offer my condolences to the Skoberg family. My roots are in 

Moose Jaw as well, and I would always be hearing stories about 

Mr. Skoberg from my uncle, Arne Nilson. And when I reflect 

on the information that we have here about Mr. Skoberg, and 

the time that he got involved in politics was the time that my 

uncle got involved in politics around a number of issues in the 

city of Moose Jaw. 

 

But the biggest one was the B/A [British American] Oil refinery 

strike, and Mr. Skoberg was on the labour council as an 

engineer, obviously coming from the railway union. My uncle 

was the head of the union at the refinery, and there was an 

extensive strike. They all worked hard to get Mr. Skoberg 

elected to the city council of Moose Jaw, and he then was a 

very able spokesperson for quite a number of people who were 

concerned from the labour movement. And then in turn he was 

elected to parliament in 1968 where he served one four-year 

term. He then retuned to Moose Jaw and was involved in 

politics again and was elected as a member of the legislature 

and represented Moose Jaw very well. 

 

I know that in Moose Jaw when you talk about Mr. Skoberg, 

there are many stories that arise, but there’s always the clear 

message that he was a very strong, forceful representative of the 

working people of Saskatchewan built on this base of support 

that he had in Moose Jaw. And my Uncle Arne died last year, 

and so I don’t hear the stories about their organizing and their 

work in the middle ’60s in Moose Jaw. But I want to have a 

special message from the Nilson family to the Skoberg family 

that we thank them for their gift of Mr. Skoberg to politics in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

pay tribute to John Skoberg and express condolences to his 

family. As an employee of CP Rail [Canadian Pacific Railway], 

John became a locomotive engineer at the age of 18, which 

would attest for his enthusiasm and his determination. At that 

time he became active in politics at the civic level, as a Member 

of Parliament, and as a MLA for the province of Saskatchewan 

in the constituency of Moose Jaw North which I am now proud 

to represent. John retired in 1986 with over 35 years with the 

railroad and 23 years in politics. Indeed he had an active and 

rewarding career. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those that serve in public life, they serve 

unselfishly with a sense of commitment and dedication, and 

indeed John Skoberg was such an individual. I did not know 

John Skoberg personally. However the understanding of his 

service to the people of Moose Jaw as an MLA from Moose 

Jaw North, also serving as a Member of Parliament as well as 

serving on city council, indicates John’s commitment to his 

constituents, to this city, and the province as he worked 

diligently for the constituency of Moose Jaw North and 

consequently for the people of Saskatchewan and of Canada. 

 

John was known for his love of Moose Jaw. He had courage 

and persistence for addressing issues. At the same time, he was 

a dedicated family man enjoying his family and participating in 

the community, being active in curling and golf and playing 

ball. 

 

On behalf of the constituents of Moose Jaw North, I extend our 

condolences to his wife, Margaret, and their children, Dana, 

Diane, Vicki, along with their families. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I’d 

like to rise and say a few words about John Skoberg who served 

this legislature well. And on a personal note, I want to say how 

much we think about some of the things we do and the 

connection it has out in the communities. I first met John, he 

was an MP [Member of Parliament] at the time, and it must 

have been in the early ’70s. I was a high school kid at the time. 

 

And you know, we go out and we speak to classes, and we 

never know what kind of impact that will have. And so he came 

out to Mortlach, my hometown just west of Moose Jaw, and he 

was talking about how at that time they were doing an awful lot 

of interesting things for youth employment. And one of the 

things they were doing is Opportunities for Youth, and they 

were encouraging young people who were going to leave high 

school about the kind of projects they might do to benefit their 

communities and whether that be a recreation project or history, 

local history project or whatever. So John was talking about this 

in our class at Mortlach High School. So I took him up on it, 

and I sent him a note to Ottawa: please send that information. 

And he sent it back and lo and behold, I and two other 

classmates did a project, and it was called little town story, and 

you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s actually in the Legislative Library 

here. And it was done in 1974 after he had left the federal thing.  

 

But because of that, I became interested in politics. And it was 

my first campaign. I was trying to think whether it was ’72 or 

’74 or ’75. But my job, and a friend, was to travel down the No. 

1 Highway putting up posters for John Skoberg, and of course 

that was a lot of fun. We thought we were brave young guys 

stapling up these signs on the telephone poles because that was 

the way you did it in the ’70s. Now you can’t do it so much, but 

that was where you put the signs. And so he was my inspiration 

to get involved in politics, and I was sure glad to follow in his 

footsteps, maybe from a distance. 

 

You know, coming from that area of the province, Moose Jaw 

and Mortlach, but serving people from Saskatoon, and he was 

such a strong advocate for labour rights and making sure in his 

passion that he always spoke for the working men and women 

of this province. And he was a strong, strong man, you know, 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2645 

with strong convictions in that area. And of course the railway 

workers in Moose Jaw have a strong tradition of that, whether it 

be Gordon Snyder as well. 

 

So it was a real pleasure to say that there was that small 

connection way back there in that high school classroom where 

we’re talking . . . And we all do this. We go to classes, and we 

talk, and we don’t know who we’re going to spark that bit of 

interest in. And when they ask us, we should follow up and 

send them the information we said we would. Because John did, 

and I thank him for that. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to join 

in and wish the family our deepest condolences. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

great sense of honour that I rise to participate in the motion of 

condolence for John L. Skoberg. I met Mr. Skoberg, it would be 

about 10 years ago, on the occasion of the then Premier 

Calvert’s annual bus tour. 

 

I can still see him in my mind’s eye on the streets in Moose Jaw 

with Mrs. Skoberg and their little dog who’s out for a walk 

along with the Skobergs. They were back home from BC where 

they had retired to, to visit, and certainly the family ties remain 

strong and the decendents of John and Margaret have done well 

for the province, made a lot of contributions. 

 

The thing I want to remark on about John Skoberg is that within 

the trade union history of this province, and certainly within the 

history of the CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation — New Democratic Party] and progressive politics 

before that, the railroaders have always held a pretty special 

place and made a pretty interesting contribution to what we 

consider to be the history of progressive politics in the province. 

And I guess as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre has 

referenced, John Skoberg was part of that tradition of 

railroaders. He was a proud member of the United 

Transportation Union and made that contribution alongside 

people like Gordon Snyder and Bill Davies before Gord Snyder. 

And again, I guess, federally one of his colleagues was good old 

Boxcar Benjamin, Les Benjamin. 

 

And I guess in terms of listing off those what were larger than 

life characters, Mr. Speaker, John Skoberg fit right in. As the 

former premier Lorne Calvert said on the occasion of Mr. 

Skoberg’s passing: 

 

You never had trouble wondering what John thought 

about an issue. He was a great defender of the rights of 

working people. He was a tenacious fighter — tenacious 

for the things in which he believed and tenacious in his 

love for Moose Jaw and the community. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, John Skoberg was no shrinking violet, 

was a rough-hewn character, but a person of passionate belief in 

terms of the principles for which he fought, again, for working 

men and women. And again in his political career serving at the 

municipal, provincial, and federal level, didn’t let a defeat in 

’72 slow him down too much, having been re-elected 

provincially in ’75 and again in ’78. And, Mr. Speaker, you’ll 

be interested to note he retired from provincial politics in ’82, 

and the person who carried the standard for the NDP in the 

wake of John Skoberg was one Glenn Hagel. 

 

So again all of these different, for me, which have been pretty 

influential strains in my life, there are lots of different roads that 

lead to John Skoberg. I knew who he was before I met him, and 

I was pretty pleased to meet him. And again it’s with a real 

sense of honour that I’m able to participate in this debate today. 

Again I join with all members in extending our condolences to 

Margaret and to the kids and the grandkids and the 

great-grandkids for John Skoberg — again a passionate 

believer, proud railroader, civic servant, and no shrinking 

violet, Mr. Speaker. Anyway, it’s good to be in this debate. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order for 

the Premier to participate in the tribute to the late Lieutenant 

Governor Sylvia Fedoruk, I move that the House do recess until 

3:25. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

a recess until 3:25. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to grant 

the recess? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands recessed to 3:25, 

with a call of the bells five minutes prior to that time. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 15:18 until 15:26.] 

 

The Speaker: — This House will now resume. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

TRIBUTES 

 

Honourable Dr. Sylvia O. Fedoruk 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and through you I 

thank the hon. members for their patience. This is an important 

day in the life of our legislature, and I have a particular interest 

in doing my part with respect to the motions. And now we turn 

our attention to the passing of . . . well a Saskatchewan hero and 

a role model. And I very much wanted to put some comments 

on the record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will first move the motion and then I have a few 

. . . I will not first move the motion. I’m going to go right to 

some remarks with respect to former lieutenant governor, 

Sylvia Fedoruk. Mr. Speaker, I apologize in advance for those 

who attended her state funeral. I prepared remarks for that 



2646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

particular occasion that I’d like to actually have on the public 

record of the province in Hansard, and so these are very similar 

to the remarks I wrote for that day. 

 

About 60 years ago, the Regina Leader-Post dispatched a 

reporter to write a profile of a young up-and-comer at the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. Sylvia Fedoruk was the 

assistant physicist at the commission. She was working 

alongside the renowned Dr. Harold Johns. She was 24 years 

old. She had accomplished already more in her very short 

lifetime than most of us will accomplish in, well a lot longer 

time than that. Yet she asked this reporter from the Leader-Post 

60 years ago not to write “anything flowery” about her. She 

said too many letters were pouring into the Cancer 

Commission, which at the time was doing leading-edge 

research, but not without controversy because of course it was 

research around nuclear medicine. It was research around 

adding value to the great resource of uranium that we have. She 

said one letter had been addressed to Dr. H. E. Johns at the 

atom bomb hospital in Saskatoon. She said, “We don’t want 

any more of those,” with a smile. 

 

American scholar Roswell Hitchcock wrote about greatness. It 

was said then: 

 

It is first of all a thing of the heart. It is alive with robust 

and generous sympathies. It cannot slumber, for activity 

is a necessity of its existence. It is no reservoir, but a 

fountain. 

 

Her life, Mr. Speaker, lived so fully among us, was a veritable 

font. Today through the many remembrances that you will hear 

in this Assembly, we will take a eulogistic walk through that 

font, through that life. 

 

And I asked on the occasion of her state funeral if it might be 

helpful if each of us could listen to these remembrances, each of 

us could listen to the eulogistic remarks of members in this 

House, through the ears of a stranger, if we could listen to the 

story of Dr. Sylvia Fedoruk as though we never knew her, as 

though we never knew the place that she loved so much. 

 

[15:30] 

 

If we were to do that, we would hear through strangers’ ears of 

her vocational and academic excellence. That is well known to 

many. We’d hear of her brilliance and of the millions — 

literally, Mr. Speaker — now the millions of lives that have 

changed, millions of lives that were saved because of her 

research, because of the work she did as a 24-year-old member 

on the team of Dr. Harold Johns. We would hear of her legacy, 

of her pioneering work and then legacy that she left for the 

province in the area of nuclear medicine, a mantle that was laid 

down for various reasons and we ought to pick up again. 

 

We would hear through the strangers’ ears of a woman whose 

avocational excellence was on display in virtually everything 

she tried, from curling to hockey to landing a 22-pound trout. 

That would have been an interesting YouTube video, that battle, 

a 22-pound trout battling with Her Honour. 

 

Despite all of this, we would also hear of her equanimity, of her 

good humour. We would hear of this person’s modesty, of her 

humble and deferential heart, of her love for the simple things, 

the best things about the province of Saskatchewan, like the 

wild blueberries that she requested even in her last days, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I have heard, and heard stories just prior to that state funeral 

from my wife, Tami, who was in the College of Engineering 

studying civil engineering when she first met Dr. Fedoruk. It 

occurred when Tami was one of the very few women 

engineering students at the U of S, Mr. Speaker. If you were in 

Arts and Science and you were maybe looking to meet a girl at 

the University of Saskatchewan in the ’80s, you know your 

chances weren’t very good at the College of Engineering just 

because of the numbers. But thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, that 

I went there. 

 

Tami would talk about how she, how Dr. Fedoruk came to 

speak to them and with them, how she encouraged them though 

there were just a few, how they gathered around her and, Tami 

said, they just didn’t want her to leave. They didn’t want her to 

go; they wanted her to stay. We will hear remembrance like that 

of her. 

 

And I have my own remembrances of her that I try to think of 

from the perspective of someone who may not have known this 

woman but just knew of her great achievements. It was on the 

occasion of this government’s announcement of the Canadian 

Centre for Nuclear Innovation, now justly and rightly named in 

her honour. When we were done the formalities of the 

announcement, we had made all of the announcements — there 

was ministers there; the minister, the member for Greystone 

was there and others, university officials — she took us over to 

look at a piece of 60-year-old technology that was on display 

that she knew very, very well. She explained it to us in terms 

that even we could understand, though I would have refused a 

pop quiz then and refuse it today because it was still obviously 

very complex. 

 

And with a twinkle in her eye, Mr. Speaker, she took us through 

this virtual tour of those moments of nascent medical history 

made not at Johns Hopkins and not at the Mayo and not even in 

central Canada but made right here on the Prairies, right at the 

University of Saskatchewan. And you know, Mr. Speaker, she 

didn’t take us there as though she were one of the star 

attractions of this tour. She basically took us there as a tour 

guide, one who may or may not have a lot to do with what 

happened there, when we actually know the truth, when we 

know she was essential to the amazing science, the medical 

science that took place there. 

 

To listen to that story, the story of that life, Mr. Speaker, 

through the ears of a stranger, might lead us to conclude, and 

reasonably so, that it actually can’t be true, that a person can’t 

be that accomplished, that a person can’t give that much to her 

fellow man in terms of her ability around science, that a person 

can’t be that good at every sport she tried, that she can’t be that 

. . . Anyone couldn’t be that humble and that deferential and 

that unassuming and that unpretentious. We would think that 

this must be a character from a novel or maybe lore. 

 

Well Ralph Waldo Emerson said, “Truth is the property of no 

individual but is the treasure of all men.” Dr. Fedoruk’s life, 

though every bit as human as ours, stands today as an 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2647 

inspirational and undeniable Saskatchewan truth. Thank 

goodness it’s not the stuff of fiction. Thank goodness it’s not 

the stuff of lore. This is an individual whose talent and body of 

work afforded her, by the way, the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 

live anywhere in the world, quite literally to live anywhere she 

chose to live. She chose Saskatchewan. She chose to stay here. 

Her life and the truth of her life is indeed our treasure, as Ralph 

Waldo Emerson would say. 

 

Because she and those who loved her and knew her best so 

generously shared that treasure, this province is quite literally 

the better for it. It is a different place. It is a different world for 

thousands of women who in those 60 intervening years have 

successfully battled cervical cancer because of cobalt-60, 

because of her pioneering work, and then those many other 

thousands of us here in the province and other Canadians who 

were just fortunate to know her, who were blessed by her 

service to the province as our lieutenant governor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of what I’ve just said will be repeated in the 

official motion, but let me just say by way of conclusion that it 

is very important that we would take some time to honour those 

members of this Assembly who have passed and thank them for 

their service and acknowledge them and send our best wishes to 

their families who miss them deeply. But it is also very 

important that we acknowledge the contribution of Her Honour, 

of Dr. Fedoruk, and that we would also pass the following 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly unite in paying tribute to the memory 

of the Hon. Sylvia O. Fedoruk, the 17th lieutenant 

governor of the province of Saskatchewan, who died on 

26 September 2012. 

 

Born in Canora in 1927, she was educated at the 

University of Saskatchewan and the University of 

Windsor. Prior to becoming the lieutenant governor, she 

had many distinguished accomplishments in sport and 

academia. 

 

Her Honour played many sports including basketball, 

softball, hockey, volleyball, track and field, and golf. 

 

Missing from the list, Mr. Speaker, is fishing but we’ll take that 

as read. 

 

She won four Canadian track and field medals, the 

Western Canadian interuniversity basketball title, and five 

provincial softball championships. Her most notable 

accomplishments came in the sport of curling. Her team 

won three provincial curling championships and won the 

first ever Canadian Women’s Curling Championship in 

1961. For her sporting accomplishments, she was 

inducted into the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame and 

the Curling Hall of Fame in 1986. 

 

In her career, she was a professor, a nuclear physicist, and 

researcher. For 35 years she was associated with the 

Saskatoon Cancer Clinic. Her Honour was involved in the 

development of the world’s first cobalt 60 unit and one of 

the first nuclear medicine scanning machines. She was the 

director of physics for the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Foundation, the first female member of the Atomic 

Energy Control Board of Canada, the first woman 

chancellor of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

For her many outstanding accomplishments she received 

the Saskatchewan Order of Merit in 1986 and was named 

an Officer of the Order of Canada in 1987, the following 

year. 

 

On September 7th, 1988 Her Honour was sworn in as the 

17th and first female lieutenant governor of 

Saskatchewan. During her tenure, Her Honour took 

personal pleasure from her work with children and youth, 

particularly in the context of education. She served as 

lieutenant governor until May 1994. 

 

Which is what brought us together for that state funeral, Mr. 

Speaker, and which is part of the reason why today, buried in 

the cornerstone of the building in the time capsule is a program 

signed by former premiers and former lieutenant governors of 

that particular funeral so that future generations may know not 

only by what we say here today, by the message we send them, 

that she was indeed a pioneer and a treasure of this province. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

the members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly unite in paying tribute to the memory 

of the Hon. Sylvia O. Fedoruk, 17th lieutenant governor 

of the province of Saskatchewan, who died on September 

26, 2012. 

 

Born in Canora in 1927, she was educated at the 

University of Saskatchewan and University of Windsor. 

Prior to becoming the lieutenant governor, she had many 

distinguished accomplishments in sport and academia. 

 

Her Honour played many sports including basketball, 

softball, hockey, volleyball, track and field, and golf. She 

won four Canadian track and field medals, the western 

Canadian interuniversity basketball title, five provincial 

softball championships. Her most notable 

accomplishments came in the sport of curling. Her team 

won three provincial curling championships and won the 

first ever Canadian Women’s Curling Championship in 

1961. For her sporting accomplishments, she was 

inducted into the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame and 

the Curling Hall of Fame in 1986. 

 

In her career, she was a professor, a nuclear physicist, and 

researcher. For 35 years she was associated with the 

Saskatoon Cancer Clinic. Her Honour was involved in the 

development of the world’s first cobalt 60 unit and one of 

the first nuclear medicine scanning machines. She was the 

director of physics for the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Foundation, the first female member of the Atomic 

Energy Control Board of Canada, and the first woman 

chancellor of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

For her many outstanding accomplishments she received 

the Saskatchewan Order of Merit in 1986 and was named 



2648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

an Officer of the Order of Canada in 1987. 

 

On September the 7th, 1988 Her Honour was sworn in as 

the 17th and first female lieutenant governor of 

Saskatchewan. During her tenure, Her Honour took 

personal pleasure from her work with children and youth, 

particularly in the context of education. She served as 

lieutenant governor until May 1994. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I agree with the 

Premier that this woman is a great asset of Saskatchewan and 

that she’s contributed many, many things to our story as a 

province, but most importantly, she has done it in so many 

different fields of endeavour. 

 

And it’s very clear that sports and athletics and all of those 

activities were a big part of her life. But her academic 

contribution around the cobalt treatment in cancer will stand for 

the long term as, I think, her single biggest contribution. 

 

It’s about, I think, 31 years ago that I got to meet Sylvia 

Fedoruk because she was a colleague of my wife, working at 

the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation. And as a spouse of a 

doctor, I got to go along for the annual meeting where the 

Saskatoon and the Regina clinics got together to talk about 

policies and deal with particular issues. And I wasn’t included 

in all the meetings, but I did get a chance to meet Sylvia 

Fedoruk and understand that this was an important woman. 

 

And I can recall that we were meeting at, I think, at the 

Sheraton Cavalier hotel in Saskatoon, and that she came. And 

even though she lived in Saskatoon, she wanted to be at the 

hotel because that’s where everybody was, and then she 

participated obviously in the meetings which I wasn’t at, but 

also in the social events. 

 

One of the other doctors, who has been deceased for many years 

now, always enjoyed getting into discussions with her. He was 

one of the oncologists, and she was the physicist. And in the 

cancer field where she worked, there was always this debate 

because the physicists were the ones that calculated how much 

radiation was needed in the treatment — and she clearly had 

been doing this her whole life — and there was always then this 

debate with the ones that were doing chemotherapy and how 

these things would fit together. And I know that she was lively 

in the conversations that I was part of in those meetings. 

 

But then since, subsequently, when I would see her at different 

events and she then became very important in the political life 

of Saskatchewan, she remembered the connection that we had 

through my wife. My wife actually then didn’t work any longer 

at the Cancer Agency until she returned in 1997, I guess, is the 

time. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But one of the things that Sylvia Fedoruk brought was what I 

would call a common sense, Saskatchewan perspective, and it’s 

clear in the references that the Premier’s made to the work that 

she did around developing the nuclear medicine facility, but 

also in so many other things that she did. I know that her role at 

the university, as a chancellor, was one to provide that common 

sense perspective, and so we know that she was always there 

with a perspective. 

 

Now one of the things that she’s also known for, and it’s in the 

information that was provided to us, relates to the specific 

legislative issue around the use of special warrants. And in that 

particular situation, in the Progressive Conservative 

government, the expenditures of the province were being done 

by special warrant; in other words, they didn’t have a budget 

put into place. And there was a lot of pressure on her to do 

something about it as the lieutenant governor, but her common 

sense perspective was, no, this is something for the people to 

decide. And she ended up saying, the electorate will deal with 

that particular issue. 

 

When the government changed after the Grant Devine 

government and Premier Romanow came into place, they 

obviously knew each other from many different areas, but they 

put into place a process and procedure between the lieutenant 

governor and the Premier which I think in some form continues 

to this day, which was very regular meetings to keep the 

lieutenant governor informed about what is happening here in 

the legislature. It’s that kind of a common sense perspective that 

she brought to many things in life, but it’s something that I 

think we can thank her for in our life here in the legislature. 

 

Now when a person like Sylvia Fedoruk contributes so much in 

so many different areas, it’s sometimes hard to describe all of 

the contributions. But I think the contribution as a leading 

woman who took on jobs that can set an example for the young 

women of Saskatchewan will always be remembered, and we 

need to tell her story again and again. 

 

So I express my condolences to the Fedoruk family and thank 

them for sharing her with Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 

have a lot to add to the comments that my colleagues have 

made already, and they’ve certainly covered the careers of Dr. 

Fedoruk. I just wanted a couple of comments from my 

perspective. 

 

I was able to be at the cobalt 60 exhibit that’s been developed at 

the Western Development Museum, which is in my riding of 

Saskatoon Nutana. And one of the people that was there to pay 

tribute to this remarkable achievement in medical innovation in 

Saskatchewan was Dr. Stuart Houston, who has written a book 

about a lot of the medical innovations of that era. And certainly 

Dr. Fedoruk was prominently featured in the book, and the 

book’s called Tommy’s Team.  

 

And I just wanted to point out that a lot of these innovations 

were made at a time when we had a government here who was 

very forthright in and active in pursuing some of these 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2649 

extremely innovative ideas. So innovation is certainly not 

something of just this century, Mr. Speaker, but it certainly is 

something that was well-entrenched in the early decades of the 

last century and certainly has been a feature of Saskatchewan 

history in many, many ways. And Dr. Fedoruk really 

exemplified that type of innovation, and again we see this is 

from a woman in a field that was not occupied by women in any 

great sense. 

 

And so for me, as a young woman growing up, we certainly 

knew about Dr. Fedoruk. And especially for me, it was when 

she was the lieutenant governor and was just seen as a figure 

that really represented what Saskatchewan women are all about 

— smart, innovative, creative, and pioneers in their own way. 

 

So it’s a great honour to be able to get up here in this 

Legislative Assembly and make some comments on her career 

and on her contributions, not only to medicine but to politics in 

Saskatchewan. She’s certainly someone, I think, that we as 

women look to as our role model. And we certainly need those 

types of role models when we look at the under-representation 

of women in many professions including in this Legislative 

Assembly. So it’s just a honour to be able to get up and say a 

few words about this amazing, amazing pioneer in her medical 

work and, also as was pointed out, in her athletics, and of 

course as lieutenant governor of this Assembly and of this 

province. 

 

And I was pleased to see that this government chose to name 

the Centre for Nuclear Innovation after her. Certainly the 

medical improvements that have occurred as a result of that 

kind of research, as the Premier indicated, has saved many, 

many, many, many lives. And it’s through innovators like this 

that we can be leaders in that type of research and in cancer 

research in general. And certainly a lot of the Tommy’s Team, 

as Dr. Houston refers to in his book, were those medical 

innovators that brought us things like the Cobalt-60 bomb and 

also the whole implementation of medicare itself. 

 

So I’m pleased and honoured to be able to be part of the 

procedures today where we’re paying tribute to this amazing 

woman. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes, together with 

the Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted, be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes, together with the 

Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted, be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 85 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and speak to Bill No. 85, An Act respecting Employment 

Standards, Occupational Health and Safety, Labour Relations 

and Related Matters and making consequential amendments to 

certain Acts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t often get bills like this one in the 

legislature because they’re hard to put in place, and normally 

they require lots of consultation because they affect so many 

people. And, Mr. Speaker, part of our problem today with this 

bill is that that consultation did not take place in a sufficient 

way to allow for this matter, this bill to go forward. 

 

The concepts or some of the ideas around this bill were released 

right at the end of the session last year, and the bill then was 

released at the end of the fall session in 2012. And we assumed 

that there would be some labour legislation to respond to the 

decision of Mr. Justice Ball in February 2012, where he 

effectively said that the government’s essential services 

legislation as drafted was not constitutional. And the issue in 

that legislation, which was much simpler and much more 

straightforward, was that there had not been consultation. And 

you just take a couple of quotes from Mr. Justice Ball to make 

that point. First quote: “. . . consultation is useful because it will 

usually lead to an improved statutory product.” 

 

In that particular case the government contended that they had 

consulted, but Mr. Justice Ball, after listening to them and after 

reflecting on the positions put forward by the government’s 

lawyers, said, “The Government’s first contention [about 

engaging in an extensive consultation process] is not supported 



2650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

by the evidence.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on this particular bill, which takes 100 years 

of labour laws and lays them out and then mushes them all 

together, had no public consultation. It had some written 

consultation but it did not meet the standard that Mr. Justice 

Ball . . . I contend, you know, I contend it doesn’t meet the 

standard Mr. Justice Ball set out for a much simpler piece of 

legislation just over a year ago. 

 

Now in Mr. Justice Ball’s decision . . . The government has 

responded to that decision of Mr. Justice Ball in February 2012 

with an appeal, and that process is ongoing. But in that 

particular recommendation from him in the judgment was that 

the government should fix the essential services legislation 

within a year. Now rather than doing that, it appears that the 

government thought, oh well let’s jumble everything up. Let’s 

go and take everything that we’ve done in the whole labour law 

area and try to jam it together in one Act. 

 

And so in fact rather than fix a piece of legislation which was 

relatively easy to fix, they have moved on with a surprise to all 

of us — I think a surprise to employers and to all of the 

corporations that rely on stable labour laws, and clearly a 

surprise to many of the unions who have worked quite well with 

the employers that they’ve been involved with over many years, 

but even more so a surprise to those people who are workers in 

Saskatchewan that aren’t in unionized jobs because this 

legislation starts going through and taking apart many aspects 

of what we’ve all assumed in Saskatchewan are the standards of 

work that we have. 

 

Now this legislation has caused a fair amount of upset within 

unionized labour, but it’s also raised many questions for those 

who are working in jobs that are not unionized. And the 

questions sometimes don’t come from the young workers who 

are just starting their first job or are trying to figure out how to 

get a career started, but it sure comes from the parents and 

grandparents who are concerned about the protections that 

we’ve had that are being eroded by this legislation. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now the initial response, my initial response to this legislation 

when I looked at it was that they — and they, I guess the 

minister and the people that are working with him — have had 

a great deal of difficulty in actually putting all these various 

laws together. And you can tell that by the number of times that 

they have to redefine terms throughout the legislation. And so 

when you’re just . . . The whole idea from what the minister 

said last May was that this was to simplify the world. Well I 

think it has gone in exactly the opposite direction because the 

same word in one spot will mean something else in another 

spot, all in the same bill. And normally that’s a sign in 

legislation drafting, in the legislative drafting world, that not 

enough time has been taken to actually produce a good product. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that would be my first point about 

this bill is that not enough time has been taken to talk to the 

people who are affected, to actually work with the words and 

use them in a way that is consistent throughout the whole piece 

of legislation. And we’re then stuck with something which will 

be very difficult to interpret. 

Now one of the jobs we have in this legislature is to be as clear 

as possible so that the law can stand on its own — you don’t 

have to go and look at the legislative debate or you don’t have 

to go and consult 10 or 15 other sources to try to figure out 

what we as legislators have set out to do. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

bill fails on that as well in that there are places where we can’t 

tell what the ultimate result is. And part of that is that we’re 

dealing with 100 years of legislation, 100 years of 

accommodation, so in other words of attempts to work out fair 

compromises for the good of the employer and the good of the 

employee. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the minister knows that when 

you have a number of court decisions or Labour Relations 

Board decisions around the meanings of various words that are 

used in legislation, it assists everybody in being clear about 

what the intent is. And when we bring forward a bill like this 

which effectively shifts around and changes the wording, it’s 

going to be many years of interpretation to sort out exactly what 

is in this legislation. 

 

All of this points to the fact that not enough time was taken. 

Maybe not enough staff, or the right staff weren’t involved in 

preparing this document. And it basically I think makes the 

point that the minister should pull this back and take more time, 

talk with the people who are affected by the various parts of the 

legislation, and see whether there is some way to have a much 

clearer bill. 

 

Now when a government comes through with a surprise — and 

we’ve seen lots of surprises from this government that nobody 

wanted, whether it’s three more MLAs or all of the other things 

that you hear us talk about — what you know is they’re not 

totally in control of what their agenda is or what they are trying 

to do. And this legislation in its present form is a good example 

of not doing your homework, not doing all of the background 

preparation, not doing the consultation, as Mr. Justice Ball 

pointed out in the essential services legislation court case. And 

the end effect of that one was that the legislation was declared 

unconstitutional. 

 

Now we know that that other legislation is under appeal, and 

we’re obviously looking forward to hearing what a higher court 

may have to say about that. But I know from reading that 

judgment that Mr. Justice Ball was very careful to make sure 

that he was right within what he saw was the Constitution of 

Canada around providing a fair and just system of providing 

essential services. That piece is not included in this legislation 

because we’re waiting for the court decisions on it. And it is 

curious because the decision from a year ago’s goal was kind of 

to help out the government and see if they couldn’t fix the 

problem they had with their essential services legislation. Now I 

don’t know how many court decisions and how many judges 

it’s going to take to fix this legislation. There are so many 

topics and so many parts of it that are going to be raising 

questions right throughout the whole system. 

 

Now we have received quite a number of comments and 

suggestions from various unions and various other groups from 

employers, and we know that a lot of employers in the province 

are saying, our issue isn’t the labour laws of Saskatchewan; our 

issue is that we need more employees. We need more workers 

to do the job of building a good economy. And so if you think 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2651 

about bringing in legislation which upsets or disrupts that 

economy, it kind of makes you wonder whether the government 

is trying to put a wet blanket on the economy or do something 

that will disrupt it. And I’m surprised, I’m surprised that the 

government has done this in a way that’s going to cause further 

conflict within the labour situation in Saskatchewan. 

 

So now when this legislation was brought forward, it clearly 

intended to run right over a whole number of people within our 

community who have worked hard over many years to have 

good legislation in Saskatchewan. And as I said before, that 

legislation or the interpretations that come out of the Labour 

Relations Board hearings or out of the courts were most often 

fair compromises that would allow for continued discussion 

between the unions and the government or as it relates to the 

employment standards that would end up protecting those 

employees that were not organized. 

 

But let’s start off by looking at some of the concerns that are 

there as it relates to some of the unionized employees. And if 

you look at the legislation itself, there are new exceptions to the 

definition of employee that will push many people who are 

currently union members out of their right to collectively 

bargain. And if that’s the intention of the government, it 

appears that they’ve tried to do some of that. But you know, if 

you’re going to do that, then you should be forthright about it 

and doing it in a way that consults with the people. 

 

And just even going into that first point reminds me that when I 

read through this legislation, the thing that was probably the 

most frustrating was that so many of the terms and definitions 

and actually important factors related to the bill had to be in 

regulation or they were in some way prescribed. And I know 

that the minister knows that that ends up being a very 

frustrating kind of law to advise a client about, whether it’s an 

employer or an employee. And I know that this may be his 

legacy in the long term — to create legal work for lawyer 

colleagues — but it’s not a very good way to help the economy. 

And as we know, you can end up spending many, many dollars 

in litigation just to try to figure out what the law actually says. 

 

So one of the first things this law does is it actually moves or 

deprives thousands of people who are currently in unions from 

their ability to continue to be a member of the union. There’s 

provisions in the legislation around this definition of supervisor 

that requires there to be basically an exclusion of people who 

supervise others in work units. 

 

Now I don’t think that the government really talked to 

employers about this or employees when they brought this in. 

We’re not entirely sure where it came from, but this particular 

clause alone is going to have a substantial effect on many 

existing collective agreements that incorporate people from 

different levels of employment within a job situation. And so 

there’s another example of something that, I think, was included 

in here but it hadn’t really been discussed with people who were 

going to be directly affected by it. 

 

A third area — and I’m just doing a bit of a summary here — 

relates to some of the terms that interfere with unions’ 

democracy, unions’ financial administration. And it relates to 

how the union dues are remitted to a union local, instead of 

letting the employees decide democratically whether they want 

them to go locally or whether they want them to go to a national 

or international union. 

 

There’s also some requirements there around audited financial 

statements that are quite expensive and I guess maybe creating 

work for our accountant professionals in the province. And also 

there’s a . . . Rather than let unions decide for themselves 

democratically, how their constitutions should be written, it’s 

put a role for the Labour Relations Board in supervising union 

constitutions. Now there are many, many organizations within 

our society, whether they’re corporations or non-profit 

corporations or churches which are part of the non-profit 

corporation or other places where we don’t interfere with the 

democratic rights of people to decide how those constitutions 

are put together. And I mean obviously there are some, there are 

remedies if there is very dramatic change, but we don’t have 

somebody going in and monitoring them. 

 

It’s not really clear why that type of power and that type of 

clause is in this legislation. It certainly wasn’t one that was 

talked about with the people who are actually affected by it 

before it was put into the law. And so, I mean, it’s things like 

that where we’ll have some questions in committee to try to 

figure out where these things came from. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now another area of concern relates to the fact that employers 

will be in a position to voluntarily recognize a so-called union, 

a union that acts on behalf of some or all of the employees, 

without requiring that union to demonstrate the support of the 

workers. And this whole area of what I think are colloquially 

called sweetheart unions, can be used by some employees who 

aren’t really thinking about the long term to effectively limit the 

worker’s rights to collective bargaining through a good-faith 

union that they have themselves. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that this is another area where the minister has not spent enough 

time talking with the people who are affected and getting 

something, so he’s put something in here that is going to cause 

disruptions in workplaces, rather than actually something that 

will benefit our economy. 

 

Now there are some attempts at provisions of dealing with some 

other issues like last offer votes, setting up some new 

procedures that are once again done without consultation. It’s 

possible that some of these kinds of things might have been 

discussed with people so that you could work out some ways of 

developing offers and acceptances that are palatable to working 

people in the province, or to companies for that matter. But 

once again this kind of a provision came in as a surprise. 

 

Now there are . . . I’m kind of identifying some of the things 

that are most egregious about this legislation rather than going 

through and detailing all the different clauses. But one of the 

other areas that I would point out is that the present Trade 

Union Act has a provision that protects people’s jobs when 

there’s a change in contractors for work. And this affects us in 

this building, I would suspect, and it affects people in other 

government buildings or in hospitals or at the university. And 

that’s where there are contracts for the provision of cafeteria or 

food services, where there’s janitorial or cleaning services, or 

there’s security services that are in publicly owned buildings, so 

hospitals, universities, legislatures, municipal buildings. 



2652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

What this bill does is eliminate the successorship right of those 

workers to have protection of their job if there’s a change. And 

this has an effect obviously on the workers, but it also has an 

effect on the continued quality of the services being provided. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is once again something that the minister 

has brought forward without talking to people at all before this 

has been brought forward. 

 

And so you have a number of, quite a large number of people 

across the province who may be caught in this type of a 

situation, who are worried about their job security. And that’s 

not fair for the workers, but it also is creating problems for the 

employers. 

 

Now if, in fact, this is intended to be used by the health regions 

of the province — and it appears that it may be aimed at that — 

what I know from long experience as a minister of Health, but 

also in consultations I’ve done around the world, that one of the 

number one concerns in our hospitals and health facilities is 

cleanliness. And we know, I think right now or in the last week 

in Saskatoon, there are issues around some of the viruses that 

are in the hospital, and much of that relates to how professional 

the cleaning work that is done there. What we know from other 

countries — and I think Scotland is one place — where they 

have recognized that cleaning and janitorial services in health 

facilities may be your number one protection against 

hospital-related infections and hospital-related injuries. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it appears that this legislation may actually 

be behind the times in not having it had a chance to discuss that 

particular issue with the people involved in this type of work. 

But right now, the way it’s set out in this legislation, that 

protection of workers will be lost in this particular legislation, 

and so that public services will be able to be contracted out. So, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll be continuing to ask questions about that 

area as well as all of the other areas. 

 

Now the other big area that I’m going to talk about briefly 

before I sit down is how minimum employment standards, the 

things that we have developed over many years, are being 

eroded. They’re being pulled back on different sides and 

different areas. 

 

And I know my colleague asked some questions around days 

off in the week, for example. Most people in Saskatchewan 

anticipate that Sunday might be part of their two days off a 

week, and that’s been in the legislation for a very long time. I’m 

not sure that the minister talked to the council of bishops or he 

talked to the various churches in Saskatchewan that he had 

brought something forward which will erode the traditional 

weekend that we have and give employers the power to change 

some of these things. I know that there are concerns already 

being raised about this particular issue because it gives less 

power to an employee to understand where the preference of the 

law is as far as protecting a weekend. 

 

Now there are a whole number of other areas where the rules 

appear to be eroded or they’ve become more flexible as it 

relates once again to these minimum employment standards. 

And I don’t think that the employees of Saskatchewan who are 

affected by this — and they’re primarily young people and 

perhaps older people who are in non-unionized jobs — I don’t 

think they understand how much damage is being done to some 

of these particular provisions that we have. 

 

Now one of the things we do know is that when there are union 

contracts, many of these minimum standards that we’ve had 

now will be protected because that’s part of the contract that has 

been negotiated over time. But there’s no question that when 

you start going after the most vulnerable workers, the way this 

legislation seems to do, then all workers are at risk. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, legislation that’s this big and this 

comprehensive that is brought on as a surprise without proper 

consultation is frankly not something we should be proud of in 

this legislature. And I encourage the minister and the Premier to 

maybe rethink this, like he has the motorcycle issue, and take 

more time. Talk to more people. Have more legislative 

draftspeople go through this to make sure that it’s more 

cohesive because what we have now is going to create a 

disruption of our relatively peaceful working world here in 

Saskatchewan. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

the debate on Bill 49, the forestry professional amendment Act, 

2012. 

 

Looking at the bill itself, there are some provisions to I guess 

remove a number of areas where the ministry is asking to 

remove the teaching, research in this bill. And that’s one area 

where they’re going to move that, and we’re not sure what the 

reason is for that. And I know over time we’ll find out what the 

reason is, whether we go into a committee and we ask questions 

about that section of the bill where it repeals those areas . . . 

And we’re talking about teaching, the research. And I don’t 

know what the reason would be at this point. And I know in 

committee we’ll get to ask those questions, and we can really 

define what the reason is. And maybe they’ve consulted with 

somebody for the first time ever, that they have actually 

consulted with somebody to have that removed. And that would 

be amazing. 

 

But having said this, I want to give some comparisons. And we 

talk about forestry, and it’s an industry that needs some 

attention by the government. It also needs respect, needs some 

respect. When it comes to our traditional trappers, when it 

comes to our First Nations and Métis, we want to make sure 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

that those communities are being consulted. 

 

You know, clearly there are areas . . . And I’m going to show, 

you know, and hopefully bring the concerns of the constituents 

back home, make sure that the concerns of our traditional 

trappers, our commercial fishermen . . . And I’m going to use 

examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because that’s sometimes the 

only way you get the government’s attention is by showing 

them what’s going on in the real world, what’s going on in our 

communities, and how people are being affected by decisions of 

this government, clearly. So we’ll go on to that, and we’ll talk 

about that. 

 

And you know, whether you’re harvesting in northern 

Saskatchewan or you’re harvesting wood in any part of our 

beautiful province, there is a resource. We know that. And you 

know, it’s really concerning when you see some of the 

conditions that are going on, and they’re harvesting without 

consulting some of the impact areas. 

 

And you know, when you talk to some of the trappers, and I 

want to . . . the story I’ve heard about. They come into their 

trapline, and it might be their family’s trapline, five generations, 

six generations that their family has been in that area harvesting 

wildlife, fur. And that’s what they’re doing. They’re making 

sure they’re utilizing the resources that are there for them. And 

that is a resource. Just like the forest is a resource, so is the 

wildlife, the fur to those communities and to those traditional 

trappers who live off the land. And there are different trappers. 

 

And I know, I’m going to show some comparison of what the 

government’s framework for the duty to consult and 

accommodate says about trappers, about traditional land users 

being consulted before industry goes into an area. And I mean it 

could be mining. It could be foresters. And these foresters are 

professionals. And I want to talk about that, clearly. 

 

Clearly in this document they talk about a professional service 

that they do. And they work on behalf of the industry, and 

they’ll go into an area. But I think I’m going to show the 

comparisons to what I want to talk about, the challenges that we 

face in northern Saskatchewan, that trappers are facing. 

 

And then I’m going to bring it back and show how it’s 

important that we make sure these professionals understand the 

duty that the Supreme Court of Canada outlined that they must 

follow, that this government has to follow. It isn’t the option 

they may or may not do. The Supreme Court of Canada’s ruling 

was very clear. First Nations, Métis people, traditional users of 

the land must be consulted. It’s the Crown’s obligation to do 

that, and I want to make that clear. And sometimes the 

government and the Sask Party government doesn’t hear that. 

They don’t want to hear that. They just want to make their own 

deals and go directly bulldoze wherever they want. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So I want to make it clear. You have traditional trappers who’ve 

been in an area and harvesting furs. And it helps with not only 

the harvesting for the culture, and they’re very proud of the 

culture. You talk to a lot of northerners who are traditional 

individuals who live and have raised their family on the 

trapline, who truly have that connection to the land, who 

understand. And they monitor, and they make sure they take 

good care of the area that they’re given. 

 

And our trappers have certain zones, and we watch how they 

work in those areas. They work very effective, and they don’t 

just go in and take everything out of an area that are there. They 

do it in a very balanced way, a very balanced approach on how 

they harvest the animals and the furs that they take from an area 

because they know, they know clearly that if an area is 

harvested too much, then those animals are gone, and it could 

take a long time for them to come back. 

 

But having said that, I just want to show how they want to be 

respected. And these foresters . . . And this bill will give some 

provisions, and maybe more work needs to be done in this bill 

to understand that. And we’re going to have to ask questions in 

committee — How is that going to connect to harvesting? — of 

this bill with the professionals that will be going into there. 

 

But I want to go back to just a story about how people live off 

the land and the forest that they live in. And northern people do. 

And it’s not just trappers in northern Saskatchewan. We have 

trappers in southern Saskatchewan as well. And they want to 

make sure, those that have done that, whether they’re 

Aboriginal, non-Aboriginal, they want to make sure there is a 

forest. They want to make sure that there is wildlife to harvest, 

and they want to make sure that they have access to that. And 

we see the industry, the prices for furs going up. It’s an 

interesting industry. It’s exciting times for the trappers, and they 

want some help from government. 

 

And you have a Northern Trappers Association, and you know, 

I want to give some credit where credit is due, that we’re trying 

to work hard together, the Northern Trappers Association. They 

have an executive, a body that works, and they work with the 

PAGC [Prince Albert Grand Council]. They’re also working 

with Meadow Lake Tribal Council. They’re trying to do what 

they can to use the supports that they have for their industry 

because a lot of them are First Nations, Métis, and 

non-Aboriginal that are in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But the majority are Aboriginal that are on the traditional 

traplines and trap. They do. And they want to pass that 

knowledge — the culture and the wisdom that they have gained 

from their grandparents, their mushom, their kohkom — they 

want to pass that and hand that down to the next generation to 

their grandchildren. And when you see some of the trappers 

with their families, their kids and their grandkids, and they go 

back to the trapline every year, and they want to make sure, you 

know, clearly there is a process there. 

 

And there’s a lot of wooded area, forest, where their traplines 

are. It isn’t like you come into southern Saskatchewan where 

you might have a small area of forest. But unfortunately in 

northern Saskatchewan and where these traplines are, 

traditionally they are just . . . There are so much forest that there 

isn’t a lot of clear land that . . . unless somebody’s been in there 

harvesting. 

 

And sometimes whether it’s a fire . . . There’s a way that the 

land, you know, traditional trappers that have their land . . . It 

could be a fire, mother nature. It could be somebody coming in 

the area makes a mistake with a cigarette — who knows? — 



2654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

open fire, and next thing you know you have a fire. 

 

But having said that, I just want to show the support that this 

Northern Trappers Association’s getting. They’re going to have 

their annual general meeting coming up, and we’ll be there. But 

they want to make sure, and I’ve heard this at the trappers’ 

meetings very clearly, before somebody comes into their 

trapping area and is going to harvest wood, that’s going to come 

in and do damage to their trapline, and they do see it as damage 

because it’s their lifestyle and it’s their culture, the way of life 

that they have lived for generation after generation. And they’re 

very proud, and some of them live that traditional lifestyle, they 

still live off the land. 

 

And you know what? I know that the Northern Trappers 

Association sent letters to the Minister of Environment, clearly 

stating that before any industry comes into their traditional 

traplines that the northern trappers want to be consulted. That’s 

the obligation that the Crown, the Supreme Court made very 

clear, the Crown had the obligation to do. That process has to 

happen. So they’ve served notice, the Northern Trappers 

Association, to the First Nations, to the Métis, to the 

government, letting them know, before you come into our 

traditional traplines and you impact our trapline, we want to be 

consulted. 

 

They’re not saying that they’re opposed to industry and the 

economics and understanding. They’re not. They’ve said that. 

I’ve talked to some of them. They’re willing to work but they 

want to be consulted. And they want to say, well maybe, you 

know, there is a better way of doing it if you consult with them. 

And maybe there’s areas where they want protected a little 

more because there’s certain reasons why they don’t want 

anybody going in and harvesting the wood or doing damage to 

their trapline. 

 

They just want to feel . . . they want to be heard and they feel 

they have a right. And the Supreme Court of Canada I think 

made that very clearly. There is an obligation to traditional land 

users like First Nations, Métis, and our trappers. 

 

So they sent out the notice again to the government. And what 

does the government do? It sends back, I guess, a letter 

notifying the Northern Trappers Association that the 

mechanism, the framework for the duty to consult and 

accommodate, will not be triggered if it is a commercial trapper. 

 

These traditional trappers clearly . . . And I say traditional 

trappers who live off the land and are trying to teach it to their 

next generation, you look at the response when they received 

the letter. And I’ve got a copy of that letter that they shared 

with me. And the frustration, and I know that they’ve passed 

that on to the tribal councils, the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations], on their behalf, to look at this. 

 

And the response was this, if they are a commercial trapper, 

then the mechanism to trigger the duty to consult and 

accommodate will not be triggered because they classify them 

as a commercial trapper. So let me give you a story and I don’t 

know, it has to be, there has to be . . . We have to clear this up. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Make it a short story. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — No, it’s going to be very long. They have to 

clear up this matter. Is it somebody who’s taken their 

grandchildren and their family and they go back to the trapline 

and they spend a lot of time on the trapline. And I think of 

individuals from Stanley Mission, you know, Adam O. Charles 

who’s a traditional trapper, who, with his grandchildren, there’s 

so much pride. You watch this man and the way he goes back 

every, every, every year to his traditional trapline and they 

harvest the fur from the animals in his area. 

 

And just the way the man tries to share with the community, his 

grandchildren, and all of us the culture and the pride, and how 

the healthy choices of food that they get to eat . . . It’s amazing 

to watch how he believes in it when he’s concerned about 

diabetes and he’s concerned about the way Aboriginal . . . And 

you look at the diabetes, and he says, live off the land the way 

they did, there wasn’t as many problems. And to watch him talk 

about that, it’s amazing. 

 

So when I say this, here you go. You have an individual who’s 

trying to share that with not only his grandchildren but all of 

northern people and anyone else. He’ll share that knowledge 

and understand and the wisdom he has. But having said that, 

here’s an individual, like I said, he goes to the trapline. He 

brings his grandchildren and he may bring some other 

individuals to teach and so that they can see the culture and the 

custom and the way they live. And he does some harvesting of 

the fur and he sets out his traps and he goes on his traplines and 

together they — him and wife, Jean — they take the animal and 

they prepare it. And they take the fur from it and they eat the 

meat. And they use so much of that animal, it’s not wasted done 

the way they do it. It’s just to watch . . . And there’s the culture. 

 

And at the end of the day, they take some of those furs and they 

use them. And they might make mukluks, mitts for themselves, 

and the different things that they make. And then you see the 

gloves, the mitts that are made in northern Saskatchewan by 

some of the traditional trappers and traditional . . . the culture 

that they have. And you see some of the coats and you see some 

of the beadwork and some of the work that they do, the custom 

that they do, and they hand this on to generation to generation. 

 

But having said that, so the cost to them to have a Ski-Doo and 

to buy the traps, the fuel that they need to go to their trapline, 

whether they’re flying in because they . . . [inaudible] . . . 

another way or they skidoo in. There’s different ways, the cost, 

they get in there and do that. And they want that lifestyle and 

they don’t make a lot of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

don’t. But they want to teach something to their grandchildren 

and they want to keep that going. 

 

So now all of a sudden the government says, yes you’re living a 

traditional lifestyle, we see that, but because you sold one of 

your furs, because you sold one fur to try to get some, to try to 

get some resources to help you put fuel in your Ski-Doo or to 

pay for some of the traps or to cover some of your cost, food, 

while you’re out there, whatever they need — whether it was 

coffee, whatever it is — the government’s saying, well if 

they’re a commercial trapper then it doesn’t trigger and we 

don’t have to consult them. The ministry, it says in their 

document, the duty to consult and accommodate framework that 

they came up with, the government, Sask Party government 

came up with, that I said earlier was rejected by FSIN, by the 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

Métis Nation not only once but I believe twice was rejected. So 

that tells me something. You’re saying, here’s the document the 

way it is and you have to accept it. And it’s not being accepted. 

So having said that, that’s how the northern trappers got treated 

by the Ministry of Environment. 

 

Now I want to go back and share a little more and use 

comparisons because this bill and these individuals that are 

going to be certified or they’re going to have the experience to 

go and actually do the work of the industry, we have to make 

sure that they understand what’s going on in there when they go 

into an area — that we have traditional trappers, that we have 

individuals, whether they’re First Nations, Métis, whether 

they’re commercial fisherman, the impacts of going on. 

 

And when I think about this, and again I want to even go a little 

further on this because I think it’s important. They’re an 

organization that’s trying to work for northern Saskatchewan 

and it’s the northern trappers. And I know there’s an 

organization in the South that have a trappers association. But 

the Northern Trappers Association, they’re trying to lobby and 

work on behalf and trying to keep the industry, the culture 

going, making sure that there is an opportunity for trappers to 

harvest. 

 

So having said that, they apply for a little bit of money, and 

they put in a proposal to the government. And then the 

government says, oh yes, we’re going to look at it. And a 

meeting was set up. And I’ll give credit to the Minister of 

Environment, you know, he did come to a meeting. He met with 

them. He accepts the proposal. But unfortunately he gave them 

the sad news: we’re not giving you any money for your 

proposal. I’m sorry, we don’t have it, even though he said they 

would do that. So there you go. 

 

And I just want to show some comparisons, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But clearly here’s what I’ll say: we have millions for 

more politicians, we have money for hardwood floor, but we 

don’t have money to help an industry that’s so proud. And a 

very small amount of money that they were asking for, very 

small amount of money, I think it was in the neighbourhood of 

80, $90,000. It wasn’t much but they could have done so much 

to help the industry. But unfortunately the government couldn’t 

find it, any money for them. 

 

But having said that, I want to come back to this bill, Bill 49, 

and where they’re saying they’re going to have individuals who 

will be, if it’s certified to be a forester, to go out on behalf of 

the industry and do the good work of the industry out there, to 

harvest wood and prepare. How do we do this? How will this 

impact? How will it impact the land? And I just have to assume 

because I don’t have all the details here, you know, we get this 

bill and there’s not . . . So we’re going to have to, you know, 

have a lot of conversation in committee. But this gives us an 

opportunity just to initially start our conversations, so the 

people back home who are listening and who have raised 

concerns about the way the forest, the environment protection 

. . . And I talked about that a little bit, and I think I’m going to 

go back because this is a good example, and this was a bill that 

you can use to talk about protecting the forest, the environment. 

 

And you look at the damage and even the wildfires that are 

going on, you know, the government’s policy, we’ve asked 

them to review that, the let-it-burn policy. So how was this 

group be monitoring, and how will they be working with the 

government’s policy? That’s been asked by people, for a 

complete review of northerners because of the damage that it’s 

doing not only to the rivers, to the fish from forest fires that are 

going on, but to traditional traplines that are burnt out, to the 

way of life — healthy choices, that Aboriginal people have that 

choice who live the traditional life, who live off the caribou, the 

wildlife, the berries. And I go on with the custom and the 

culture and the way of life that they had. And some of them still 

hold on to that way of life and take it very serious. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So when we walk about Bill 49, how will these individuals, and 

I don’t know that they will have much impact because I don’t 

know. We’ll have to work this out in committee when it goes to 

committee, but it’s going to be interesting to see how are we 

going to make sure that these individuals that will be going off 

the land . . . And there’s some of them and I have to give them 

credit, there’s some of them are very educated. There’s some of 

them that know a lot about the forest, about the culture, about 

the way of life of First Nations and Métis, of northerners, of the 

way our trappers live off the land, the way the commercial 

fishers . . . So they have to, there’s provisions that they have 

now. 

 

They’re supposed to be the experts in the area. They’re 

supposed to make sure that they take care of the environment, 

the water. There’s a lot of regulations that they will have to 

follow. And these individuals . . . And it’s going to be worked 

out again, like I said, on Bill 49, we’re going to have to work it 

out and we’re going to have to . . . But I’m going to go back and 

use some examples again because I think it’s good to do that. 

And with this bill we have a little bit of leeway to show some 

examples on how this could impact Northern Saskatchewan, but 

also in the rest of the province when it comes to forestry. 

 

Now you sometimes can, you know, you look at the profession. 

There are, you know, individuals and they want to harvest 

wood. And there are some of them harvesting wood in our 

province and that’s fine. And right now there’s regulations that 

they have to follow, and if they’re not in compliance then we 

have enforcement. And Environment has enforcement officers; 

they will go out and they will see if you’re in compliance. And 

if you’re not in compliance, well there’s provisions for them to 

give you fines. They might give you timelines to clean things 

up. They might say, you need to adjust this. You’re blocking off 

a water or a stream or you’re creating . . . You’re stopping the 

flow of the water, and they may not like that. 

 

And some of these individuals, they work mainly in the 

wintertime. And they may go out to harvest wood and to get 

what they need out of the forest in winter. But there’s all those 

provisions and regulations that these individuals have to learn. 

And they’re going to be the experts to know. 

 

And that’s my understanding of this bill is, you’re going to have 

those foresters who are out there who have to know the rules, 

who have to know the regulations, who have to know whether 

it’s oceans, you know, and fisheries. They have to know that. 

So when I say that they’re going to have a lot of knowledge, 

how much knowledge will they have? And I hope . . . And I 



2656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

don’t see any provisions in here, and maybe in committee we 

can work that out. What provisions are there to understand 

about the obligations of what the duty to consult and 

accommodate traditional land users — our trappers, our 

fishermen, our First Nations and Métis communities — that are 

impacted by foresters going in there and looking, and by 

companies in the industry going in and wanting to harvest in 

there? What provisions are there? 

 

So there’s a lot of questions that individuals have out there, and 

I know that. You hear these individuals when you’re going to 

the trappers’ meetings, when you’re going to meet with leaders. 

They talk about the environment. You hear that around the 

tables. People are concerned about the environment. And this 

group will harvest a lot of our forest. And sometimes, you know 

what? There’s areas where maybe it’s all right and we need it to 

be harvested, and there’s reasons why they’re going into areas. 

And I mean sometimes we have a certain disease that will 

attack the trees, and maybe there’s a reason why we want to go 

in certain areas and harvest. 

 

And maybe if you explain that to a traditional person who is 

living on the land, or First Nations, Métis, or citizens, or a 

community that’s going to be impacted by the way you’re 

harvesting, you have an obligation as a government, and the 

Crown does, to consult with those individuals to make sure they 

understand why that’s happening. Not go and harvest and start 

cutting everything down, and clear-cutting, and then say, oh 

yes, well, yes. 

 

And I’ve heard stories about that, that a trapper will go to his 

trapline and all of a sudden somebody’s been in there 

harvesting away, and there’s so much of his trapline has been 

harvested, cut down. And he’s looking; he’s wondering, how 

did this happen? And it might be a trapper. I even heard of 

some of the cabins, the trapper cabin that he stays in — gone, 

you know, for whatever reason. He’s wondering what’s going 

on. And so you have the frustration. And when you listen to 

some of the trappers and you hear some of the concerns of 

traditional land users, that’s the frustration. 

 

So if this group of foresters are going to understand, they’ve got 

to make sure that they understand the impact that they’re having 

on traditional land users, and that’s clear. But I have shown an 

example that I’ve used to try to have, you know, a comparison 

to what’s going on and how strong these individuals feel and 

the compassion they have for their lifestyle, for their 

grandchildren, to hand it on to the next generation. Clearly I 

want to show that. But there’s so much in this bill that could 

impact our forests in our province and the way they can be 

impacted. But I think clearly the government has the obligation, 

and in committee we’ll have a lot of questions for this. 

 

But I think it’s important. And I want to go back to some of 

this. And we look at this, our forest, and we look at northern 

Saskatchewan, and I’ve raised this before and I’ve shared this 

with some, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this bill, will this bill . . . 

These harvesters that are going out there, in any way will they 

be able to go into the forest and if they see something 

happening — because of the training that they have, because of 

the experience, because they are professionals in their industry 

— will they be able to go into an area and see . . . And they can 

see if there’s a disease going to be affecting an area working in 

their field. They can definitely bring that information to the 

traditional land users, to environment, to say, here we’ve 

noticed this. And I mean there might be putting out little areas 

where they have testing, where they’re doing, where they’ll 

know if it’s being infested by some type of a bug, you know. 

We’ve seen like in BC and Alberta, you have the forests . . . 

Are these individuals going to be monitoring? 

 

And when I go on and I talk about the damage that greenhouse 

gases . . . When we look at that, the pollution, is that impacting 

our trees? And can these individuals and would this bill give 

these experts and these professional people some ability to 

monitor that, and is that in here? And I don’t know that it is. 

This talks about what they will have, what they are taking away, 

and how they want to certify. And if you look at it . . . But 

there’s so many questions that we have on this bill. 

 

And I say, I was sharing earlier, you know, and you think of the 

communities, and some of I guess the concern that individuals 

have. And for those that didn’t hear this, you have some 

communities in northern Saskatchewan — and I think of 

Camsell Portage, and I think of someone that’s close to me over 

there — that, you know, certain winds come in, you know, and 

the wind is coming from we’ll say the side of Alberta, and it 

comes. And there’s certain days there’s a film. And I don’t 

know. She tried to explain it. It’s sticky, rusty. She said there 

was a film on everything. And they have to deal with that. And 

obviously if that’s in their community, it’s happening. It’s going 

on our trees. 

 

And will these individuals be monitoring that? Will they have 

the opportunity and will they report that? And when they’re 

having certain experts in those areas, will there be tools for 

them? And well that’s what we’re going to have to work out. 

Will they be watching for this stuff out there and making sure 

that they’re advising Environment of these conditions? Is that 

provision in here or is there regulations that are going to allow 

it? 

 

And that’s kind of a lot of the questions we’re having, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in this area, and I mean whether it’s protecting 

the forest, whether it’s provisions in here. And you talk about 

the minister’s comments in here and he refers to giving them, 

making sure that it’s not just any individual that can go out 

there and start — from my understanding, what I got — that 

just can’t go out into the industry and just start saying, well 

they’re an expert and they’re going to go . . . And they talk 

about the seal and about the profession, about . . . So if it’s 

certification, is it making sure that that group . . . 

 

And we know that, that we have other industry and other groups 

where they get a certification. It’s a seal and it says that they are 

certified and they have got the education and the expertise, and 

they’ve done and they’ve met the qualifications to give proof on 

what they’re talking about. And they are the experts, and they 

can bring that forward. And that’s what it sounds like to me, a 

provision in here that the minister was trying to do in his notes, 

and I look at that. 

 

So when I say that, I’m hoping that in those regulations . . . And 

if individuals will be the experts, do they understand about the 

process on how do you reach out to the traditional land users 

that will be impacted, when they’re in there looking at the trees 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

to harvest for the industry? And how do they communicate? 

Are they going to go directly to the trapper? Is there an 

obligation there? I think there is. Or do they think they can go 

to the, you know, the mayor and council? Is the process to the 

chief and council? Is it to the Métis leaders? What is the 

process? And how are they doing this? But I know the trappers 

and the Northern Trappers Association made it very clear they 

want to be consulted and their trappers want to be consulted 

before people go on their land and their traditional land and do 

any impact that will impact their traditional lifestyle and their 

traditional land. They want to be consulted. 

 

So that is clear, and we’re not sure that that’s going to happen. 

And how do we ensure, how do we ensure that that happens? 

Well this is the venue where we ensure that the concerns of our 

northern trappers, the concerns of trappers in the province do 

have their concerns raised here in the House, whether they’re 

here or whether it’s in committee. 

 

And as I attend the meetings with them, they share. And you 

know, you’re having coffee. And you go around and you have a 

coffee, a cup of tea, and you sit there with some of our elders, 

and the traditional individuals live off the land. And they’re 

concerned about the forest and they’re concerned about 

environment. And I’ve talked about this. 

 

So these individuals here we’re talking about that will be the 

experts in that field, in forestry, will go on. They have, and I 

think this provision’s going to give them a lot of . . . And I’m 

not sure if it is, and that’s why we’re going to have to work this 

out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Will it give them any more clout? 

Will it give them any more? 

 

Will they have to have more training? Will they have to be 

certified in a certain way? Is it going to be the industry that will 

say who is the expert, who is not? Who is going to be certified? 

Who will be the experts to go into the areas and say, yes, we’ve 

done this study? We’ve gone into an area. We’ve done the 

research. Or we’ve looked at what we need to look at, and as far 

as our professional opinion and our certification, we can say 

this, this, this, this. 

 

And I mean there are individuals out there, I know, who have a 

lot of knowledge of the forest, and each company has to have, 

you know, a plan and how they’re going to harvest and that. 

And if these individuals are the ones doing it, will the 

regulations come out clearly on how that’s going to be done? Or 

do we have to ask these questions in committee? But having 

said that, I’ve got quite a bit more I want to talk about on this 

one because I think it’s important to relate back to the 

provisions in here. 

 

So having said that, now let’s just say somebody does have a 

cabin and a trapline. And right now they have a certain area, 

and it could be 10 miles by 10 miles, so it’s a pretty fair size of 

a trapline. And let’s just say the industry wants to go in there, 

and they want to harvest wood now. 

 

And this is why I say it’s important that these professionals 

understand. And is the government making sure that they 

understand that there is an obligation of the Crown because of 

the Supreme Court of Canada ruling saying First Nations and 

Métis traditional land users must be consulted and 

accommodated? And sometimes, you know, we talk about the 

accommodations, and a lot of people don’t understand that. And 

I think it’s going to come out clear: what did that ruling mean? 

And I think people are going to find out, and they’re going to 

try to find out. And we need to find out, and the government 

needs to know what is exactly . . . And I mean everyone’s going 

to have their definition of it. But to consult and accommodate, 

and that could be meaning a trapper who has a 10 mile by 10 

mile say, well yes, I know you’re going to come in here and 

harvest, and you’re telling me you’re going in this area. But this 

area over here we’ve always had as our family, and there’s a lot 

of berries in this area or mushrooms or we use this quite a bit. 

Can you not put your road through there? Could you make your 

road go around? 

 

And that’s what I look at, some accommodations. Is that what it 

means? And it could mean as little as that — that they consult 

with the individual and they make the road in a different area. 

That’s what we’re talking about it. Or accommodate, does it 

mean if you’re going to come in here, is it accommodate . . . In 

what way does it mean you have to accommodate them? Is it 

you have to give them a trapline in another area? How is it 

you’re going to accommodate them? And I think that’s the very 

concern that they’re starting to wonder about. What does that 

mean? 

 

They understand about consulting, but they know the 

government doesn’t consult them. They know that. They 

understand that. The word’s used nice, and the government 

likes to say the word, but they actually never do that. We see 

the way the government’s been handling some of that. So I 

know I look at that. 

 

So where do we go from here? And how do we ensure that the 

government consults the traditional land users? And how do we 

ensure that the government is going to use this bill and these 

provisions to deal with this type of legislation that they’re 

introducing? And it might be, you know, minor stuff, and 

sometimes we have housecleaning stuff, but unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, this one isn’t just house . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 5 

o’clock, this House stands recessed till 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2629 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2629 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2629 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2629 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2630 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2630 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Rent Increases Rescinded 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2630 

 2013 Farm Family of the Year 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2630 

 Premiere of Saskatoon-Made Film 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2631 

 Camping Reservation System Exceeds Expectations 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2631 

 Nutrition Month 2013 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2631 

 Report Highlights Strong Economy 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2632 

 Election Platform and Policy Review Document 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2632 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2632 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 

 Status of College of Medicine 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2634 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2634 

 Academic Health Sciences Building and University Funding  

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2634 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2634 

 Provincial Disaster Assistance Program 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2635 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2635 

 Financial Management and Reporting 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2636 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2636 

CONDOLENCES 

 Beverly Milton Dyck 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2637 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2638 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2638 

 Paul Mostoway 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2638 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2639 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2640 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2640 

 Roy Nelson 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2641 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2641 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2642 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2643 

 John Skoberg 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2643 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2644 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2644 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2644 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2645 

  



 

TRIBUTES 

 Honourable Dr. Sylvia O. Fedoruk 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2645 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2648 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2648 

  Harrison (transmittal motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 2649 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2649 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2652 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


