




















































Hansard: May 07, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 59A  TUESDAY, MAY 7, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3463 

 May 7, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to remind our guests at this time that 

they are not to participate in events on the floor, and that 

includes applause. Nor are they to take photographs from the 

galleries. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I wish to 

introduce a group of 36 grade 10 kids from Yorkton Regional 

High School. With them is their teacher, Mr. Perry Ostapowich. 

And as well with them is another one of their teachers, Mr. 

Grant Bjornerud, who will be I think more formally introduced 

later. Who isn’t in attendance with them today but I have to call 

out a little bit is their bus driver, Mr. Pat Rawlick who is a good 

friend of mine, but he’s outside looking after the bus. 

 

With this group a few shout-outs I agreed to do. Tanner Mak, 

he’s a friend of my nephew’s and plays hockey with him. 

Tanner, give us a wave. We also have Nathan Bewcyk. He’s a 

friend of mine. We go to church together, and we see each other 

around town quite a bit. His family is just a very great family 

that we know very well from Yorkton. 

 

Also with them is Abbey Schmalz — Abbey, Kirsten 

MacDonald, and Silken Slater. There’s a few I probably missed 

that I didn’t recognize, but I tried to call out the ones that I 

knew. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome these 

citizens to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to introduce a group of northern students 

in the west gallery that have joined us today. We had a chance 

at lunchtime to meet with them and with the Speaker and the 

member from Athabasca to greet them. And I just want to let 

them know that this is your Legislative Assembly and we’re 

pleased you could come. They’re from all northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Also the chaperones, teachers, thank you for encouraging them 

to come here to see how the proceedings work. And truly this is 

your Legislative Assembly. We are honoured you’re here. I 

hope you learn lots while you’re here with our visit. And ask a 

lot of questions. Enjoy yourself, and don’t be afraid of this 

Legislative Assembly. You own it. It belongs to you. You are 

the people we serve. 

 

I ask all members to please join me in welcoming them to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join the member opposite in extending a warm introduction and 

a warm welcome to all these students from our northern 

communities. We have students from Cumberland House. We 

have students from Stanley Mission, Buffalo Narrows, Montreal 

Lake, La Ronge, Pinehouse, and I think some additional 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are part of the youth mentorship 

program. They’re in our capital and their capital over the course 

of a few days. They’re learning about how their government 

operates. They’re learning about our shared history. They’re 

exploring post-secondary educational opportunities and skilled 

training opportunities, and they’re also learning about possible 

careers within our public service. 

 

And so, in joining the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 

these students on this great adventure here, in their capital city. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

very proud to stand up along with the other of my colleagues 

and introduce the northern students. And I want to say a few 

words in Cree, which is my native language. And of course 

many of the students also speak Cree and Dene from northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

And very quickly, Mr. Speaker, I just told them that I’m very 

happy they’re here today, and that they needn’t be afraid of 

anything; that this is their Assembly, this is their great hall of 

democracy. 

 

And I want to say a special thanks to all the chaperones that are 

joining them, and especially Corinne Favel. Corinne Favel lived 

in Ile-a-la-Crosse for a while. A wonderful lady, very strong, 

spiritual leader in Ile-a-La-Crosse and now in Cumberland 

House. About the only fault that Corinne has, Mr. Speaker, is 

she’s married to a guy named Butch Favel, and he’s a Boston 

Bruins fan. That’s the only problem that she’s had in her life. 

But Butch, being a wonderful guy, needs to make one little 

change in his life and that’s to stop cheering for Boston, and 

start cheering for Montreal Canadiens. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’m proud and 

humbled to introduce three people in your gallery representing 

Street Culture project and, in particular, Street Culture Studios. 

They’re producing music videos and videos. 

 

With us today is Kyle Wood, a.k.a. [also known as] Young 

Choice. He’s a former gang member who came through the 

Regina Connected Youth program . He’s now a full-time 

employee with Street Culture Kidz and has been gang free for 

two years. Also with us is Brandon Holts, a.k.a. Lil Baz. He’s a 



3464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2013 

former gang member and client of the Regina Anti-Gang 

Services program. Baz has been gang free for two years. Also 

with us is Mike Gerrand. He’s the director of programming at 

Street Culture project, executive producer at Street Culture 

Studios. He’s directed operations for Regina Anti-Gang 

Services for four years and has been with Street Culture, 

helping youth in need of service, for two years. Josh Steeves, 

a.k.a. Kno Tiz — sad he couldn’t be here. He’s actually 

working with Westridge Construction today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these young people are truly, truly inspiring and 

they need to be congratulated on their positive choices that 

they’ve made. And I’d like all members in joining me with this 

deserving recognition. I’ll be talking a little later on a member’s 

statement but again if we could all welcome these three to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the member from Regina Coronation Park in 

welcoming these three individuals from Street Culture project 

to their Legislative Assembly. Kyle and Brad, keep up that 

good work, and keep on turning those challenges that you’ve 

had into opportunities for teaching and showing that good way 

forward for others that have been caught up in gangs. 

 

And I want to say a special word to Mike Gerrand. Now of 

course Mike comes from a family with a name that is familiar 

to many in this place. His grandfather served admirably as our 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner, and certainly a notable 

person in public life. But it’s no mistake, Mr. Speaker, and no 

surprise that Mike is carrying on that public service and that 

giving back to the broader community forward because he 

comes from a family with a great name for it and a great record 

in terms of serving people right around this province. 

 

It’s really good to see these individuals here today in their 

Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, so I’d again join with the 

member opposite in welcoming Mike, Brad, and Kyle to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

introduce third-year English honours students from the 

University of Saskatchewan sitting in the Speaker’s gallery 

today, and I’ll ask them to wave when I read their names. The 

first one is Ms. Victoria Cowan who has been awarded the 

prestigious 3M National Student Fellowship, which involves a 

payment to her of $5,000, which she indicates she will be able 

to do with as she wishes but probably use it for student loans. 

With her today as well is one of her colleagues, Wenona 

Partridge, who worked Ms. Cowan through the 3M application 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ms. Cowan is the first U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] recipient to receive this award, which is given to 

undergraduates in Canada for demonstrating leadership in 

education. One of my colleagues will have a little bit more to 

say about that in a member statement shortly. 

When I met with Ms. Cowan before, in spite of the rapid 

growth in Saskatoon, we learned that we were both from the 

same neighbourhood and in fact had lived on the same street. 

She, being somewhat younger than I, remembered coming to 

my house for Halloween and was very pleased to remind me 

that we were not among the families that gave away toothpaste 

instead of candy. 

 

So I’d like to ask all members to welcome them to the 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a privilege 

and pleasure to introduce 24 grade 6 students from St. Brieux, 

Saskatchewan. Would you give us a wave, gang? There’s our 

group from St. Brieux. They are accompanied by Michelle 

Daubenfeld, their teacher; and Kimberly Martin, Andrea 

Schaab, Eva Marie Kernaleguen, Audrey Piatt, Tyra Thomas, 

Cyril Ruiz, and Kurt Hoehn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this group are smiling loudly because in Batoche, 

when they come to visit here, they get treated with Dilly Bars so 

they’re smiling from Dilly Bars. So welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to join with my colleague from Yorkton in welcoming the 

students from the Yorkton Regional. I also want to 

acknowledge first Perry Ostapowich. And I think many other 

members in this Assembly will remember over the years, Perry 

used to be a teacher in Melville, in the high school in Melville, 

and was faithful about bringing his class in to see how the 

legislative process works. And on behalf of all my colleagues, 

we want to thank him for that. He’s carried on that tradition in 

Yorkton. 

 

I also want to make mention too and special mention, Mr. 

Speaker, because we don’t often get the opportunity to 

acknowledge members of our family, my son Grant is also a 

teacher at the Regional and joins Mr. Ostapowich with the class 

today. So I would ask all members to welcome them here today, 

and our two teachers and my son Grant. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina South has asked for 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you, 

colleagues. It’s my great pleasure to introduce to you and 

through you to all members my good friend Ken Jones who is 

seated in the west gallery today with his wonderful wife, Deb. 



May 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3465 

Give us a wave, you guys, so we can see where you are. Thank 

you. 

 

Joining them today are Ken’s dad and step-mom, Walter and 

Pearl, who have come all the way from Dartmouth, Nova 

Scotia. And I believe cousin Bob is here from Edmonton as 

well. 

 

Now Ken has lived right here in Regina for a very long time, 

Mr. Speaker, almost since our community was called Pile of 

Bones, I think. No one knows exactly how old Ken is, but 

here’s a clue: he’s just retired after a very, very successful and 

distinguished 40-year career in Saskatchewan’s public service. 

 

For four decades, he served the people of Saskatchewan 

extremely well as an engineering technologist. He started out 

with the ministry of engineering and mines working on mine 

projects. Later on he transferred to the Highways ministry to 

work on roads and bridges, including most recently Regina’s 

brand new west bypass. 

 

He began his career drafting plans with pencils and tracing 

paper, and finished by creating electronic drawings on state of 

the art computers. After 40 years, Ken can truly say he’s seen it 

all. 

 

When not at the office, Ken didn’t spend a lot of time at home, 

which I’m told is one of the reasons Deb has such a sunny 

disposition. Instead, Ken devoted endless happy hours to 

another of his great passions, photography. Without doubt, Ken 

has generously volunteered more time providing professional 

quality records of important community events than the rest of 

us put together. 

 

To Ken, please accept the congratulations and sincere thanks of 

a grateful province for a career of exemplary service. And to 

Deb, many thanks for sharing Ken with all of us so graciously 

over these years. And to both of you, best wishes from all of us 

for a long and thoroughly enjoyable retirement. You deserve it. 

Thanks so much for coming today, and welcome to your 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming Ken and Deb and 

family to their Legislative Assembly. I should, not to give too 

much private information out about the Joneses, but they come 

from Cathedral Village, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of the 

wonderful community that that is, of course it takes a lot of 

people to make that, make communities great, and Ken and Deb 

are certainly prized members in Cathedral, Deb doing a lot of 

work with the Cathedral Village Association and all the 

wonderful things that happen there. And as the member 

opposite has pointed out, in Ken’s case oftentimes, Mr. 

Speaker, you don’t see him without a camera between him and 

you. And certainly, you know, be it the Buffalo Days parade or 

the arts festival or folk festival or, you know, Outdoor Hockey 

League — it’s a family that’s contributed mightily to that — 

this is a couple of people that have contributed mightily to the 

great things that happen here in the city of Regina and in 

Cathedral Village. 

As well, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Ken for 40 years with 

the Department of Highways or Ministry of Highways. He’s 

seen a lot of changes. I’m sure that wasn’t the only one, Mr. 

Speaker. But thank you very much for that service to the people 

of Saskatchewan, and it’s really good to see Ken and Deb Jones 

here today at their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it 

gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you, 

my father, Ron Steinley who is here from Swift Current. Just 

give a wave, Dad. He’s up in your Speaker’s gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. And he’s a farmer from Rush Lake and he lives in 

Swift Current now. And he had the opportunity to meet his 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], and they had a 

great conversation earlier this morning. And he says maybe the 

member from Thunder Creek might still be his favourite MLA, 

but I think now I have to take that mantle away from the 

member for Thunder Creek. So sorry about that. He lives in 

Swift Current now, and he’s retired and he’s enjoying life there. 

 

And I get to introduce another very important person in my life. 

My wife, Larissa Steinley, is up there. And she’s about six 

months . . . six days away from having our first . . . six days 

away from having our first son. And I’m a little nervous, Mr. 

Speaker, and I hope you guys understand why. But we’re 

excited to have our first-born here in the next couple of days, 

and thank you guys very much for coming. And you guys have 

a huge impact on my life, and thank you for everything you do 

for us. Take care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’m 

pleased to introduce three individuals that are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. Joining us today, this afternoon, are Mr. 

Dave Nelson, Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder, and Ms. Anita 

Hopfauf. Mr. Speaker, as the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Mental Health 

Association, obviously members will know Mr. Nelson’s 

tireless advocacy on behalf mental health services and those 

that are struggling with mental health in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. So we’re pleased that Dave could be here this 

afternoon. 

 

Dr. Stockdale Winder is a practising clinical psychologist. 

She’s also Vice-Chair of the Canadian Mental Health 

Commission of Canada, Mr. Speaker. I believe she’s just 

finishing two three-year terms on the commission. And we 

certainly appreciate her being here as well. And Ms. Hopfauf is 

the executive director of the Schizophrenia Association of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be making a ministerial statement at the 

close of question period, and we had the opportunity to take 

part in an announcement earlier this morning. And I’d ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming them to their 



3466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2013 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Minister of Health in welcoming the representatives who 

work with mental issues, not just in Saskatchewan but in 

Canada and I know worldwide through their connections. 

 

We very much appreciate the work that they do here in 

Saskatchewan and we especially want to honour them during 

this week. But I think the important thing is that we remind 

ourselves that mental health issues don’t go away. They’re here 

all year round and we need to be very vigilant when we develop 

our policies in this place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with leave for an extended 

introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Economy has requested 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to a group of 

groundbreaking Saskatchewan entrepreneurs sitting in your 

gallery today. 

 

Mr. Darrin Craig of Dyna Industrial has designed and 

developed a roof bolting technology that improves the overall 

safety and efficiency of roof bolting processes widely used in 

our mines. 

 

Next Mr. Nick Meiring of Saskatoon Colostrum Company Ltd. 

is representing the nominee, Dr. Debbie Haines who was unable 

to be here today. The company has developed and standardized 

methods that produce a high quality colostrum replacement 

powder to supplement or replace maternal colostrum that is 

ingested by calves in their early first critical hours of life. 

 

Next Mr. Greg Sutton and Ms. Marnee Brick of TinyEYE 

Therapy Services have successfully created and commercialized 

a world-class telehealth application that enables speech 

language pathologists to treat patients in rural and remote 

schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these four individuals were recently nominated for 

the Manning Innovation Awards, one of the most coveted prizes 

in innovation in Canada. Later today they’ll be attending a 

reception which they have been honoured with this great 

achievement. 

 

Nominations for decades-old awards such as this don’t just go 

to anybody, Mr. Speaker. These individuals are purveyors of 

great ideas and proof that Saskatchewan-made concepts are 

reaching beyond our borders, making an extraordinary impact 

on this province and indeed the entire world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is safe to say that our fertile land grows 

some of the best crops the nation has to offer, but when it 

comes to hard-working and determined citizens of the province, 

nobody grows entrepreneurs and ingenuity like we do here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members of the legislature, I’d 

like to congratulate Nick, Darrin, Greg, and Marnee on their 

nominations, and a significant milestone in their careers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to join with 

the minister opposite and welcome these award winners here 

today, or these nominees here today. And certainly it does 

reflect that strong spirit of innovation that we have as a 

province. And it’s certainly proud for us as a province to 

showcase these individuals and their contributions. As well 

these industries that they’re involved with span a diverse array 

of sectors when you’re thinking of construction and the 

resource sector, when you’re looking at agriculture and 

ensuring high-quality, healthy cattle, or when you’re looking at 

education and health as it relates to speech pathology. 

 

So it’s my honour to join with the minister opposite and 

welcome Mr. Darrin Craig, the representative on behalf of Dr. 

Debbie Haines, Mr. Greg Sutton, and Marnee Brick to their 

Legislative Assembly to thank them for their innovation and for 

making us proud as a province. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand today to present a petition in relation to 

cellphone service for the northwest part of Saskatchewan. And 

the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along with the 

adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; Buffalo 

River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, along with the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nations and the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Canoe Narrows, but the people that have signed 

the petition in support of expanding cellphone coverage have 

come from all throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better care for the seniors here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 



May 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3467 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 

including creating more spaces and more choices for 

seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 

facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 

appropriate staffing levels in senior care facilities; and 

providing more support to help seniors remain 

independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to the 

Legislative Assembly on behalf of over 50 citizens of this 

province who are concerned about the fact that northern 

Saskatchewan’s being targeted by the Nuclear Waste 

Management Organization to become a storage site for millions 

of used irradiated nuclear fuel bundles. These radioactive 

nuclear bundles would be shipped on provincial highways. 

Some provinces have already banned the storage or transport of 

used nuclear bundles. And I’d like to read the prayer. It reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly pass legislation to 

permanently ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

of nuclear waste into, out of, and through Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed these 

petitions come from the city of Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and 

the town of Patuanak. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on Highway 123. This highway provides the only access to the 

communities of Cumberland House and Cumberland House 

Cree Nation. This highway was recently voted by Saskatchewan 

residents as the Canadian Automobile Association’s worst road 

in the province. This highway needs major upgrades and 

repairs. Mr. Speaker, the people are very concerned for their 

safety. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the upgrades and repairs 

and maintenance on Highway 123 is important to northern 

residents and must be undertaken immediately. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mental Health Week 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, at least one in three Canadians 

experiences challenges with their mental health each year. May 

6th to 12th marks the Canadian Mental Health Association’s 

62nd annual Mental Health Week. 

 

This is an important time to raise awareness about mental health 

issues in the community and work together to reduce the stigma 

that many individuals struggle with in their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, creating a community that supports mental illness 

takes a commitment from both individuals and governments. In 

our communities we can be listening to our co-workers, 

families, and loved ones and letting them know that we value 

their role in our lives. We can work together to build inclusive 

community organizations and faith groups which can create 

feelings of connection and purpose. 

 

There is also a role for government in creating supports for 

healthy communities. An issue that faces many individuals with 

mental illness is a lack of affordable and appropriate housing. 

Stable housing allows an individual to create networks of 

support including medical professionals and community links 

that enable an individual to stabilize and build a healthier life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage each of us to take advantage of 

the many events taking place during Mental Health Week to 

learn more about how we can support and improve mental 

health services in our communities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

3M National Student Fellowship Recipient 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize the accomplishments of Victoria Cowan who is here 

today in your gallery. As mentioned earlier by the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Victoria is the first U of S student to 

receive the 3M National Student Fellowship. Ms. Cowan has 

been a leader on and off campus through her volunteerism as a 

peer mentor with the university learning centre and a teacher 

intern with Inspired Minds. Mr. Speaker, the nomination 

process involved preparing a narrative that outlined Ms. 

Cowan’s vision of leadership in higher education, along with 

evidence from other students and faculty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to have her leadership excellence recognized with 

a national award is an exciting achievement for Ms. Cowan and 

the U of S. As part of the student fellowship, Ms. Cowan will 

receive a $5,000 award and will have the opportunity to discuss 

her vision for teaching and learning at a major conference in 

higher education in Cape Breton, Nova Scotia. 

 

In addition to this recognition, Ms. Cowan has also received the 

Vera Pezer Award for Student Enhancement sponsored by the 

University Of Saskatchewan Students’ Union. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to ask all members to join me in congratulating Ms. 

Cowan on this great achievement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

National Nursing Week 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Always 



3468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2013 

good to be recognized. May 6th to 12th is National Nursing 

Week. This is a week to recognize the role that licensed 

practical nurses, registered nurses, and nurse practitioners play 

in our health care system and in our communities. I should also 

mention registered psychiatric nurses as well, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Nurses provide a diversity of services in our communities. The 

work they do ranges from acute care nurses working in our 

hospitals, to nurses in community clinics across the province, to 

nurse educators providing vital health education programs in 

our communities. I’m incredibly grateful for the care that nurses 

provide patients and family members in the health care system. 

Many of us have stories of nurses and other health care 

providers taking time to provide that extra bit of care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last month prior to the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses annual general meeting, former SUN [Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses] president Rosalee Longmoore was here in the 

House with family and colleagues. Rosalee is a strong advocate 

for the people of Saskatchewan and celebrated 15 years of 

service to SUN this year. And I just want to say again, Mr. 

Speaker, we are indebted to her for all her work on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we in the official opposition would like to welcome Tracy 

Zambory to her new role as Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

president. We look forward to working with her in the future to 

address the many challenges that are facing the health care 

system and in the communities where we live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this House join with me 

in thanking nurses and other health care professionals for their 

care, compassion, and commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Street Culture Studios 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud and 

honoured to rise in the House today to talk about Street Culture 

Studios and recognize the recent accomplishments of Street 

Culture members that join us here today. 

 

As many of you know, Street Culture Project uses many 

engagement tools in its arsenal to foster relationships with at 

risk youth. With the help of Mike Gerrand and the recently 

constructed Street Culture Studios, music and video production 

has become a prominent tool in this initiative. All the artists 

who have performed or recorded tracks at the new studio were 

previously involved in the justice system or entrenched in gang 

life here in Regina. 

 

The most notable track produced by Street Culture Studios to 

date is called “Warrior” and has also been made into a music 

video. Kyle and Brandon as well as Josh, who couldn't join us 

today, are featured in this song about being a true warrior for 

First Nations people. 

 

The video was made with a partnership between North Central 

Community Association and Street Culture Project through a 

grant from Heritage Canada. Mr. Speaker, Street Culture helps 

young people to make positive choices through mentoring and 

to help them acquire the skills to become productive members 

of society and, most importantly, taxpayers. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

accomplishments of these Street Culture members, congratulate 

them on the successful creation of their music videos. I also 

invite my colleagues to take the time to check out Street 

Culture's “Warrior” video on YouTube. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Open Door Society and WeConnect Job Fair 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I had 

the pleasure of bringing greetings at the WeConnect job fair 

held at Nutana Collegiate in Saskatoon hosted by the Saskatoon 

Open Door Society. The goal of this event was bringing 

together newcomer job seekers and employers under one roof 

with the theme being Breaking Barriers, Building a Future. 

 

The Saskatoon Open Door Society helps immigrants to 

overcome barriers in finding work and contributing to our 

province’s economy. They provide employment services to 

newcomers such as programming and employment readiness 

training. The WeConnect job fair is unique that it focuses on 

connecting refugees and immigrants with Saskatchewan 

employers. Out of the 47 companies and organizations present 

at the job fair, 37 had immediate jobs available. 

 

It was truly a community event reflecting Saskatoon’s diversity 

and a great example of how businesses, supported by 

government, welcomes newcomers to this great province. Many 

organizations contributed their time and resources to make this 

event a success including Nutana Collegiate, Tim Hortons, and 

Hub City Display, who donated all the booth equipment. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to recognize Beulah Gana, Bill Schwarz, and 

the entire team of the Saskatoon Open Door Society for pulling 

this event together. 

 

Our government is working hard to help newcomers in this 

province achieve a better quality of life by supporting 

organizations like the Saskatoon Open Door Society and events 

such as WeConnect job fair. Congratulations to all employers 

and potential employees who attended the fair. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Student Receives Doctoral Research Award 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today to congratulate Cassandra 

Opikokew. She is a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] candidate at 

the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public Policy here at 

the University of Regina. I’d also like to extend the 

congratulations to her supervisor, Dr. Greg Marchildon as well 

as the school’s executive director, Dr. Michael Atkinson. 



May 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3469 

Cassandra has just been awarded a doctoral research award by 

the Canadian Institutes of Health Research worth $108,000 over 

three years to further her work in indigenous health and 

education policy. In addition to her studies, Cassandra is the 

associate director of the Indigenous Peoples’ Health Research 

Centre and leads the knowledge translation, policy 

development, and strategic initiatives for this centre. 

 

Having grown up in Meadow Lake, Cassandra is a member of 

the Canoe Lake First Nation. She plans to use her research to 

develop a indigenous policy-making model that puts a greater 

emphasis on Aboriginal epistemology. Using an indigenous 

research methodology, Cassandra will examine Canadian 

policy-making processes in fields of First Nations health and 

education and will conduct a comparative analysis with other 

select countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members of this Assembly to join me 

in congratulating Cassandra on this prestigious award for her 

research on such a vital issue, especially when it comes to the 

future of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Privately Operated Liquor Store  

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. There was an 

interesting column in today’s paper pointing out that Pat 

Atkinson as a member of the Saskatoon Co-op is now the part 

owner of one of the first private liquor stores in Saskatchewan. 

But the irony doesn’t stop there. You know who else has a share 

in the new Saskatoon Co-op liquor store — the Leader of the 

NDP [New Democratic Party]. That’s right, the NDP leader is 

also a member of the Saskatoon Co-op, and that means he is 

now the part owner of one of Saskatchewan’s first private 

liquor stores. So is the NDP Labour critic and the new CEO 

[chief executive officer] of the NDP party, Frank Quennell. 

 

Now we know why the NDP has been so quiet on this issue. 

They know the Saskatoon Co-op is a great organization and will 

do a fantastic job of running the new private liquor store in 

Saskatoon. But at the same time, the NDP leader is chained to 

his party’s outdated ideology, which is completely opposed to 

any private liquor stores.  

 

It’s quite a dilemma for the NDP leader, Mr. Speaker. Does he 

embrace the future or does he cling to the past? I think the 

Leader of the Opposition should tell us where he stands on his 

new private liquor store. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Regulation of Hearing Aid Industry 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2001 and 2006 the 

previous NDP government took some good steps to regulate the 

hearing aid industry here in the province. But since that time, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from other people, more people that 

we need even stronger regulations, especially around the 

education requirements for individuals selling hearing aids. 

Over two years ago, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

acknowledged that by producing draft regulations for The 

Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act. I’ve corresponded with the 

minister on several occasions, and back with the previous 

minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the motivation 

for these changes, he said in a letter, “. . . ensuring that safe and 

quality hearing services are delivered and that vulnerable 

seniors who are the major consumers of hearing aids are 

protected.” The minister also said, “The desire is to complete 

the regulatory changes in a timely manner.” 

 

Despite that desire for a timely manner and to protect 

vulnerable citizens, Mr. Speaker, two years later we still do not 

have the draft regulations in place. My question to the Premier: 

Why has the Sask Party government been slow walking these 

regulations for well over two years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

I was able to indicate in estimates just a week ago or so, Mr. 

Speaker, we have been engaged in consultation with all 

stakeholders that have an interest in this issue, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Mr. Speaker, that consultation period did take some time, Mr. 

Speaker. The first part of that consultation, when it was 

complete, it was pretty clear that between the various 

stakeholders that do practise in this industry, Mr. Speaker, that 

there was a wide gap in terms of what they wanted to see when 

it came to regulations. That took us to late 2011 into 2012, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve taken the bulk of the previous, this most recent 

year, Mr. Speaker, to try to bridge some of that gap in between 

the various stakeholders. And as I mentioned in estimates, I 

look forward to having regulations in place early this summer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ron Schick is board 

certified in hearing instrument sciences and was involved in the 

hearing aid industry for 14 years. He recently left the industry 

about five years ago because of his frustration of seeing many 

individuals in the province who aren’t receiving the type of care 

because of the lack of proper regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he saw individuals not receiving the right type of 

care, people who should have been referred to a doctor with 

situations like a severe middle ear infection, mini-strokes, and 

even a situation of a brain tumour. He saw consumers, Mr. 

Speaker, who were sold two hearing aids when they only 

needed one because one of their ears would never actually 

work. He’s become a passionate advocate for better regulations 

in order to ensure that the most vulnerable seniors, Mr. Speaker, 

here in this province receive the protection that they deserve. 

 

Good steps were taken in 2001 and 2006, Mr. Speaker, but we 

need even stronger regulations in order to ensure protection for 

Saskatchewan people. My question to the Premier: does he 

agree with the concerns that Ron Schick has identified with the 

hearing sales industry here in the province and, if so, will those 

concerns be reflected in the regulations that are coming 

forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



3470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2013 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, good steps were taken in 

2001, 2006, Mr. Speaker, and better steps are going to be taken 

in 2013. The commitment that I’ve made to the stakeholders, 

Mr. Speaker, as well as to the Leader of the Opposition, is that 

regulations would be forthcoming early this summer, Mr. 

Speaker. We wanted to make sure that we were doing our full 

due diligence when it came to putting in place regulations that 

will have, potentially have an effect on individuals that are 

already involved in the industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we do share the same concerns that the Leader of the 

Opposition has raised in the premise of his question. We want 

to make sure that, Mr. Speaker, that customers of those 

individuals that need these types of services, Mr. Speaker, can 

be assured that they are receiving these services by individuals 

that are fully trained and fully qualified, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why we’re bringing forward the regulations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If we look at other 

professions and other people working in the province, we see 

levels of education that are there to protect individuals and 

ensure the right level of care is there. Care aids require one year 

of school. Registered massage therapists require two. Dental 

hygienists require two years of schooling. Optometrist 

technicians require two years of school to dispense glasses and 

contacts. But right now anyone, Mr. Speaker, can come in off 

the street and sell hearing aids in the province. 

 

Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia have 

a college requirement. And I think it’s a common sense 

approach, Mr. Speaker, that we would have regulations similar 

to those provinces in order to ensure our standards are as high 

as they need to be here in the province. 

 

So my question to the Premier: with the new regulations that 

will be coming down, as the minister indicates in the summer, 

will they contain a college requirement as we see in other 

jurisdictions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we are, and I’m certainly 

well aware of the requirements that are required in other 

provinces in terms of the minimum two-year standard, Mr. 

Speaker, on education. Mr. Speaker, we want to see that put in 

place in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do know that there are concerns with those 

individuals that have previously been in this industry, Mr. 

Speaker, and how do we properly take into account their 

business experience, Mr. Speaker, and their experience in 

dealing with clients and customers. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 

balance that we’re trying to strike. And I think when the 

regulations are enacted later this summer, Mr. Speaker, I think 

people will see that we have struck the proper balance. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the new 

regulations coming forward, it’s important to recognize this can 

be a benefit to seniors, to vulnerable people in the province. But 

it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to recognize the situation that 

businesses have been put in by the Sask Party government 

taking so long to bring these regulations in place. 

 

By not knowing exactly what the Sask Party government is 

going to do, by slow walking this for so long, it’s put many 

businesses in a situation of limbo, not knowing the reality that 

they will have to face in order for training and to do the 

planning in order to have the successful businesses that they 

want and need to have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party proclaimed May as Speech and 

Hearing Awareness Month. We know that this is a concern in 

the province. It’s a priority and it’s a growing concern. If you 

look at the previous minister of Health’s letter when talking 

about the motivation for these changes, he said the consumer 

and senior groups who were consulted voiced support for the 

proposed changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know what the right thing is to do to protect 

the vulnerable people here in the province, seniors who are 

needing hearing aid devices. My question to the Premier: the 

regulations that come forward, will they ensure that seniors 

have the level of protection that they deserve and need when 

needing hearing aid devices? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we will, as I said, be 

bringing forward regulations this summer that I think will strike 

a good balance that will look to protect those seniors and other 

individuals that require the assistance of hearing specialists or 

others that are involved in this industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find it a little bit ironic though, Mr. Speaker, at times the 

Leader of the Opposition is telling the government to slow 

down when it comes to consultation. In this case, apparently 

we’re not making our decision quickly enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we know that we need to strike the right balance when we 

put in place the regulations. And I think the Leader of the 

Opposition will agree, when he sees the regulations later this 

summer, that the government has indeed achieved that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Lobbyist Registry Legislation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s now been 517 days, more 

than 1 year, 5 months since the Sask Party government 

announced with great fanfare that they wanted a lobbyist 

registry for the province. A standing committee studied the 

issue. It received public feedback, and the committee issued a 

report with 23 recommendations last May. Since then, Mr. 

Speaker, that report has sat on the shelf. 

 

Apparently in early March, the Sask Party quietly released a 

short consultation paper which was at one point hosted on the 

Justice website. But as of 1:20 today, it’s gone. That’s far from 

transparent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if they took the Premier’s proposed lobbyist 



May 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3471 

registry seriously, the government would have improved on the 

recommendations and brought forward legislation, rather than 

waiting another year to re-consult. Why has the Sask Party 

government let a year go by without implementing a lobbyist 

registry, the same registry the committee recommended last 

May? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well indeed, Mr. Speaker, we did receive 

the tabled copy of the report. We did have some further 

consultations that we wanted to conduct on this particular 

matter, Mr. Speaker. I’ve spoken to the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana about this, that there were some concerns 

expressed with respect to the report. 

 

We felt that it was important that we get some further 

consultation from a number of parties. We’ve issued a 

consultation paper, Mr. Speaker. Those consultations will 

continue. We will be introducing legislation this fall. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, what the Sask Party government 

has done is went back to some of the same individuals who 

have already presented to the committee for their opinions yet 

again. 

 

Guy Giorno, the Prime Minister’s former chief of staff, repeated 

on April 30th the issues he already pointed out to the committee 

members last year. Mr. Giorno has real concerns with where the 

Sask Party government has headed on the lobbyist registry. He 

says the registry should be thorough and require the government 

to register non-profits in their lobbying efforts. Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Giorno used federal statistics to illustrate that half of all 

lobbyists are non-profit lobbyists. 

 

The Sask Party’s recommendation would exclude potentially 

half of the lobbying happening here in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s hardly transparent. Why would the Sask Party 

government recommend a lobbyist registry which only covers 

half of the lobbying going on today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going 

to second-guess any of the ongoing discussions and 

consultations that are going to happen with respect to this piece 

of legislation. Mr. Speaker, we want to get this legislation right. 

And we think that having some further consultation with a 

number of individuals and a number of groups who have 

expressed some concern about the draft report was very 

important. 

 

I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that one of those groups was 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]. 

SUMA and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities], Mr. Speaker, deliver certain programming for 

the province, and we thought that it was important that we have 

further consultations with them. Seems to me to be redundant to 

have them deal with and work within a lobbyist piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, when they’re actually delivering 

programs for the government. 

 

So we need to think about those kinds of things, and that’s 

precisely what we’re going to do through this consultation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Giorno is concerned that the 

government’s recommendations and its consultation document 

have no real teeth of enforcement. Mr. Speaker, last year the 

committee recommended a system of penalties for lobbyists 

who do not comply. Mr. Giorno states clearly, “The 

consultation paper makes no reference to offences, prosecution 

fines, or administrative monetary penalties. In fact, the paper 

does not mention enforcement at all. This omission is 

troubling.” 

 

And he goes on to say, “When ordinary Saskatchewanians 

break a law, they are subject to penalties. The notion that 

lobbyists can break a law and face no penalties is offensive to 

the principle of equality before the law.” 

 

Why is the Sask Party proposing a lobbyist registry with no 

intention of enforcing it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

seems to be implying that we’re going to ignore everything that 

came forward in the report, and that’s simply not the case. We 

wanted to have some further consultations on some matters with 

a number of groups. We think that’s important. Having further 

consultations to make sure that we get the legislation right, we 

think is very, very important. But to assume that we’re going to 

simply ignore the report that was tabled in this legislature is just 

not correct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, as we know, the consultation 

paper that the government recently released made a number of 

recommendations, but not one of them referred to enforcement. 

And that’s concerning, not only to the opposition but to Mr. 

Giorno. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has sat on its hands for a year 

without putting in place the very promise they made 17 months 

ago. As Mr. Giorno and others have pointed out, the wide-scale 

exemptions and the absence of enforcement present the people 

with a watered down approach to lobbying. 

 

Mr. Giorno said, “Lobbying, the right to petition government, is 

a fundamental democratic right.” He goes on to say that good 

legislation will “. . . ensure that the right is exercised in a 

transparent and ethical manner.” 

 



3472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2013 

Why, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party government delaying this 

legislation? And when they finally do introduce it, will they 

ensure that the legislation protects the public good? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, transparency and lobbying 

legislation is very important. I find it quite incredible though, 

Mr. Speaker, for that member to ask those questions, especially 

given the fact that throughout the course of this legislation we 

get complaints from the other side about the fact that we don’t 

consult enough. And so when we do consult on a piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker — because we want to ensure that we 

have some further consultation from those parties that we think 

are important — that they complain about it, Mr. Speaker. So 

you know, I find the question to be quite incredible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Testing Standards and Support for Education 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Parents 

and teachers continue to be concerned about the Sask Party 

government’s plan to spend millions of dollars on standardized 

testing. In the committee last week, the minister’s officials 

revealed a new fact when they said 400,000 of those dollars are 

going to be used for communications. Mr. Speaker, taxpayers 

are now on the hook for another $400,000 for spin and PR 

[public relations] to help the Sask Party justify why it’s 

introducing wide-ranging standardized testing in Saskatchewan 

schools. 

 

To the minister: why would the government need $400,000 for 

spin and PR for standardized testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank you to the member opposite for the question. You 

know, the student achievement initiative that the province of 

Saskatchewan is undertaking is a comprehensive program, Mr. 

Speaker. It spans the spectrum from pre-kindergarten through 

grade 12. It’s just not an assessment program, Mr. Speaker. It 

involves the student engagement, measuring student 

engagement, Mr. Speaker. It involves early years assessment, 

Mr. Speaker. It involves identifying those vulnerable children 

where we can put the proper supports, Mr. Speaker. And all of 

that requires some information, Mr. Speaker. So the money 

spent on communication, Mr. Speaker, is a good investment to 

the program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, people have real question about 

$400,000 when there’s so many things that need to be done in 

our schools. Mr. Speaker, the minister revealed another new 

fact last night in the committee when he admitted the Sask Party 

government will be releasing the results of the new standardized 

tests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concern to many people I’ve been hearing 

from is they worry that the test results will be used to pit school 

against school and to publicly shame students who haven’t 

performed as well as others for a variety of reasons. The 

minister has been silent, silent about the concern over 

publishing the results of standardized tests, even though he 

knows schools will have to be putting out the results in the 

public. The minister said the ministry will not rank the schools, 

but he knows very well third parties are interested in just doing 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the Sask Party government understand the 

potential consequences in publishing the results of standardized 

testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite. Again, Mr. Speaker, I need to assure 

everyone in this Chamber and the people of Saskatchewan, this 

program is not about ranking schools. It’s not about ranking 

teachers, and it’s not about allocating funding to resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program is a comprehensive, holistic program 

that will identify the resources and supports that teachers, 

parents will utilize to be able to support student achievement 

going forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will continue to move in the direction that will allow us to 

provide and gather data that will inform that instruction and 

validate curriculum, Mr. Speaker. It’s an important initiative, 

and we intend to be able to provide results at the individual 

level so that parents are going to be able to make the decisions 

that they need to support their children. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. But he 

knows third parties will be out there ranking schools, and he 

should be doing something about that.  

 

But we know now, Mr. Speaker, that the minister says, and he 

has said that he intends to spend $12 million by 2016 to 

administer these standardized tests. Despite repeated requests 

from me and many of those who are concerned, the minister has 

yet been able to provide a credible vision to support this plan. 

 

We in the public have heard from education professors, 

teachers, parents, education specialists, and families who 

recognize that standardized testing is an outdated concept that 

doesn’t meet and doesn’t benefit students here in our province. 

The minister’s officials also revealed that they’ve already spent 

$950,000 on this scheme last year, and the testing hasn’t even 

started yet. The tally of taxpayers’ dollars keep adding up and 

there’s no good explanation of that benefit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does he believe that this $12 

million will be well spent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition critic said this about school 

divisions and their standards-based testing and approaches to 



May 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3473 

student achievement, the exact things that we’ll be doing at the 

provincial level, and let me quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . this is something that’s very important, that we want 

our students to achieve. And it’s great they’re making that 

commitment to do that with the additional resources to 

make sure that happens and there is a balance between 

testing and teaching. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s exactly what we’re doing. Mr. Speaker, 

the past president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, 

Steve Allen, said last May that our new approach to provincial 

assessment was going to measure students’ success by looking 

at “. . . how we have grown, where we are doing well, and 

where we need to do more work,” Mr. Speaker. Again, support. 

 

During this time . . . and if I may quote from Liam Choo-Foo, 

director of education with Chinook School Division: 

 

During this time [Mr. Speaker] there was anxiety over this 

initial change, which was expected. But now I can 

categorically state that this initiative has been the greatest 

transformational change in teaching practice that I have 

witnessed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of support that we need to have 

going forward for our children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I do 

appreciate being quoted because, you know, as a teacher from 

the Saskatoon Public School Board, we do believe in 

assessment — not this standardized, wide-based kind of testing. 

I’d be curious for the minister to quote the current president of 

the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation]. What does he 

say about this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, our support for education going forward is 

unquestioned, Mr. Speaker. We’ve increased operating funding 

to schools by twenty-three and a half per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

That goes to supports in the classroom, Mr. Speaker. Over 65 

per cent of our K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] schools are 

repaired, Mr. Speaker — $600 million in the last six years, Mr. 

Speaker, 263.6 per cent increase over the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to invest in our students. We will 

continue to invest in our classrooms. We will continue to 

support our teachers as we go forward, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t 

hear what the current president of the STF has to say, now that 

we know what the real plan of this government is. 

 

But we know last week the minister’s officials admitted that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers will be paying an annual software 

licensing fee for the standardized testing scheme. The annual 

licence for data collection software will be $900,000, each and 

every year. Mr. Speaker, this shows this government is more 

interested in paying for testing, administration, the software 

rather than teaching and building stronger classrooms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve raised many concerns about the K to 12 

education here in this Assembly, from packed classrooms to 

crumbling gymnasiums to the need for better supports for 

English as an additional language. And the pressures facing 

students, teachers, and the schools are simply overwhelming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does the Sask Party have millions for 

software for standardized testing instead of supporting the real 

needs of today’s students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, investment in infrastructure is key to the student 

achievement agenda, just like investment in infrastructure is key 

to providing the kind of environments that our children need to 

grow and learn in, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And our government is very solid on its record. We’ve 

increased capital spending in the 2013-14 budget, Mr. Speaker, 

by $7.2 million for a total of $119 million, Mr. Speaker. In the 

Sask Party’s six years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve invested $600 

million in capital; in their last six years, Mr. Speaker, $165 

million. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased spending on new schools 

and major school renovations by 228 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

over the NDP. Mr. Speaker, our record, $450 million over six 

years; the NDP, $137 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s our record, 

and we’ll stick with it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we know the running tally for this 

experiment is $7 million a year, and it hasn’t begun yet. But we 

know in Manitoba in 1999 the government spent over $10 

million for standardized testing for four grades. And that 

happened just for one year over a decade ago. 

 

To the minister: why does the Sask Party government have $12 

million for standardized testing when there’s so many pressures 

on our classrooms today? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again our support for 

pre-K to 12 education in our province is pretty solid, Mr. 

Speaker. We have the second highest paid teachers in Western 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. Our record, over 65 per cent of all K to 

12 schools are repaired. Again, Mr. Speaker — 155 pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten] programs under the NDP, Mr. Speaker; 301 

under our government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the key to success moving 

forward is to provide for our early learners as they proceed 

through the education spectrum. Mr. Speaker, 264 per cent 

increase in K to 12 capital over the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. In the first year and a half of the Sask Party 



3474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2013 

government we invested $272 million, and it took them eight 

years to get close to that investment, Mr. Speaker. We stand by 

our record. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Development of a Mental Health 

and Addictions Action Plan 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this week we joined stakeholders and advocates from across 

Canada in formally recognizing the 62nd annual National 

Mental Health Week. This important week runs from May 6th 

to May 12th. 

 

Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of formally 

announcing a further step forward in how we address mental 

health services in Saskatchewan. In the company of the 

Minister of Corrections and Policing at the Canadian Mental 

Health Association brunch, I announced our government will be 

developing a provincial inter-ministerial mental health and 

addictions action plan. Building on the care and services 

already in place, this inter-ministerial action plan will provide 

us with recommendations to better serve some of the most 

vulnerable people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, good mental health plays a key role in every 

person’s well-being. Improving the mental health of our 

population is everyone’s business. We need to reduce stigma 

and to get people talking about the issues. Because mental 

health and addictions issues are often complex and connected, 

these issues often require the support of various agencies, 

organizations, and ministries. We are working with other 

sectors including the Ministries of Health, Social Services, 

Education, Corrections and Policing, and Justice to move this 

important work forward. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my 

colleagues for their support, in particular members of the Child 

and Family Agenda for their leadership on this matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance of 

providing appropriate and timely access for mental health 

services. The plan will cover a broad range of mental health and 

addictions issues including depression, anxiety, suicide, as well 

as schizophrenia. It will look at prevention, building 

self-esteem, and resiliency. It will also examine access 

coordination and how to best meet the mental health needs of 

the people of Saskatchewan. Some problems can be prevented 

or perhaps impacts minimized if recognized early with the 

appropriate supports in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the coming weeks, government will announce 

the appointment of a commissioner who will be leading this 

important work. Planning is under way to begin a consultation 

phase, and the action plan and accompanying recommendations 

are set to be complete by the fall of 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, mental health issues affect as many as one in five 

Canadians in a given year. Sometimes the wait times to access 

services is much too long, and far too many people suffer alone. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a transformative and innovative approach to 

how we think and deal with mental health in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak to 

this particular proposal by the minister. Any time that we in this 

legislature and in the government can look at mental health and 

addictions issues, I think that’s important activity. I know that 

the person who will be selected as commissioner will work with 

various government departments. I think it’s very important that 

whoever that is, that they will work and look at the long history 

of dealing with mental health and addictions issues in this 

province because there are many things that we have learned 

over the decades around how to deal with these particular 

issues. Now there’s new ones that are coming here. 

 

One suggestion I would make, in looking at the proposal put 

forward by the minister, is that there is a clear gap as it relates 

to issues like housing, jobs, and the economy. And I think it 

would be appropriate to bring in people from Advanced 

Education, Economy, even the recreation, culture side, and 

especially on the housing issues because those are those 

wraparound things that make a big difference as we deal with 

mental health issues. 

 

But I am encouraged by this particular effort and I know that all 

the people of Saskatchewan will want to contribute to this next 

round of looking at mental health and addictions issues. So 

thank you. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair for the 

Economy Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 83, 

The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in the Committee of the Whole on the bill and 

that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Economy has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 

No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration 

Services Act and that the bill be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 



May 7, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3475 

Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment 

and Immigration Services Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Economy that Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment 

and Immigration Services Act be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 81, The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on the bill and that 

this bill and its amendments be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Economy has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 81, The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act and that 

the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I move that the amendments be now read a 

first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Economy that the amendments be now read the first and second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Economy that Bill No. 81, The Global Transportation Hub 

Authority Act be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman for the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its third report. I move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Human 

Services Committee: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



3476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2013 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 430 through 433. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses to 

questions 430 to 433. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 434 through 555. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

434 through 555. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:41.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3463 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3463 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3463 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3463 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3463 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3464, 3465 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3464 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3464 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3464 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3464 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3465 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3465 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3466 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3466 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3466 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3466 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3466 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3467 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3467 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Mental Health Week 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3467 

 3M National Student Fellowship Recipient 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3467 

 National Nursing Week 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3467 

 Street Culture Studios 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3468 

 Saskatoon Open Door Society and WeConnect Job Fair 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3468 

 Student Receives Doctoral Research Award 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3468 

 Privately Operated Liquor Store  

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3469 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Regulation of Hearing Aid Industry 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3469 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3469 

 Lobbyist Registry Legislation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3470 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3471 

 Testing Standards and Support for Education 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3472 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3472 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Development of a Mental Health and Addictions Action Plan 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3474 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3474 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3474 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 3475 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3475 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3475 

  



 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3475 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3476 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


