




















































Hansard: October 28, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 3B  MONDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2013, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3671 

 October 28, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume on 

the special order. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I must admit I got 

a bit of ribbing over the lunch hour. I’m 20 minutes into my 

speech. I haven’t said a whole lot about the Throne Speech yet, 

so I’m going to try and wrap this up in the next hour, hour and a 

half if I can. 

 

I was referring a lot in my initial comments to my dad, Alfred 

Ottenbreit. And admittedly, you know, that was my intent. 

Again I was talking about how my dad taught me to help those 

who can’t help themselves and to give back to community. 

 

One quick story I’d like to tell is an example that my dad set for 

me as a very young person. We had an employee who, you 

know, he had some challenges. He ended up buying a car that 

he couldn’t afford. He was in a bit of a tough predicament. But 

again, dad, he could have looked the other way and let the 

fellow kind of put up with the mess he had created. But he took 

it upon himself to go down to the dealership to talk to the dealer 

and make sure that they would take that car back and give him 

his very, very capable old car, his used car back to get him out 

of that predicament. And that’s just the type of example my dad 

would set for all of us kids. 

 

Again, I talked about he gave employment opportunities to 

those that otherwise maybe wouldn’t have employment 

opportunities. He gave them good jobs, fairly good-paying jobs, 

and gave them a sense of dignity as well, having a way and 

means to support themselves — again an example, as I talked 

previously about examples that my dad set, and I think 

examples that our government sets in large. 

 

When it comes to planning, our government is very big on 

planning, as we’ve talked quite a bit about our Vision 2020 and 

Beyond, our plan document, Mr. Speaker. Very much along the 

same idea as my dad would have — respond to current needs 

and pressures, but plan for the future. Equipment upgrades, 

service improvements, find efficiencies — all mantras of my 

dad in business as well as our government. Adapt where 

needed. Don’t stay stuck in one track. Don’t refuse to change 

just because that’s the way you’ve always done it. That’s 

something I learned from my dad many years ago, and that’s 

something I think our government is really following as well, 

Mr. Speaker. You know, think outside the box, and don’t do 

something the same way because it’s always been done that 

way. Find better and new ways to get things accomplished. 

 

When it comes to P3s [public–private partnership], for 

example, our government is very interested in P3s being able to 

address the infrastructure needs for our province over the 

coming years and decades to make sure that we have the 

infrastructure to address the challenges of growth that we are 

feeling right now because of the record growth that we’re 

having in this province. And our government I think is really 

looking at improving those areas, Mr. Speaker, and thinking 

outside the box when it comes to addressing those challenges. 

 

Again when my dad was growing his business, he was faced 

with many challenges in the business. But eventually he would 

find positive ways to overcome and address challenges, again 

very much like I believe our government does and as outlined 

in our Vision 2020, our growth plan, and this Throne Speech 

and throne speeches that have come before. 

 

And again, you know, growing a business, what do we grow a 

business for? Well I think some do grow business just for the 

purposes of maybe self, you know, self-benefit and other 

things. But my dad was never that way, always growing the 

business not only for the better quality of life that he could 

contribute and provide for his family, but also the better quality 

of life he could provide for those employed and their families 

and people in the community that he could help. The better he 

did, the more he gave back, and the better the community 

would do around him. Growth not just for the sake of growth 

but growth for the betterment of all in society, which again, I 

think a philosophy of my father and a philosophy of this 

government. He learned how to be competitive in a very 

competitive business, a very competitive environment. And I 

think we’re along that track as well in Saskatchewan and this 

government.  

 

My dad kept competition out of our hometown of Yorkton, for 

the most part, for about five decades. And how would he do 

that, Mr. Speaker? I think a lot along the same lines as our 

government looks at philosophy and business, philosophy of 

running this province, as well as people of the province, the 

philosophies they have — honest practices, quality service, 

investing back and being part of our community, and a strong 

work ethic. And again, I think that’s a philosophy of many in 

this province and a philosophy of this government as well. 

 

Now for some overarching comments of the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker, “Meeting the Challenges of Growth.” The 

government has helped to do that in the past and will continue 

to do that, Mr. Speaker, investing in highways, health, 

education infrastructure, and helping municipalities like 

Yorkton, like my hometown of Yorkton. Record revenue 

sharing has really given Yorkton the benefit of investing back 

in the community and helping with some of the infrastructure 

projects and the growth challenges that we have there. 

 

We have a brand new water plant in Yorkton that has more 

capacity than we need, but it’s there for future growth, to attract 

business, to attract other entrepreneurial organizations to our 

community as well, and through that provide opportunities for 

those that live in our city and our area. Surrounding highways 

have been upgraded, in large addressing some of the challenges 



3672 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

with the traffic flow. Our airport has, I think, benefited the best 

out of the CAP [community airport partnership program] 

program in our province. And the benefits there to our 

community and to the airport are very visible. 

 

Post-secondary education, we talk about it quite a bit in the 

Throne Speech with training seats, new apprenticeship 

programs, and adult basic education, all programs delivered by 

our college in Yorkton, the Parkland College, the Trades and 

Technology Centre — the project approved by this government 

and funding in place now with the recent announcement last 

week by our Premier and our Minister of Advanced Education 

as well, the current one and the one that did a lot of work 

previously, or previous Advanced Education minister, the one 

currently looking after Education. I want to thank both of those 

members, the Premier and the Deputy Premier, for all the work 

that they’ve put into bringing that Trades and Technology 

Centre to fruition. And we’re looking forward to that opening in 

2015, what it’ll do for our community, and the benefits and 

opportunities for all the people of our area including our young 

people. 

 

A lot of health initiatives. Yorkton is a very . . . We do have a 

very aged demographic, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very happy to 

say that although we do face challenges in our health care 

system — I’m not happy about that — what I’m happy about is 

that we have been addressing a lot of those challenges. We have 

a state-of-the-art heart and stroke initiative in Yorkton 

addressing the needs of a lot of our senior citizens. We have a 

chemotherapy outreach and advanced cancer treatment in our 

community as well that is advancing and growing every day, 

Mr. Speaker, as well as a dialysis department has grown, 

addressing some of the needs for not only the seniors but also 

benefiting many of those in our area. 

 

So again, you know, we’re setting the table. We’re supporting a 

growth environment for those in our community and for 

business opportunities in our province. In fact in my local area 

the Yorkton Grain Millers, now they’re looking at going ahead 

with an expansion there which will make them the largest oat 

processor in North America, Mr. Speaker. We are currently the 

canola crushing capital of Canada — I know for a fact — 

probably all of North America as well. We have manufacturers 

there that are doing well. Their only challenge is, admittedly, 

getting employees. 

 

And with, you know, some of the immigration initiatives we 

have going forward, we’ve increased our SINP [Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program] program by 4,450, I think, or 450 

— sorry, Mr. Speaker — to 4,450 SINP nominations every 

year. So we’re looking at immigrating enough people to start 

filling those positions but also training them at home with the 

good work done by the Parkland College there. 

 

Parkland Welding has advanced greatly. They’re actually 

producing all of the hydraulic cylinders for Seed Hawk 

manufacturing right now, as well as a lot of the hydraulics for 

the oil field. Leon Ram — I think I touched on them — they’ve 

been expanding just by leaps and bounds as well and really 

contributing to our local economy and the employment 

opportunities at home. We have three new hotels, many new 

restaurants in town, and enormous other private investments 

that are again creating opportunities for people there and just 

contributing to our local economy. 

 

There’s so many opportunities we have in this province, Mr. 

Speaker — the resources, the resource base which is our 

wealth. We have a very diverse economy, including our 

agriculture. But one thing I always try to remind myself and 

those around us that, you know, it wouldn’t be possible, the 

investments that this government has made back in this 

province, that people are able to make in this province would 

not be possible if we weren’t so totally blessed by God in this 

province, blessed with such divine providence that, you know, 

without that we really wouldn’t have the tools to do what we’re 

able to do. And the people of the province wouldn’t have the 

opportunity to do that either. 

 

Many, I believe, Mr. Speaker, positive qualities I’ve seen and 

tried to adopt from my father and my mother, I see in our 

government — our philosophy, our plans, our members, our 

policies. They’re also reflected in our budgets, our throne 

speeches, including this one. So, Mr. Speaker, for those reasons 

and for the reasons that my dad taught me, I will be supporting 

the main motion, our 2013 Throne Speech, and I will not be 

supporting the amendment put forward by the opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 

pleasure to stand in this House and talk about some of the 

positive things of Saskatchewan, and to address the Speech 

from the Throne that was delivered last week. 

 

First of all I’d like to thank my family, my wife, Debbie, and 

our children that support the position and the extra work and the 

extra miles and the extra efforts that come into being an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and serving the people 

of Saskatchewan and especially the people of Moose Jaw. 

 

I’d also like to thank my assistant, Judy Hatfield, for looking 

after the office. She’s very diligent in what she does. She’s very 

strong in her commitment to looking after the concerns that 

come into the office. Two other people that help us in the office 

are Deb Mutlow and Rosalie Boots who are also very 

supportive and help look after the office and the people of 

Moose Jaw. 

 

I’d like to thank the people of Moose Jaw that have trusted in 

me as their MLA and look at this government very positively 

moving forward, doing the things we said we would do, of 

supporting growth in this province. And that was very evident 

last week when we, Moose Jaw North along with Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, had the Premier’s Dinner. The support that we got 

from the community was outstanding. Premier Wall was there 

to give an address — very inspiring. The people that were there 

very much were inspired. It was an enthusiastic presentation, 

promoting Saskatchewan and how it’s being promoted 

throughout the world, the strength that this province has to go 

forward, Mr. Speaker. The Speech from the Throne really has 

two themes, that of continuing the growth of this province and 

meeting the challenge of growth. They really go hand in hand 

because if you’re meeting the challenge of growth, the growth 

will continue and this is where we’re at. 

 

You know, I was listening earlier today. The member from 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3673 

Athabasca as he laid his presentation out, really I questioned 

whether he even looked at the Speech from the Throne, because 

there’s so much good things in the Speech from the Throne that 

he couldn’t possibly have made the statements he was making 

as he addressed this House. It reminded me a little bit of the old 

story from years past, the story about the United States. They 

had Ronald Reagan. They had Johnny Cash. They had Charley 

Pride and they had Bob Hope. Saskatchewan had the NDP with 

no cash, no pride, and no hope. 

 

There’s something that I’ve told my grandsons, especially 

Taylor when he was playing football. He had difficulty getting 

to the football games, and I tried to impress upon him, if you 

think you can, if you think you can, you’re right. But if you 

think you can’t, you’re also right. And I would suggest the 

member from Athabasca thinks they can’t, and in their minds 

that’s what is the reality of this province. 

 

So when we took over, there was some promises we made for 

growth, some real goals we set, and one of those goals was to 

increase the population. Mr. Speaker, the population surpassed 

the 1.1 million people just a few weeks ago. And I’m proud to 

say that last week, last Tuesday the population of Saskatchewan 

increased by one more as we were blessed with our fifth 

grandchild, a little boy whose name is William. So I want to 

publicly congratulate my daughter, Kimberly, and her husband, 

Colin, for helping to add to the population of Saskatchewan. 

 

Colin is what I would call a young entrepreneur. He had some 

difficulties a few years ago, in fact just before their wedding. 

He was operating a seed plant near Mortlach and just days 

before the wedding, the seed plant burned down. Now here’s a 

young entrepreneur that took the situation and was determined 

to be involved, and is now involved with Agrocorp, which is a 

new processing plant in Moose Jaw. Colin actually manages it 

and managed the establishment of it. It was opened this 

summer. It is now handling some grain and processing some 

specialty crops that will be marketed around the world. It’s a 

huge industry and it’s going to be such an addition to this 

province as we move forward. And he’s just one of the young 

entrepreneurs that we have in this province. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Debbie and I were fortunate enough to attend the Business 

Excellence Awards in Saskatoon for Saskatchewan business 

excellence, put on by the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce. Mr. Speaker, the room in Saskatoon was 

enthusiastic. The business people of this province were very 

proud in what they were doing. They had some enthusiasm. 

They had some . . . a life that we didn’t see a few years ago. But 

of all this what was most surprising to me, was most noticeable 

I should say, was the amount of young entrepreneurs like my 

son-in-law Colin Young, young entrepreneurs that were in there 

establishing businesses, taking business leadership roles, and 

really with all of the enthusiasm that this province has. They 

can see the future here. It’s not like a few years ago when our 

young people were migrating out of the province. Now the 

young people are staying. They’re thinking. They’re being 

educated and they’re starting to get into business, growing this 

province. And they will certainly be the future for many years 

to come. 

 

There’s a strong attitude for growth and it certainly was 

noticeable at the Chamber of Commerce Business Excellence 

Awards. I was very proud to be there as one of the past 

presidents. And it was one of the reasons that I got involved 

with the political aspect of government in this province, was 

really initiated when I was president of the Saskatchewan 

chamber. The NDP [New Democratic Party] were in power at 

that time, and I thought as the president of the voice of business 

in this province, I had a right that I should be able to talk to the 

premier of the province about business concerns. Mr. Speaker, 

on three occasions I had contacted the premier of the day and 

never got a response back. I was all but shunned by the 

government of the day and the premier of the day. I could never 

understand why they wouldn’t want to talk about business in 

this province. I suppose maybe it’s understandable now when 

you know a little more about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 

Utility Development Company] and some of the dealings they 

had. They really didn’t know too much about business. But 

since then, but since then there’s a new attitude in this province, 

and it certainly is in the attitude of growth and prosperity. 

 

And students are staying. There’s two programs that we 

introduced, the student retention program, the student 

advantage scholarship, that are keeping our young people here. 

And the Speech from the Throne is really strong on education, 

which I’m proud to say. 

 

The Speech from the Throne talks about the student first. 

We’ve taken that concept of patients first, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’ve put that same concept into what we would like to see as 

students first, putting the students first, putting education there. 

It’s not just buildings and systems; it’s students learning. The 

student first will build on the successes that we’ve already seen 

in some cases. For example, in the Chinook School Division, 

they used the student reading assessment to help teachers 

respond to each individual student needs. Clearly this approach 

is working. In 2008, 63 per cent of the students were reading at 

their grade level, but by just last year, 2012, this number had 

increased to 84 per cent. So you can see that there’s a marked 

improvement. An important first step to the student first will be 

consultation with the teachers, with administrators, with 

parents, and students. And as we go on, this will be a great 

value to the learning ability of the students and the growth of 

the province. 

 

Early years evaluation for pre-kindergarten and kindergarten 

students and Tell Them From Me surveys will continue. Last 

year nearly 75,000 students and over 4,000 teachers took part in 

the Tell Them From Me survey. That provided the students and 

the teachers from grade 4 to 12 an opportunity to provide 

feedback on their school experiences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session our government will be responding 

to the anti-bullying recommendations put forward by the 

Legislative Secretary responsible for that, based on extensive 

consultation that she held throughout the province with 

students, parents, and teachers. Mr. Speaker, bullying is 

becoming more and more evident. I think it’s always been 

around, but it’s something that has to be addressed. And when I 

hear from my town, from Moose Jaw, that a parent felt forced 

to move their child from a school in May because there was 

nothing happening with the bullying that was going on, it 

makes me believe that things aren’t as they should be, and there 



3674 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

has to be steps taken. So I’m really proud that our government 

is looking at the bullying situation and taking steps to go 

forward on that. 

 

A growing Saskatchewan requires new schools and classrooms 

to support the increasing population of students. Since 2007 our 

government has invested more that $600 million in building 20 

schools and undertaking 23 major renovations in addition to 

completing approximately 900 smaller capital projects. 

Education is important and our government knows that. Our 

government has announced nine new joint-use schools that will 

be built using the innovative P3 bundling approach through 

SaskBuilds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of talk about the P3 system. I 

attended a workshop that was conducted by the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association. I can tell you some of the speakers 

there were fairly high-profile panellists that were there. Patrick 

Waunch, the president and CEO [chief executive officer] of 

Rambow Mechanical Ltd. was one. Robert Lashin is the 

president of Houle Electric, British’s Columbia’s largest 

electrical contractor. Brian Savage, the vice-president and chief 

operations officer of Western Industrial. Mr. Speaker, they were 

higher profiled panellists that sat down and talked about P3s 

and how they’re being used in other parts of Canada. The 

bottom line . . . They all agreed on one thing, that P3s are the 

way of the future. About 23 to 25 per cent of major projects 

will probably fall under the P3s. They’re not for everybody, but 

they agreed that it is the system that the future will use in 

building major projects. 

 

Now I might comment that during that particular workshop, the 

Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the member from Regina 

Rosemont, also was there. He came about three-quarters of the 

way through the program and left shortly after that. So I’m not 

sure the purpose of him being there was a photo op or just what 

it was, but obviously he didn’t really get the sense of what a P3 

could do or would do just by coming and going that quickly. So 

when he stands in this House and talks about the disadvantages 

of P3s and what they’ll do, I don’t think he really knows what 

he’s talking about. 

 

Further in education, the development of 15 new 

pre-kindergarten programs and the development of 500 new 

child care spaces is also part of the Throne Speech, bringing the 

total number of licensed care spaces in Saskatchewan to more 

than 13,700. It’s a 48 per cent increase since 2007. 

 

In education, SaskTel will invest $5 million over the next four 

years through the CommunityNet program to increase 

bandwidth and improve Internet access and speed to schools 

throughout the province. Learning is important, education is 

important, and so is keeping our children in Saskatchewan, 

keeping them here after they’re educated to build a future. 

 

Another very strong part of the Throne Speech was the 

post-secondary education. More than 40,000 students have 

received part of their tuition costs back through the 

Saskatchewan graduation retention program. At one time, if 

you’ll remember, our students were leaving the province in 

droves. They weren’t staying here. A lot of us have 

grandchildren and children that are in other parts of the 

province. The Saskatchewan graduate retention program helped 

relieve that. They’ve kept them here. They started being 

interested in Saskatchewan, got jobs, started businesses, and 

further to that there’s another 4,500 students that have seen 

their tuition costs reduced through the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship. A growing economy is ultimately powered by 

education and this government believes very strongly in 

education. 

 

Further in education, Briercrest College and SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

were granted degree-granting status last year. SIAST is going to 

be taking one more step into the polytechnical . . . as a 

polytechnical institute. Polytechnical is kind of an elite of 

education. It’s kind of a step higher. There are 11 members of 

the Polytechnics Canada, making one of the elite 

post-secondary technical education and skills training institutes 

in Canada. 

 

There are advantages of being a polytechnic institute. And I 

talked to the president of SIAST and he was quite excited. 

Polytechnics Canada members offer a four-year bachelor 

degree program with a focus on applied science and studies. 

They have joint bachelor degrees with universities. They have 

apprenticeship programs, post-secondary certified courses, 

specialized corporate and government training, online training, 

and distance education. International students need to know, 

need to be informed about their options when pursuing 

post-secondary education in Canada, and the polytechnic 

system will address that. They will provide improved credit 

transfers from universities and other technical schools to 

enhance student mobility. Credits earned at one institution are 

valid at all the other members’ institutions. 

 

So polytechnic memberships, which SIAST is a part of, are 

really a growing part and especially for SIAST Palliser Campus 

who has an international component to their studies. 

 

I could go on, and there’s lots I could say. You know, the 

housing in Saskatchewan has been a challenge to growth. We 

all know that, but our government is doing things to try and 

assist with that. 

 

Moose Jaw is no exception. There’s strong demands on 

housing, especially with the K+S Legacy mine under 

construction. Our government has committed 344 million to 

expand the housing supply by 12,600 units and repair or 

upgrade about 24,000 units by 2016. In this program, Mr. 

Speaker, Moose Jaw is receiving 114 public housing units that 

will be replacing public housing units already in existence in 

Moose Jaw. It’s a unique program, and it gives the people in 

Moose Jaw that are in the public housing an opportunity either 

to buy the existing house or to graduate up into the new housing 

once it’s completed. I talked to the manager of Moose Jaw 

Housing just last week, and he informed me that about 80 per 

cent of the houses have started construction or started planning 

for, which he was very delighted with. It’s a lot faster than we 

had originally anticipated it might be, but it’s a good news 

story, and I’m proud that it’s going forward in that respect. 

 

Further to that, the government has broadened the Headstart on 

a Home program to encourage the construction of rental 

properties. Since its creation in 2011, Headstart on a Home has 

provided more than $193 million to finance the construction of 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3675 

1,159 entry-level homes. Another successful story for the 

province of Saskatchewan and the government in meeting the 

challenges of housing. We know housing is a challenge, and 

we’re working to address that as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to cover the features of the Throne 

Speech in a 20-minute presentation. The Throne Speech is 

prepared to meet the challenges of growth and, in summation, it 

is for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s for a better living for all 

the people of Saskatchewan, a higher standard of living. 

 

In the last six years, we have lowered income taxes. We have 

lowered property taxes. We have lowered corporate taxes to be 

competitive and attract investment, and we have attracted 

businesses. We’ve attracted investment. We’re growing the 

population. We’re broadening the tax base. 

 

We’re expanding resource development with uranium, potash, 

and with BHP Billiton and K+S. Mr. Speaker, just two weeks 

ago, I do believe, I had the opportunity to do a tour of the K+S 

mining site. They’re progressing very nicely with construction 

keep on going, but they have boreholes already made. They’ve 

got a lab set up there. Then they’re testing the product as they 

plan for the future. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased the health care, and there’s more 

in the Throne Speech on that. We’ve reduced waiting times. 

There’s more doctors. There’s more nurses. There’s more 

education spaces for doctors and nurses. We’ve got better 

health care into rural Saskatchewan with the collaborative 

emergency centres. We’re building hospitals, Mr. Speaker, in 

North Battleford, the children’s hospital in Saskatoon, and yes, 

the Moose Jaw Hospital. It’ll be closed in this fall. They’ll be 

able to work on the inside of it, and it’s slightly ahead of 

schedule, on budget. It’s really looking good, and I certainly 

appreciate that the plans are moving forward in that regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on longer and longer but I see that 

certainly the time is passing. We have improved highways, 

construction and upgrades. We’ve twinned the highway 

between Saskatoon and P.A. [Prince Albert]. That’s been 

finished. There are major heavy traffic areas in the province 

that will be twinned in the future. There’s been more money for 

municipalities, reduced regulation bottlenecks. Even the Crown 

investments through SaskPower and SaskTel are being made to 

better serve the people. 

 

There are a lot of good things in this Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve touched on a few of them, I think, especially the 

ones that have been close to the city of Moose Jaw. I appreciate 

the work that has been gone into this. I appreciate the foresight 

that this government has — looking forward, meeting the 

challenges of growth, growing the province, and doing the 

kinds of things to benefit all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that, I will not support the amendment but I 

will be in support of the motion of the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to I 

guess part of my speech is going to be discussing the new 

anti-bullying initiative. Without letting the cat out of the bag, I 

just wanted to talk about all the hard work that’s gone into it 

from the staff in the Ministry of Education as well as the 

Minister of Education’s office. 

 

But first I would like to, you know, acknowledge my 

constituents from Fairview and thank them once again for 

allowing me to represent them and for me to be able to sit in 

this seat. I still get a little bit overwhelmed when I pull up to the 

legislature and realize I get to work here. This is part of my job, 

you know, as well as working in the constituency, and 

definitely it’s still very surreal even though it’s been more than 

a few years. So even tonight I was still quite affected by it. And 

I think that that really, you know, contributes to the way I try 

and do my work as well as relate to my constituents and be a 

representative. 

 

Because nobody really gives you a handbook in how to be an 

MLA. It would have been nice in the beginning. And you try 

and figure things out and you hope you don’t screw up too bad. 

But definitely, you know, you put the time and the energy and 

the effort into it, and definitely realize that it is a privilege to sit 

in this Chamber and to sit, you know, and sit next to my 

colleagues. And definitely there’s been some definite synergies 

between people on this side of the Chamber as well as on the 

other as I get to know the MLAs. 

 

And I’m being very earnest when I do, I guess, talk about we 

need everybody’s perspective in terms of what this bullying 

strategy is going to be. And I’m very hopeful that the members 

opposite really do put in a submission. The submission deadline 

is October 31st for the online submissions and they can send an 

email to anti-bullying@gov.sk.ca. 

 

The deadline of October 31st hasn’t changed since the spring. 

That deadline for online email submissions has always been 

there. We haven’t pushed back the date. And definitely it’s 

been widely reported in the media. And it’s also on the website 

so it’s pretty, you know, it’s not very hard to find in terms of 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. You know, we didn’t push 

back the date. 

 

The date has been constant. And it’s very difficult to sit and just 

listen and not be able to defend myself or defend my team at the 

Ministry of Education. And realizing all the hard work and all 

the long hours that they have put in, and definitely even before I 

was appointed as Legislative Secretary, the good work has been 

done definitely from some people in the department who were 

in, you know, tasked with looking at anti-bullying measures. So 

I really, I really want to thank the staff at the Ministry of 

Education as well as in the minister’s office with all the hard 

work and the long hours they put in. And definitely it’s not an 

easy job. It’s a very touchy subject and definitely everybody 

has an opinion about it and they’ve been touched by bullying in 

some way. 

 

We have many parents and grandparents and even aunts and 

uncles sitting in this Chamber and in this building who know 

somebody close to them that’s been affected by bullying, and 

definitely not to take it lightly. And we need to do definitely do 

our research and our consultation and go through the process, 



3676 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

make sure it’s thorough, and make sure it’s done right. I’ve 

always stressed that I would like to make sure that we are as 

thorough as possible and also I’d like to kind of only do it once. 

I don’t want to come back to it in six months and amend it even 

though it’s going to be basically a living document because 

technology changes every day and, you know, the experiences 

of our children in our schools change every day. 

 

You know, they constantly evolve and definitely we can’t, you 

know, predict the future and what, you know, a child’s school 

experience is going to be in the next 5 or even 10 years. But we 

definitely have to make sure that we have a strong foundation in 

place before, you know, we just kind of roll out a strategy 

because definitely we don’t want to jump the gun. We want to 

make sure that the process is followed. And the dates are pretty 

clear. 

 

So the deadline is on Thursday. I stress that again and hopefully 

somebody from, you know, the members opposite take that 

down and hopefully we get a submission from them because I’d 

really like to hear what their opinions and their views are. We 

have many parents across, members across, as well as 

grandparents, and we have a couple of teachers over there and 

lawyers and definitely we’d like everybody’s opinion so I am 

. . . I say again, I’m being very earnest in wanting their opinion. 

 

So we did 16 in-person consultations and that is not the only 

consultation that we have done. We went to eight different 

communities and eight were with stakeholders and eight were 

in the evening with the public. So that did not end there. It 

didn’t end there. It can’t end there. For it to end there would be 

very lazy on our part and I’m one person who, and others on 

my team who go above and beyond in our jobs and take this 

very seriously. And we also had online discussion groups and 

that’s where we got other submissions. And we had gotten up to 

over 1,000. And now we’re just waiting for the email 

submissions. We didn’t just have the consultations, finish up in 

June, and then go sit down and wait around. Work has been 

done. We’re still meeting with stakeholder groups. We just met 

with the Human Rights Commission last week again. It was one 

of several meetings. 

 

And you know, sometimes one meeting isn’t enough. 

Sometimes the stakeholder groups would like to have a couple 

of meetings, and we’re definitely accommodating them because 

we want to make sure that, you know, we have all our t’s 

crossed and our i’s dotted because when we come up, when we 

release the strategy, this is affecting children’s lives, which is 

very, very serious. Definitely we do not take it lightly and, you 

know, and the process was . . . The timelines were specifically 

set with that in mind. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve had two deaths in the last 

couple of weeks, of children. And that’s exactly what they are. 

They’re children. We had one last week, Savhanah Turcotte 

from Regina, and also Todd Loik of North Battleford earlier 

this fall. And the fact that these children don’t think that there’s 

any alternative for them and that death is a way out is very, 

very upsetting and disconcerting. And this is one of the reasons 

why we have to make sure that the bullying strategy is done in a 

way where it can be effective. Definitely don’t want to hear 

about any more deaths due to bullying and for children to be so 

young. And it is very difficult. 

As my daughter leaves her teenage years and goes into young 

adulthood, and just having discussions with her about bullying 

and then realizing she was very lucky, that she had a pretty 

good high school experience and she had a pretty good circle of 

friends where she didn’t deal with that . . . But you know, not 

everybody can say that. There are parents out there who are 

dealing with this, have been dealing with this for years and this 

is the kind of feedback and discussion that we heard at these 

consultations. 

 

And definitely we need to be holistic in how we approach it 

because we can’t just focus on the person who’s being bullied. 

We definitely have to look at why the person who’s, you know, 

bullying the kids, why they’re behaving the way they are and 

what’s the root cause of that. 

 

So as a result it is going to take a little bit longer than some 

people would like. Definitely if I had all the answers, you 

know, and my team had all the answers, we would have rolled 

something out. But you know, not everybody has all the 

answers ever, anywhere. So it’s very, you know, a very difficult 

prospect in terms of trying to come up with a strategy that’s all 

encompassing and that’s as well-rounded as, you know, we can 

make it. And definitely, you know, in terms of addressing the 

bully, you know, we definitely don’t want to bully the bully as 

government. We don’t want to, you know, not treat them like 

they’re children because that’s essentially what they are in the 

K to 12 system. They’re children. 

 

So when you approach that with the same perspective and 

realize that we need to not nip the behaviour in the bud, but 

basically give these kids support . . . And as government, you 

know, we can’t solve everybody’s problems. And I would hope 

as a citizen, and I’m not speaking as an MLA right now, that I 

wouldn’t want government to have all the answers because I 

would want the community to get involved. And that’s 

definitely one of the approaches that we took, you know, when 

we had the consultations in my opening remarks. You know, I 

think the communities are, you know, you guys are going to be 

writing this strategy. 

 

Because one of the first questions that I got was, what’s your 

opinion? And I always reiterated, it doesn’t really . . . I’m here 

to listen to you. I’m not here to dictate about what this plan is 

going to be. You guys have to tell me what’s going on. What’s 

your experiences? What’s your children’s experiences? What’s 

your neighbours’ experiences? What are you hearing out there? 

What are these kids going through? Why are these children 

taking their lives? Thirteen years old. This little girl was 13 

years old. And I don’t know what her mom’s going through 

right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to take that into context when we’re 

coming up with a strategy. And it was very hard for me in the 

last couple of weeks when everybody wants to know what’s the 

strategy. And it’s really hard to keep my mouth shut when it 

comes to that because I don’t want to jump the gun and let the 

cat out of the bag until we actually, you know, we do as much 

due diligence as we need to. So I’m very glad that our 

government is coming up with these new measures, which was 

mentioned in the Throne Speech. 

 

[19:45] 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3677 

Mr. Speaker, I know there was many other aspects of the 

Throne Speech, but this stood out in my mind because I’m very 

close to it, and definitely don’t want to let the work of, you 

know, the people involved go unnoticed. We were very 

fortunate to have a member from the Health ministry come over 

and help us out and give us a different perspective of what we 

need to do in terms of what we need to look at as well, and not 

just education policy. There’s many other different ministries 

that are involved, such as Policing, Justice, Health, Social 

Services. It’s very, very diverse. It’s a very diverse issue. And 

there’s also diverse components of bullying, and I wish I could 

address all of them. But in this anti-bullying strategy, we’re 

definitely going to be looking at the K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12] system because that’s what I was tasked with, and 

definitely looking at, you know, ways to address it and where 

we can have happy and healthy and productive children, and 

give them the best possible quality of life here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I came back home about 10 years ago after living in southern 

US [United States] as well as out east. And I wanted to raise my 

daughter in a place where she felt safe and had really good 

values and where she would be hard-working, and know what 

it’s like to, you know, walk down the street and feel okay and 

feel safe. When we left the US we were living in Houston, and I 

love Houston but it’s not a good place to raise a young 

daughter. And especially if I’m working all the time I can’t 

always be there. 

 

So here I could do that. I could do what I wanted to do in terms 

of going to school and working and knowing my daughter can 

walk home and arrive home safely and get the support that she 

needs. And definitely very lucky that she’s in her first year of 

university, and I still have a little bit of a hold on her. She’s still 

living at home, which is nice. I get her for a few more years, in 

my mind. She keeps threatening to move to South Africa. That 

might happen eventually. But realizing that, you know, we’re 

pretty blessed to live in Saskatchewan. You know, we’re so 

lucky, you know, we’re not experiencing what a lot of other 

countries and even our neighbours to the south are experiencing 

in term of economic turbulence and just even the level of 

disparity. 

 

You know, we live in western society, you know, and I realized 

when I had gone over to India in 2008 how westernized I was. I 

had gone over there, and I was of the mindset I was indigenous. 

I was not a Canadian. This is how I felt in 2008. I went over to 

India, and it changed me. And I thought, I am a Canadian. I like 

the western comforts. I like running water, even though as a 

child, you know, there were times where I lived in a household 

when we didn’t have running water. And definitely, you know, 

realizing that I don’t have to go very far to be comfortable. And 

definitely realizing that hard work will . . . With hard work, you 

can achieve success. And then realizing that success doesn’t 

have any colour attached to it, you know. Opportunity has no 

colour attached to it. So you know, and the key is to know who 

is in front of you and to not ever give up that opportunity. 

 

So I have a quote. Everybody knows I love quotes. I had to find 

a good one. But I found Steve Jobs, and this resonated with me 

because I took a path that’s a road less travelled. And some 

people still scratch their heads when they see where I am, and 

where they’ve known me for years and they still can’t believe I 

am where I am. So Steve Jobs said: 

Your time is limited, so don’t waste it living someone 

else’s life. Don’t be trapped by dogma — [which I hear a 

lot of dogma in here and] which is living with the results 

of other people’s thinking. Don’t let the noise of others’ 

opinions drown out your own inner voice. And most 

important, have the courage to follow your heart and 

intuition. They somehow already know what you truly 

want to become. [And] everything else is secondary. 

 

And this is the message that I send out to the kids out there who 

are different, who aren’t following the path that their parents or 

their cousins or their friends are taking, and they decide to be 

different. And that there is always a tomorrow and it’s not 

going to be as bad as it is today. And definitely I want to send 

out the message out there to kids, is there is hope. There are 

people out there. There are support systems. Definitely if any of 

you are listening and you’re being bullied and you don’t think 

that there are any support systems out there, you just have to 

reach out to them. Because in the last few months, I’ve learned 

we have so many supports out there, that the community of 

Saskatchewan is just amazing and there is already some good 

programming that’s being done out there with . . . in terms of 

bullying. 

 

And I don’t know how many minutes I’ve been talking, and I 

could go on with a whole list of things. But, Mr. Speaker, I will 

not be supporting the amendment and I will be supporting the 

Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government Whip on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — For introduction of guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has asked for leave 

for introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, to all the members of the Assembly, I would like 

to introduce two very good friends of mine up in your gallery, 

Patrick and Andrea Thomson — no P — from Yorkton. They 

come to Yorkton via Abbotsford and other parts around the 

world actually, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Pat is a very accomplished airframe maintenance engineer, a 

long history in aircraft maintenance all around the world, and 

has very interesting stories in how he came to Yorkton. But 

we’re very blessed to have him and Andrea there right now. 

 

Andrea is actually a property manager in Yorkton, worked with 

Pat at the Prairie Harvest Christian Life Centre for a time there 

as well. Pat, his main duty there is youth pastor and the lead and 

developer of Reload Ministries, a paintball ministry program in 

Yorkton that’s doing just great work with youth there. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask you and all members to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



3678 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Nutana. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

certainly an honour to be able to rise in this Assembly tonight 

to speak to the Speech from the Throne that was presented by 

the Lieutenant Governor last Wednesday. 

 

First of all, I guess I want to start off by just acknowledging 

how quickly time flies. It’s hard to believe that I’ve been a 

member now for almost two years. And I certainly echo the 

comments of the member from Fairview in terms of still being a 

bit in awe of this Chamber and this Assembly and being able to 

drive up in my vehicle and say, there’s the office. It’s an 

amazing place to be and certainly in a large part because of the 

people that work here. 

 

But before I get into more of that, I just want to start off by 

acknowledging some important people in my life, and 

particularly want to thank my family for all the supports they 

have given me. My older son is now in second year in 

university so he’s kind of off on his own and I hear from him 

on Facebook every now and then, but I still have my youngest 

son, Sam, at home. And Sam is someone that keeps me 

grounded and always sort of in touch with what his generation 

is looking at and the issues they’re dealing with. And certainly I 

know he’s dealing with the modern lifestyle, including the 

social media networks that are so prevalent in people’s lives 

these days, and how young people are struggling with sort of 

the interpersonal relationships and the evolution of social media 

for relationships with young people. We have some really good 

discussions about that. 

 

And how he relates to his friends now is much different than 

how I related to my friends when I was growing up. In fact, you 

know, not to date myself but I remember when we had the 

button telephone and my uncle would always sort of click it up 

and down — I was talking to my friends on the phone — 

because he’d get impatient with me and my sister when we used 

to chat with our girlfriends on the phone. So there was no 

privacy then, that’s for sure, in terms of conversations. But we 

managed to occupy a lot of telephone time. 

 

Now you look at it and there’s texting and there’s Facebook and 

there’s all kinds of websites and social media — in fact even 

socializing through game playing on the Internet. So it’s quite a 

different world for children and I really appreciate the 

perspective of my son Sam and his friends and the way they 

operate in this new world of social media. 

 

I’d also like to thank my brothers and my sisters for their 

constant support. My sister is a recently retired teacher and I 

have two brothers who are farming on our family farm down in 

Lafleche. And again they certainly keep me grounded as well in 

terms of what’s going on in their rural communities. 

 

And I would also really like to acknowledge my mom and my 

dad. And my dad and my mom both come from what I would 

call entrepreneurial backgrounds. My dad was a farmer and his 

dad was the homesteading farmer before him. And they are 

essentially entrepreneurs in the farming community, struggled 

to make the farm business work, and did a good job at that and 

were able to pass it on to my two brothers. And my mom’s 

family, my grandpa was the pharmacist in town and ran a 

pharmacy business. So certainly there’s a lot of entrepreneurial 

spirit within our family and within our community. 

 

And also able to say that I’m proud to say that they were also 

community-minded people who support socialistic principles 

like credit unions and co-operatives. And we hear today that 

even credit unions could be successful business people. So I’m 

proud to be part of that background and that heritage, that 

entrepreneurial spirit that has been such a basis for the amazing 

things that people in Saskatchewan have accomplished over the 

last many, many decades. 

 

In terms of my experience here in the last two years, even 

though I’m past 50, I have learned so much. And the learning 

curve has been steep, but what an opportunity for someone like 

me to be able to come in to this Assembly, be part of a great 

team of opposition members, and to actually really learn a lot 

about the government and enjoy meeting and working with a lot 

of the government members as well. It’s been, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And the staff of the Legislative Assembly. Again a wonderful, 

wonderful opportunity for someone like me and certainly an 

honour and privilege to represent the people of Saskatoon 

Nutana in this capacity. 

 

Before I go on too further, I do also want to acknowledge the 

support of my sons’ father, Mike Fisher, who is again one of 

the reasons why I’m able to do this job because he’s always 

there when we can’t be at home for our family responsibilities. 

So a shout-out to Mike. He’s the best ex that a woman could 

want, and he certainly is very, very, very supportive of my 

career and my political choices, and I appreciate that very, very 

much. 

 

Also I just want to wish my mom and dad a happy anniversary. 

It’s their 60th wedding anniversary this coming up month, and 

we’re going to be celebrating that in Lafleche at the end of 

November. So very exciting. We will be in Lafleche for the 

60th anniversary. 

 

I would also like to really thank our caucus staff and the 

legislative staff. Again the support of the people that are here 

keeping this place going is really, really important. And our 

caucus staff have been really the most reliable people I’ve been 

ever able to work with, and I really want to appreciate them, 

particularly Kyall Glennie who’s been very helpful for me in 

the last part of this session. And I’m always able to know that 

there’s somebody there for me, and Kyall in particular I wanted 

to thank for that. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Also want to thank my constituency staff. This April, my 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3679 

former constituency assistant Troy MacGillivray had gone back 

to his musical career, and so I now have the wonderful Deborah 

Aitken who is there in the office every day. And Deb is just a 

ray of sunshine for me. She’s a very optimistic, 

forward-looking individual. She’s very talented and very 

creative and really brings a lot to the position. She loves people 

and she loves people’s stories and really, really digs into that 

kind of work. So I’m very fortunate and thankful that Deb has 

agreed to work for me and is there in the office looking after 

things when we can’t be there. 

 

Again I want to mention how happy I am to be representing the 

people of Saskatoon Nutana. Been living there for more than 20 

years now, and really I have to say it’s probably the best 

constituency in Saskatchewan. I don’t want to just, you know, 

say anything about anybody else’s, but Saskatoon Nutana is 

really a good group of people to be with. I have to say there’s 

even a couple of members opposite who live in my riding, and 

I’m happy to represent them as well. 

 

There are a lot of people doing their part in Saskatoon Nutana. 

And they are people who are very concerned about the future of 

the province and really care about this province and love this 

province, and they love our city and the city of Saskatoon. I 

often refer to them as a triple A riding because we have lots and 

lots of academics in our riding. I also have a lot of artists, and 

we also have a lot of activists. We have people who are very 

politically engaged in Saskatoon Nutana and are truly 

protective of our democratic procedures. And quite often, you 

will find someone who’s all three. So we have a great mix of 

people in Saskatoon Nutana and I’m very pleased to be able to 

represent them. 

 

Over the summer, got to visit and travel throughout the 

province on a number of different trips. And even in Saskatoon 

itself, I’m always happy to head down to the farmers’ market 

on Saturday morning. Often see our mayor there, the mayor of 

the city of Saskatoon who makes his visits to the farmers’ 

market. Lots of people there that you can touch base with and 

find out what’s going on in the heart of Saskatoon. So that’s a 

great opportunity to mix it up with people. 

 

I was able to attend the 100th anniversary of my hometown this 

summer, and the member for Wood River was there bringing 

greetings. But it was great to be part of that and to see my dad, 

as a former reeve of the RM [rural municipality] of Wood 

River. And then my uncle, who’s the former mayor of the town 

of Lafleche, got to cut the cake, the official cake, for the 100th 

anniversary of my hometown. So it was great to get there and 

see how people are prospering and how they’re working hard to 

do their part to make sure that Saskatchewan continues to thrive 

and prosper as we go forward. 

 

I was able to attend a number of cultural festivals and events 

throughout the summer, up to Ness Creek of course for the 

Ness Creek Music Festival, and also a new festival up there, 

Country at the Creek, in June. And it’s good to see the people 

of Big River getting more and more involved in the culture and 

events out at Ness Creek. 

 

I was able to attend and participate in Back to Batoche this 

year. I actually got to perform on stage with John Arcand, the 

master of the Métis fiddle. And it was a great night to get out 

there and see the pride in Batoche, the Métis pride and the great 

cultural event there. And also I got to attend out in Tuffnell, a 

fiddle camp down in Kenosee Lake, the Kenosee Lake Kitchen 

Party, which is in Mr. Speaker’s home riding. A great area and 

a lot of fiddle activity going on then, lots of young kids out 

there doing the dancing and the playing and making music and 

sharing the love of music together. So it really inspires me to be 

able to participate in those kinds of things. 

 

And in particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to just give a kudos to all 

those volunteers out there who make these events happen. And 

it’s not just signing up for a shift for a couple hours to work the 

gate at a festival or an event, but it’s the immense quantity of 

hours that goes into organizing events, that really people roll up 

their sleeves and do the work. And it’s always a pleasure to 

know that people are working together to put together these 

wonderful events. And I will be hopefully talking about more of 

those as we go through in this session. 

 

One example I wanted to mention, Mr. Speaker, was, if you 

recall, at the Speech from the Throne on Wednesday, there was 

a school from Regina that performed some singing. And there 

was a fiddle player, or a violin player, I guess, and a cello 

player. The two boys that did that are Raymond and Benjamin 

Knorr. And this summer we were hosting a national fiddling 

championship in Saskatoon, and Raymond and Benjamin, in 

order to do fundraising for that, performed two separate 

occasions in Kipling, Saskatchewan. And they donated all the 

money they raised — $1,700. And these are two teenaged boys, 

Mr. Speaker, who donated that money to the cause of 

supporting fiddle music in Saskatchewan and Canada. And it’s 

those kinds of boys and that kind of initiative that gives me 

hope for the future. So I really wanted to congratulate them. It 

was a real pleasure to see them here in the Assembly last week 

and performing with their school. I think it was the Winston 

Knoll Collegiate, if I’m correct, and they were . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It was Campbell. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Was it Campbell? Oh, okay. Okay, well then I 

want to stand corrected then. It was Campbell Collegiate. 

 

So now we get into the purpose of the Throne Speech. I wanted 

to make sure I understood what the purpose of the Throne 

Speech was. So I turned to my good friend Wikipedia and 

Google and had a little look at what was going in there. And I 

also turned to the resources that are available here in the 

Legislative Library, and again something I’m very thankful for 

because the people that work in the Legislative Library are 

always able to help me out when I want to do some research on 

some of the issues that we’re dealing with. 

 

So what I found is that there’s a couple of purposes for a 

Throne Speech. And the first that I was able to ascertain was 

that the Throne Speech is typically a report on the condition of, 

in this case, the province. And I think we certainly found a lot 

in this Throne Speech that talked about what this government 

has done. So I guess in that sense there’s lots of looking back 

and seeing what this government has attempted to do over the 

last few years. 

 

But the other piece I think that’s always mentioned and when 

you do the research on a Throne Speech is where the monarch, 



3680 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

in this case our Lieutenant Governor, is asked to outline the 

legislative agenda for the upcoming session. And I mean 

historically what the Speech from the Throne was was a 

summons for all the members of the Legislative Assembly or 

the parliament to come forward to do the work of the Chamber. 

So in this case we have a Throne Speech that’s to summon us 

here to the Legislative Assembly as legislators and to do the 

work that this government wants to set out. 

 

I had to look harder in the Throne Speech to find out exactly 

what the reasons for summoning us to this debate were because 

there wasn’t really a whole lot that I could find in terms of 

upcoming legislation and what the goals and intentions or the 

legislative agenda for this particular session is going to be. Why 

were we summonsed and what will we be debating here in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I went through it carefully and I found there were about six 

things that looks like is on the agenda for the government this 

fall. On page 3 of the Throne Speech, we found there is 

intentions to introduce amendments to The Personal Care 

Homes Act. We don’t know for sure, but there’s an indication 

on page 5 that there will be a response to the anti-bullying 

report that the member from Saskatoon Fairview was just 

talking about. On page 7 we know . . . we expect there will be 

something on the traffic safety recommendations. Page 16, 

some sort of legislation for protection for adults in our 

community who must rely on others to ensure their well-being. 

So that’s a vague reference to some sort of legislation that 

perhaps the Minister for Health will be introducing, but it 

wasn’t clear to us and there certainly wasn’t any indication in 

the Throne Speech what the content of that would be. 

 

Then they’re also rehashing the essential services law. They’ve 

— on page 16 — indicated that they attend to amend the Sask. 

employment Act, despite the fact that I understand the Supreme 

Court of Canada has now agreed to hear the case against the 

introduction of that particularly contentious piece of legislation. 

And the only other thing I found in the Throne Speech in terms 

of why we are being summonsed here to speak is new 

regulations for agricultural drainage. 

 

So that doesn’t sound like a very heavy legislative agenda, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m not sure if that’s going to be the whole 

content of our debates in the next few weeks. So perhaps 

there’s some surprises that we don’t know about. And actually 

in the short two years that I’ve been here, I have noticed that it 

is the tendency of this government to not talk about the 

legislation they intend to introduce at the Throne Speech, which 

is a bit of a departure from the normal customary procedures 

where the Throne Speech is an indication and a demonstration 

of what the agenda will be. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, I was participating earlier this year 

in some hearings about The Provincial Lands Act. And the 

indication we received at that time from the ministry staff was 

that there would be legislation this fall in relation to The 

Provincial Lands Act. I know that at the Throne Speech itself 

members of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association were 

here and were disappointed that there wasn’t any announcement 

about The Provincial Lands Act. And certainly we don’t have 

any idea what the agenda is or what the content of that Act may 

be if it’s introduced. 

So I’m a bit disappointed that we weren’t able to find out more 

about that particular piece of proposed legislation. And it just 

makes me wonder what else this government didn’t talk about 

in the Throne Speech. So we, again I remember last year when 

we found out there would be changes to the Information 

Services Corporation, it certainly wasn’t announced as part of 

the Throne Speech. It was an element of surprise, and the same 

when legislation was introduced in terms of adding more 

MLAs, which were not asked for or even discussed during the 

election period. 

 

So we’re not sure why this government chooses to introduce 

legislation, that why they won’t use the conventional way of 

introducing their legislative agenda as part of the Throne 

Speech. And our job as legislators and our job as members of 

the opposition is to provide that thoughtful reflection of what 

the public’s concerns are with that legislative agenda. It’s 

difficult to do that in this response when we don’t seem to have 

any indication exactly what the government’s up to. 

 

I was thinking, you know, if they’re hoping to have the element 

of surprise, my only concern is this is not a birthday party, Mr. 

Speaker. This is the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

although it is one of my colleague’s birthday today. The 

member from Regina Elphinstone is celebrating something in 

the 40s, I believe, a birthday party. But he looks, as the member 

opposite suggested, no older than, not a day over 20 I’m sure. 

But his youthful appearance belies his wisdom and his 

leadership as our House Leader. 

 

One of the things I wanted to raise in terms of this Throne 

Speech that was brought up by the editorials we were all . . . I 

was happy to be able to have an opportunity to look at what the 

pundits in the fifth estate had to say. And the quote from The 

StarPhoenix was that this Throne Speech is not very, it’s not 

very . . . Here I’ll just read it, and then we’ll get it over with: 

 

The most common complaint lodged against throne 

speeches is that they typically are heavy on rhetoric and 

vision, but frustratingly light on detail. 

 

And they went on to say: 

 

On Wednesday . . . the government delivered a speech that 

is the opposite. Although it is chockablock with details on 

actions the government has taken . . . what’s frustratingly 

weak is its vision for Saskatchewan. 

 

And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I have to agree with the 

editorial. This speech tends to look backwards more than it 

looks forwards, and it tends to spend a lot of time discussing 

what the government has done or has announced in the past. 

But certainly it doesn’t give us any idea of what the future of 

Saskatchewan should look like. So it’s a bit, it is disappointing 

— not a bit disappointing, it is certainly disappointing. 

 

As the editorial points out later on — and this is something I 

think that this government is maybe missing the mark on — is 

that the true sign of progress, Mr. Speaker, is health. And a 

healthy society is something I think that should be first and 

foremost in any sort of legislative agenda or the spending of 

revenue dollars or tax dollars on the part of a government. And 

I just want to find my notes here. The editorial points out: 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3681 

But more must be done to help the broad spectrum of 

people whose incomes haven’t grown with the cost of 

living, who struggle with addiction, mental illnesses, HIV 

and other infections, and homelessness, or whose income 

supplements have fallen way below what is necessary to 

survive, much less help change lives. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we know that in order to have a 

healthy society — and this isn’t just health care dealing with 

illness, but this is about having a healthy society overall — the 

things we need to be looking at are income. And when we live 

in a place in Saskatchewan where the income gap is getting 

wider instead of narrower, this is of concern for everyone, Mr. 

Speaker, and there are numerous studies that prove that. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Income, education, employment, housing, the wider 

environment, and social supports — those are the things that 

determine the health of a society. And unless you have those 

first and foremost in the legislative agenda and in the executive 

government’s actions, those indicators of health are going to 

suffer. And we will have, like the people I have in my riding, I 

have a lot of seniors that live in Saskatoon Nutana and they are 

being squeezed very much because they’re on fixed incomes 

and they’re terrified about where they’re going to end up living 

because of the cost of living that are impacting them so much. 

 

I have students who are really struggling to be able to attend 

university because of the cost of living. So these are the people, 

these are the indicators that tell us whether we’re doing a good 

job as a society. And those types of things are not to be found 

in any great detail in this Speech from the Throne. 

 

There are of course some programs and some ideas I think that 

are very laudable and I want to comment on them as well, Mr. 

Speaker. There are definitely good things to be found in this 

speech and the first one, recently announced, is the Urgent 

Issues Action Fund in relation to health care in the long-term 

care facilities. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, our leader and 

the opposition have been repeatedly calling for improvements 

to long-term care, and certainly the staffing levels. 

 

And I guess my biggest question about this $10 million Urgent 

Issues Action Fund is, why is the urgency there? And it 

shouldn’t be there, Mr. Speaker, because there was every 

indication for many years now that this issue was going to 

become more and more pressing and urgent. So it’s a bit 

disappointing that the money has to be put in as an urgent 

action fund when we know, and this government has had every 

indication, that these problems are mounting, they’re growing, 

and they’re becoming more and more serious. And 

unfortunately they haven’t responded in a timely fashion. 

 

There are good things in the health section in the budget or in 

the Throne Speech. The amendment to The Personal Care 

Homes Act for public disclosure of inspection reports, the idea 

of collaborative emergency centres, the pilot project in 

Maidstone, and new centres that are coming up, I think that’s 

very important. 

 

On page 4, the government talks about hot-spotting pilot 

programs to help with high-risk, high-use patients who 

repeatedly show up in emergency rooms. Mr. Speaker, this is 

critical. I mean it’s costing the taxpayers a lot of money and it’s 

obviously not working in terms of the needs for these particular 

patients. 

 

What I find a bit frustrating is that on the same page we see the 

government talking about Patient First and student first, which 

is a new initiative that they’re implementing in education, but 

we don’t see anything on Housing First, which is an initiative 

that the major cities in Saskatchewan have been talking about 

for a long time and are looking for this government for 

leadership and support in starting a Housing First program here 

to deal with the issues of homelessness. And I was again 

looking at Housing First on Wikipedia, and there’s a good 

article there that the government may want to look at that 

describes the importance of this kind of approach where you 

put people in homes first and then these types of hot-spotting 

pilot programs would be less likely to be required. 

 

So the science is there. The evidence is there. I hate to say the 

evidence is evident, but I said it, so . . . But we know that 

Housing First is something that is desirable, it’s being used in 

other provinces, and we have other provincial governments who 

are supporting it. So you know, let’s keep up with the firsts. We 

have Patient First. We’re starting student first. Why not 

Housing First? And I think that’s something this government 

should take very seriously and take a very close look at because 

of the success in other areas. 

 

We have quite a bit on education in the Speech from the Throne 

and no wonder, given the trouble this government seems to 

have with handling this particular file. And maybe mishandling 

is generous, Mr. Speaker. But a couple of things that I want to 

point out in terms of the education and the response, and one is 

in my new capacity as official opposition critic for francophone 

affairs. And I just wanted to share this story with the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, and maybe point out that there’s certainly more 

that could be done in this context. 

 

On October 15th, les Conseil des écoles fransaskoises wrote a 

letter to all the parents of students in their schools. And you 

may not know this, Mr. Speaker, but the francophone education 

community have had to take this government to court pretty 

much every year for the last few years because the funding 

they’re receiving is not meeting their constitutional 

requirements under our constitution here in Canada. It’s very 

frustrating for the educators because they’re spending more 

time in court and more money in court than they would like to 

be doing, and it’s because the lack of response from this 

government for their needs. Since 2007 they’ve had to go to 

court multiple times. There are growing numbers. The schools 

are bursting at the seam. Their portables are filled before 

they’re even delivered, and they keep winning in court but for 

some reason this government refuses to recognize this 

constitutional obligations. 

 

At any rate, in this letter I’d like to share a paragraph for you. 

It’s in French and I will read it in French but I have a copy of it 

and will share that with the Assembly. So I’ll read it in French 

first and then I’ll give a bit of a translation. But here’s a letter 

dated October 15, just went out. And it says: 

 

Le budget . . . [équilibre] présenté à la province n'est pas 



3682 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

un budget de choix. Il ne répond pas aux besoins uniques 

du Conseil des écoles fransaskoises. Comme tout conseil 

scolaire de la minorité au Canada, le CSF doit respecter 

ces obligations constitutionnelles en vertu de l'article 23 de 

la Charte canadienne des droits et des libertés. L'article 23 

assure aux parents ayants droit un accès équitable à 

l'éducation dans la langue de la minorité. Toutefois, ces 

obligations nécessitent un financement supplémentaire. La 

Cour a d'ailleurs déjà reconnu «que le CSF doit composer 

avec un budget serré et a épuisé les réserves destinées aux 

urgences.» 

 

[Translation: The . . . [balanced] budget presented to the 

province is not a budget choice. It does not meet the 

unique needs of the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises. Like 

any school board in the minority in Canada, the CSF must 

comply with constitutional obligations under article 23 of 

the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Article 23 

provides for eligible parents equal access to education in 

the minority language. However, these requirements 

require additional funding. The court has already 

recognized that “the CSF has to deal with a tight budget 

and has exhausted the reserves for emergencies.”] 

 

So basically what the French . . . council of French schools is 

telling parents is that the budget they presented is not a budget 

that they’ve chosen. It’s a balanced budget, but it doesn’t 

respond to the unique needs of their council. And like every 

school council in Canada that’s for a minority school, they have 

to respect the constitutional obligations because of article 23 of 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. And article 23 assures 

parents that they have the right to equal access to education in 

the language of their choice. And so these obligations always 

require supplemental finances that are not being provided by 

this government. And so what the courts are recognizing every 

time they go to court is that this council of French schools have 

to make a budget that is broken and always exhausts the 

reserves that are supposed to be for emergencies. So this is a 

real difficulty for the French schools, and we don’t see anything 

in the Throne Speech that recognizes the frustrations and the 

failure to meet the constitutional obligations that we have under 

section 23 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Those same constitutional rights are of concern to the Catholic 

schools. We met last week with, or a couple of weeks ago, with 

the Catholic school board and again, in terms of minority rights, 

we have religious rights that require . . . Equality doesn’t mean 

treating everybody equally, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something 

I’ve said before in this legislature, and I’ll say it again. And 

that’s that those same things, those same concerns that we hear 

from the French schools council, we’re also hearing from the 

Catholic school board. And I’m just wanting to highlight that 

and just say that we don’t see a whole lot in this budget — in 

fact we don’t see anything — that deals with the recognition of 

those frustrations and difficulties that those organizations are 

having in meeting their constitutional requirements and our 

constitutional requirements. 

 

We see in the education piece that the student-first program 

they’re talking about is going to start with wide-ranging 

consultation. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s really 

encouraging because this government’s record on consultation 

with educators hasn’t exactly been stellar . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Or in any area. That’s right. Hasn’t been 

something that’s very commendable. So we’re glad to see that 

they are intending to do the consultation. It’s too bad it’s taken 

this long to realize that. But we’re certainly supportive of that 

form of consultation and we hope that that new program will 

provide this government with the information that they’re 

looking for. 

 

One of the things we just heard the previous speaker from 

Saskatoon Fairview talk about was the work that’s being done 

on anti-bullying, and the Throne Speech refers to a forum that’s 

going to happen in November for national Anti-Bullying Week. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s only a couple of things I want to say 

about that and it’s something that’s been bothering me a lot 

since I started attending here in the Chamber. And that is, in 

order for us to expect students to not bully, it’s important for 

adults to lead the way. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

behaviour in the Chamber here sometimes is bullying and 

there’s a lot of that that goes on here. 

 

And when we have school kids come and attend and watch — 

and I hear this comment over and over again, and I hear it not 

only from the schoolchildren but I hear it from people that I 

care about — and they say they really are disgusted by the 

behaviour in this Assembly at times. And I think that in order 

for us to show leadership . . . We are the leaders of this 

province. We’ve been elected to be leaders in this province. It is 

very important for us to treat each other in this Chamber 

without bullying. And I have to say, by and large, most 

members are not engaging in that type of behaviour. But when 

it does occur, it’s very disturbing. 

 

And I think also, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been asked since I got 

elected, as a woman, to talk to women’s groups about women in 

politics. And one of the things that I discovered as I’m doing 

some of my research when I do these speeches is the impact of 

this perception of what goes on in these chambers as . . . I have 

to find my paper on that. The perception of many women and 

why they choose not to engage in political activity is because of 

that type of behaviour that goes on. And so if we really, truly 

want this to be a place where people feel welcome and people 

feel that they can bring their ideas and their enthusiasm, their 

passion for legislation and their passion for bettering their 

society, that we can’t have a place where bullying occurs. So I 

just wanted to raise that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing that was raised in the . . . and we’ve heard lots 

about this in the last few days is, raised in the education piece, 

is the idea of these new joint-use schools. And the government 

has described the method that they’re using as an innovative P3 

bundling approach through SaskBuilds. And so we’ve heard a 

lot recently about P3s and it appears that there’s a lot of rhetoric 

that goes around what exactly P3s are. So I turned to my friend 

again, Wikipedia, to just try and understand. Because some of 

the questions that are being asked of me is, who’s going to own 

these schools? Who’s going to end up owning them at the end 

of the day? And this is something that’s not clear, and we 

certainly don’t know, by what the government has announced, 

who’s going to actually own them. So we’re looking forward to 

finding out the answer to that. 

 

But one of the things it says in Wikipedia, and I’m going to 

quote, it says there are usually two fundamental drivers for P3s. 

http://www.fransaskois.info/CEF


October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3683 

Firstly, P3s — and this is what we hear from the government: 

 

. . . P3s enable the public sector to harness the expertise 

and efficiencies that the private sector can bring to the 

delivery of certain facilities and services traditionally 

procured and delivered by the public sector. 

 

So we’ve heard a lot about that from this government. What 

we’re not hearing about from this government is the second 

piece of the P3 definition that’s found in Wikipedia. And it 

says, secondly, a P3, I’m quoting again: 

 

. . . a P3 is structured so that the public sector body seeking 

to make a capital investment does not incur any borrowing. 

Rather, the P3 borrowing is incurred by the private sector 

vehicle implementing the project and therefore, from the 

public sector’s perspective, a P3 is an “off-balance sheet” 

method of financing the delivery of new or refurbished 

public sector assets. 

 

So I think that’s very important and it’s interesting that this 

government isn’t talking about the fact that they can 

successfully invest our future without it showing up on the 

balance sheet. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is something our 

Provincial Auditor has pointed out on other occasions in terms 

of how this government approaches its bookkeeping, because 

what we see is the debt isn’t showing up. And that’s something 

that’s very handy for a government, Mr. Speaker, to be able to 

not show the debt that they’re incurring on the balance sheet. 

 

And I think that this government needs to take a more serious 

look and be more honest with the people about the fact that they 

are able to hide debt by using this P3 model. So it’s not just for 

the first half of the definition that they’re doing it but, Mr. 

Speaker, I think they need to be more open and transparent 

about the second half of the P3 equation, which is allowing 

them to basically defer debt. In fact I thought I’d be clever, Mr. 

Speaker, and I thought rather than calling them P3s maybe we 

should be calling them D3s — because to me they’re deferring 

and delaying debt. And that is really part of the picture that 

we’re not hearing about from this government. 

 

So we will be watching very carefully to see, are these going to 

be owned by the people of Saskatchewan, these schools? Or are 

we going to be leasing them in perpetuity? There’s nothing in 

the Crown’s speech that tells us that. There’s nothing from the 

Speech from the Throne that tells us what the details are on this 

kind of thing. And so we’ll be watching very carefully to find 

out where the debt will lie and what the impact on the taxpayers 

is going to be. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So we’re glad to see new schools, Mr. Speaker, and certainly 

we’ve been calling for them for a long time. Again no surprise 

to this government that, with the increase in population, we’re 

going to need more schools. But all of a sudden they decided 

that they need to get caught up. And so they’re using the cookie 

cutter, bulk bundling approach to actually just get caught up 

with the deficit that the schools are incurring right now. 

 

One of the things again that I was happy to see in the Throne 

Speech was the Premier’s recognition that Internet access in 

schools is suffering and that there’s a barrier there. You know, 

he actually talked to teachers and found out it was a problem 

and is responding to it. And I think that’s an important response 

because Internet learning is very much part of the modern 

education approach, and so it has to be there. 

 

On post-secondary education, really there’s nothing new there, 

and I think that’s disappointing for a lot of people that are 

struggling in their post-secondary pursuits. There are some 

individual advantages that are described, but there’s really no 

oversight or vision for the future for post-secondary education. 

 

I mentioned earlier on the highways we’re going to see perhaps 

. . . We’re told the government will act on the recommendations 

of the Special Committee on Traffic Safety. And as my 

colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale indicated, there’s a couple 

of pieces missing on that report, and we are certainly really 

hopeful that the government will take account of that and do the 

right thing by ensuring that the impoundment of vehicles is part 

of the new law that’s being introduced, hopefully, we hope. 

 

I’m going to skip ahead a little bit here. Just a couple of 

comments on competitiveness. We see there’s two full pages on 

competitiveness, under the heading of competitiveness, and yet 

there’s not a single heading for First Nations and Métis people 

here in Saskatchewan. And it’s concerning to me, Mr. Speaker, 

that we don’t see more of a highlight on our partners in 

Confederation, the First Nations of Canada and the Métis 

people. 

 

And there’s a couple of mentions throughout the speech of 

smaller points on First Nations. But I guess I could move into 

that discussion right now. I was going to talk about it a little bit 

later. But on page 17, we have a heading, accountable 

government. And you would think maybe under that heading 

you might see something about being accountable to the First 

Nations partners and our Métis Nation partners in our 

relationship here, our government relationship. But it’s not 

there. The only thing under accountable government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the fact that we are finally getting a new 

lobbyist Act. And that seems to be the extent of accountability 

that this government is prepared to deal with in this particular 

Throne Speech. 

 

There’s no heading for First Nations people, and we know that 

our First Nations are the partners in Confederation. They have 

enshrined rights in the constitution. And I just wanted to point 

out a comment that I found on the January 16th Globe and Mail 

when the regional chief, Perry Bellegarde from the FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], was talking about 

the need for government to ensure that the duty to consult is 

being properly carried through. 

 

And we have a comment from our Premier in that article that he 

said: 

 

Our position will remain unchanged as long as I am 

premier, as long as this government is in office, that there 

will be no special deals for any group regardless of that 

group in terms of natural resource revenue sharing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to refer to our First Nations constitutional partners 

as a group is really relegating them to a status that is 



3684 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

inappropriate, in my view. We know that the First Nations were 

the founders of this country, and we know that in our 

constitutional relationship with them and within our treaty 

relationship with them that they are still a self-determining 

group of people. And just because we’ve imposed a domestic 

system of law overlaying that onto their enshrined 

self-determination rights is something that I don’t think we can 

overlook. 

 

And I find those kinds of comments coming from our Premier 

really are not reflective of the actual relationship with that 

particular sector of our society and of our Canadian history. 

And it really disturbs me when I hear those kinds of comments 

coming from our leadership, because it really doesn’t show 

respect for the role of the First Nations people and the Métis 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think by seeing that we don’t find any kind of plan, any 

kind of vision for how our relationship with First Nations 

people is going to unfold in this great times that we have here in 

Saskatchewan, when we see First Nations people suffering and 

struggling with poverty issues beyond belief, Mr. Speaker, 

when we see the Idle No More movement and the frustrations 

that First Nations people have continuously with our 

government and with the governments of the country, it just 

saddens me, quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m very 

concerned about the kind of comments that we see coming from 

this Premier and this leader for the future of our relations with 

the First Nations. I could say a lot more about that but, given 

the hour, I’m going to move on in my comments. But I just 

wanted to mark that on the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another point I want to talk about on page 5, this government 

indicated in their speech that . . . They talked about the 

development of 500 new child care spaces. Again that’s 

something that was already announced, so they’re reannouncing 

something that they’ve already done. But what’s of concern 

there, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re announcing that there’s 

13,700 spaces in Saskatchewan when in fact that’s not quite 

right, Mr. Speaker. And we know that many of those spaces 

don’t exist. In fact about 3,000 of those spaces are not 

developed at this point in time. So although the announcement 

has been made, really the right number is more like around 

10,700 spaces. There’s still a desperate need for these spaces 

and you have to ask yourself: they’ve announced them; why 

don’t they exist? 

 

And I was talking to my colleague from Riversdale, Saskatoon 

Riversdale who indicates that a lot of the reasons for that is that 

the organizations that are approved to provide these spaces 

simply don’t have the capacity to put them into place. So why is 

that, Mr. Speaker? I think that’s something this government 

needs to take a look at and I’m hoping that they will do so in 

the very near future. 

 

Okay now, I’m just going to move on to page 15 of the Throne 

Speech and there’s one line in there that I found really 

disturbing and I wanted to highlight and talk about this a little 

bit. On page 15 under safe communities, there’s a reference 

near the bottom of the page that says that “helping the victims 

of crime is a priority for my government.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

can tell you that there are some victims of crime in this 

province that are not being helped by this government, and it’s 

a sad story and it’s a long story and I’ve been working with the 

Lange family for a long time, since I became involved in 

politics. 

 

And I want to talk a little bit about Kutler Lange who is a 

young man who was viciously assaulted and suffered 

permanent brain damage. He’s almost 30 now, but this was 

quite a few years ago when he was a teenager and he was 

brutally beaten in a house. He was hit over the head with a 

whiskey bottle and then his head was repeatedly kicked in and 

he spent at least two months in a coma, I think, Mr. Speaker. 

And he is now permanently brain injured and is not able to 

work or have a family or have a lot of those things that a lot of 

us take for granted with our children and ourselves. 

 

I have to talk a little bit about Kutler’s mother, Sharlene, who is 

one of the most amazing women I think I’ve ever met. And she 

is her son’s biggest advocate and she has not stopped trying to 

get justice for Kutler since this terrible, terrible incident 

occurred. And Sharlene’s done a lot of work and has educated 

me on The Victims of Crime Act and the various compensation 

levels that are available to people who are victims of these 

types of crime. 

 

Back in 1967, Saskatchewan — I don’t know if you know this, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — but Saskatchewan was the first 

province in Canada to recognize victims of crime and provide 

compensation for those victims of crime. And we’ve had 

various versions of that legislation in place. But something very 

important happened in the early ’90s when the no-fault 

legislation came through. 

 

And what happened there was, we have a no-fault scheme, so if 

people are injured through an automobile accident, they are 

able to access that insurance fund in order to provide for loss of 

income and all the kinds of care that are required for people that 

are injured. And certainly those that are brain injured are 

included in that care. In fact I believe they can get up to $6 

million in compensation through the insurance scheme under 

the Auto Fund. 

 

Now what happened though is that at the time when that fund 

was created and the no-fault insurance scheme came in — and I 

hope I understand this correctly — I’m advised by Sharlene that 

all of a sudden there was a problem with the intentional assault 

by use of a vehicle. So if I decided I wanted to run somebody 

over with my car, that’s a criminal assault. But there was no 

ability to compensate for those kinds of injuries through the 

ordinary victims of crime compensation because that was gone. 

And so the assault by use of a vehicle was now incorporated 

into the insurance scheme for the purpose of being covered. 

 

So we have some crimes that are covered by an insurance 

scheme, but we have the crime that was perpetuated against 

Kutler that is not covered by an insurance scheme. And it’s that 

injustice that Sharlene has been very, very determined to deal 

with. And in fact she has dealt with a number, at least two 

Justice ministers in this government, trying to find a way to 

bring justice for her son. And I really just want to commend 

Sharlene for the work she does. I want to commend Kutler for 

being determined to find justice for these types of victims of 

crime. 

 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3685 

And we do have a victims of crime scheme here in 

Saskatchewan, and we certainly do. But that goes up to about 

$25,000. And that deals with — and this is the inadequacy in 

our system — it deals with lesser crimes or lesser impacts of 

crimes. So if your property is damaged by wilful acts of 

violence or vandalism, you are eligible to get compensation to 

get your garage door repainted or your fence fixed or there’s all 

kinds of things under The Victims of Crime Act where people 

are properly given coverage. But the sad part for us is that 

there’s nothing that deals with the grave and catastrophic 

consequences of crime that Kutler has suffered. 

 

I asked Sharlene the other day about, were you not able to get 

support through the civil system? Because the criminal system 

deals with the crime itself. The fellow who perpetuated the 

assault was found guilty, and he actually did time in jail. I think 

the sentence was about three years. He’s now married. He’s 

taken over his father’s business. He has a beautiful wife and a 

family, and he is moving on with his life. He did his time, and 

he has, you know, paid the price that society requires for that 

type of crime. But he is able to get on with his life, Mr. 

Speaker. Kutler isn’t. 

 

And I asked Sharlene, you know, why weren’t you able to use 

the civil courts because, you know, you can sue? And here’s 

what . . . This again is an example of how the legal system has 

failed this family. She said there were no legal proceedings. 

 

I tried several lawyers . . . They all wanted money and I 

had none, Kooter had none. [Kooter is her name for 

Kutler.] Not one would offer pro bono or contingency 

because there was likely nothing to be had anyways. 

Which is exactly why we have the motor vehicle 

insurance compensation system. Tony Merchant’s office 

told me to go to the Victims’ Fund and get the $25,000 for 

legal fees. I told every lawyer that I was not entitled to use 

that money for any legal fees, and if I use it for income 

replacement . . . [then Kutler couldn’t] get welfare. 

 

So she was caught up in this system of getting bounced around, 

and she was not able to get any help. She said, my hands were 

completely tied. 

 

Kutler was hurt so bad that that is all this kid has for rehab 

for the rest of his life [this 25,000 was all he had for the 

rest of his life] so I needed to use it sparingly and only for 

emergency physiotherapy relating to his spinal injury 

when this kid is down with it for months at a time . . . [She 

said] I even went to CLASSIC and met with a lawyer. He 

said that I had to be turned down by at least ten lawyers in 

order for them to give me advice . . . 

 

And all they could do was give her advice. They couldn’t even 

act for her. 

 

The assault happened on October 24, 2003 and the trial 

was in May of 2005. I had to wait for the trial and 

outcome before we even knew if we could sue . . . I was 

out of work for one year and seven months by the time the 

trial was did and done. Kutler was in very bad shape so 

neither of us could possibly have the means to drop 

thousands for a civil suit, and even if I did have some 

funds, how under those circumstances could I risk 

investing thousands with the likelihood of getting nothing. 

 

Remember, the trial was in May 2005 and there was a 

two-year statute of limitations to sue so if you couldn’t 

find anyone to help in that period of time you were pretty 

much out of luck. 

 

And then she goes on to talk a little bit more about the situation 

they’re in. 

 

[20:45] 

 

In 2011 there was an article in The StarPhoenix about this, and 

the headline is that the “Justice system forgets crime victims.” 

And here’s a bit of the story there. This is by Bronwyn Eyre on 

August 13, 2011. 

 

Victims of crime. It’s a term much bandied about, but 

often without any real sense for the stories and faces 

behind the phrase. 

 

Take Kutler Lange — the young Saskatoon man who was 

severely beaten in 2003 after he helped his friend fend off 

a home invasion in Lawson Heights. 

 

Kutler’s mother, Sharlene, dropped him off on a Friday 

evening to hang out with friends. When an acquaintance of 

Kutler’s went out for a cigarette, he engaged in verbal back 

and forth with some other youths driving by. Matters 

deteriorated and the group announced they’d return with 

“back up.” 

 

They did. There were some altercations outside and some 

windows were smashed. After Kutler helped his friend try 

to lock up the house, the two hid in a closet, as one Tyrell 

Morash roamed through the house with a metal bar. 

 

When Morash entered the bedroom, Kutler’s friend 

accidentally turned on a light. Morash opened the closet, 

pulled him out and started to beat him. Kutler then 

emerged from his hiding place to intervene — taking the 

beating instead, which has ruined his life. 

 

After Kutler was knocked out with a Wiser’s bottle, his 

head was repeatedly stomped on and he suffered 

permanent brain damage. 

 

Morash was sentenced in adult court to nine years, but was 

released in April of 2009. Kutler’s friend — the one he 

protected — has never been in touch with him. 

 

Following a one-off $25,000 payment, Kutler now receives 

only $1,000 a month from the provincial government. He 

can work only sporadically. His mother, who refuses to 

institutionalize him, has spent everything she has to take 

care of him. 

 

As she says, people injured in auto accidents — even car 

thieves and drunk drivers — get more compensation from 

SGI than . . . [victims of crime] such as Kutler. [And she 

says] “Why are people like that protected, yet the true 

victims live in poverty?” 

 



3686 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s every opportunity for this government 

to rectify what is clearly an injustice and a completely unfair 

situation. Sadly I received a letter dated today from the Minister 

of Justice. I was asking about restitution in Kutler’s case. And 

basically the minister has said that the only restitution that’s 

available are for damages or expenses that are quote, “readily 

ascertainable” and of course at Kutler’s . . . the time of his 

injury, there was no way to determine the full extent of the 

damages that he suffered as a result of this crime, Mr. Speaker. 

So basically what the minister is saying is that there’s nothing 

this government can do for Kutler. 

 

And I really want to and will continue to raise this story and 

encourage this government to find a way. There are 

catastrophic victims of crime legislation in other jurisdictions 

and, given the inequities with our criminal injury system and 

our automobile insurance system and the fact that this is just 

clearly unfair, I urge and implore this government to make 

some way to make this right. And so I appreciate the 

opportunity to be able to bring it to the legislature’s attention, 

and I really do hope that we can find fairness and justice for this 

family and the other families in Saskatchewan who are dealing 

with these types of catastrophic impacts for criminal activity. 

 

I’m going to move on now, Mr. Speaker, to later on in the 

Speech from the Throne. In particular on page 18, we see the 

section on parks and culture, and we see the government patting 

itself on the back for the launch of Creative Saskatchewan. And 

I just can’t let that comment go by, Mr. Speaker, without 

pointing it out that we’ve basically lost an entire industry here 

in the province. 

 

Now the film industry is basically shut down because of the 

refusal of this government to recognize the importance of a tax 

credit like the film employment tax credit and its role in 

keeping a healthy film industry and a viable film industry in 

any province. And our loss is to the gain of every other 

province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And again it’s disappointing 

that this government refuses to admit when it’s wrong and is 

too stubborn to fix those kinds of oversights and mistakes, Mr. 

Speaker. And I just wanted to reiterate our disappointment on 

this side of the House for this government’s inability to do 

what’s right when it comes to the film industry. 

 

Near the end we have the final section on the environment. And 

I thought, Mr. Speaker, as Environment critic, I would actually 

go back and see what other things this government has been 

saying about the environment since it came into power. And I 

looked at the Speech from the Throne from 2007, and I found 

something very interesting there. The quote from that particular 

speech was this: 

 

My government is committed to finding solutions to the 

environmental problems facing our province, our country 

and our planet. The recent record has not been good. This 

province has the highest rate of growth in greenhouse gas 

emissions in Canada. For the sake of our children, this 

must change. 

 

That is why my government is committed to meeting 

Saskatchewan’s existing greenhouse gas emission target of 

reducing levels by 32 per cent by 2020. 

 

Okay. So in 2007 we were going to reduce levels by 32 per cent 

by 2020. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, earlier last week, or I think it was late last 

week on Thursday, there was a report released by Canada’s 

Emission Trends. And what we see in this report is that in 

Saskatchewan in 2005, the greenhouse gas emissions were at 71 

megatonnes, and in 2011 they are at — this is dated information 

because it gets released after the fact, but this is the most recent 

information we have — 2011 the number of megatonnes is 74. 

So we have gone up from 71 megatonnes of emissions in 2005 

— and remember those emissions are still in the atmosphere — 

and every year since then we’ve been adding at least that much 

more. And in 2011 we added an additional 74 megatonnes of 

carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. 

 

Now that is not what the Throne Speech said in 2007 unless . . . 

And we haven’t seen this in this Throne Speech, but the 

government may still have a plan for reducing levels by 32 per 

cent by 2020. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s only seven years from 

now. And there’s nothing, there’s nothing in this Throne 

Speech that identifies how that’s going to happen. So we have 

to assume that this government has basically reversed its 

position, and it is not at all interested in meeting the greenhouse 

gas emission target, reducing levels by 32 per cent by 2020. 

 

And I think that’s an absolute shame, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

something that’s not serving the people of Saskatchewan well. 

And it really concerns me, particularly because our emissions 

per capita, our emissions per capita in Saskatchewan are the 

highest in Canada. And not by a small bit, Mr. Speaker. 

Incredibly large. If you put together Alberta and 

Saskatchewan’s emissions and compare them to pretty much 

the rest of Canada, that’s where they’re all coming from. As 

much is coming from Alberta and Saskatchewan as the rest of 

Canada. I think that’s something that we need to be very, very 

concerned about. 

 

The numbers are stark. I think they’re quite frightening. And I 

guess my biggest disappointment is when I look long and hard 

in the section on environment in this year’s Speech from the 

Throne, there’s no mention of it. There’s not a single word 

that’s being said about the continuing pumping out of 

megatonnes and megatonnes and megatonnes of carbon into our 

atmosphere. And I think that’s something that this government 

has really let the people down on. And we’ll continue to 

comment on that as we go through the legislative agenda for 

this session. 

 

Now the other piece in the environment that was commented on 

in the Speech from the Throne was the issue of agricultural 

drainage. And as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been up 

on my feet in this Legislative Assembly in the past, 

commenting on the fact that the existing law for environmental 

drainage is not being enforced and monitored in an appropriate 

way. So rather than just do that, which I think would be 

sufficient, this government has said, well we’re going to 

develop new regulations. So this is another area where we’re 

being promised some sort of legislative activity in the form of 

regulations. 

 

I’m hoping that . . . That’s something the government is telling 

us they’re going to be getting consultations on. And I’m hoping 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3687 

that these consultations will actually go and they will speak 

with Andre and Lorraine Boutin. And I don’t know if you 

remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the Boutins were here in 

the spring and were very, very concerned about the impact of 

agricultural drainage on their property near Bellevue, 

Saskatchewan. I recently received a letter from them indicating 

that they have not been able to progress at all on their problem. 

And even as late as September 16th, they were still writing to 

the Water Security Agency and asking for help and assistance. 

 

And what we really get, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a lot of 

buck-passing. Because what’s happening here is the response 

that came from SaskWater or the Water Security Agency is, 

what they’re saying here is that there’s really nothing they can 

do. And what they’ve said in a quote . . . This is a response 

from a gentleman named Dwayne Rowlett to Mr. and Mrs. 

Boutin, and on September 20th he said: “We would look to 

your family with the support of the local conservation 

development authority in promoting the project as one that 

would provide benefit to all those that would drain toward it.” 

Now you’ve got to remember, the Boutins are at the bottom of 

this drainage system, and Chicot lake I think is the name of the 

lake. 

 

So they’re telling the Boutins, the toughest . . . There’s three 

pillars to the development of a project that will save their farm 

— basically most of it’s been under water for a number of years 

now — technically feasibility, financing, and the last but not 

least is community acceptance of the project. So well that 

sounds kind of reasonable, you know. Is there a technical 

feasibility? Possibly. Financing? Maybe there’s financing out 

there and community acceptance. 

 

But what he went on to tell these individuals is the toughest one 

of the three pillars is community acceptance of the project. And 

then he went on to say, “I encourage you to talk with your 

neighbours about the benefits of such a project that will allow 

some level of flood control.” Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the 

neighbours who have been draining on to the Boutin’s property. 

So for the government to suggest that they go out and talk to 

the benefits of flood control and to pay for it, it’s just not going 

to work. And this is the basic problem with the existing system. 

 

So I’m happy to see the agricultural drainage is being identified 

as one of the most serious environmental issues in the province 

today. I’m not happy that greenhouse gas emissions aren’t that 

serious issue. But we will be watching this government very 

carefully and looking very closely at any proposals because the 

current system . . . I think the words on paper are fine. There’s 

all kinds of enforcement ability for this government to ensure 

that drainage is taken seriously and that people up the hill are 

not taking advantage of gravity in order to solve their problems 

but leaving it all on their neighbours down the hill. So we will 

be watching very carefully to ensure that the new regulations, 

whatever they look like, are going to be fair and adequately 

deal with the problem. 

 

So I guess in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been an honour 

again, as I said, to be able to bring these comments forward at 

this point in time and to comment on this most recent Speech 

from the Throne. As I indicated, it’s a little bit what we call 

maybe legislation light because there isn’t a whole lot in there 

in terms of a legislative agenda that I think that this Assembly 

can look forward to in the following weeks. But who knows 

what surprises are up the government’s sleeve, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because we’ve seen it before. We don’t see it in the 

Throne Speech, but we certainly do get all kinds of little 

surprises on the legislative agenda as we go along. So we look 

forward to that. 

 

The one other piece that I did want to talk about was the 

upcoming report from Peter MacKinnon on our permanent 

sources of wealth from ongoing resource sales. And we see a 

government that isn’t able to put aside any of this money. Right 

now they’re using this one-time resource income. This is 

non-renewable resources, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s using it for 

25 per cent of its operating costs, and this is something that 

very few other provinces are doing. So I’m not sure how we’re 

going to be able to move forward with a proper savings for the 

future when we’re using up these resources that are 

non-renewable. But again, we’re going to really look forward to 

Mr. MacKinnon’s report and the action that this government 

proposes as a result of that report. 

 

The StarPhoenix editorial had a comment on that as well, and 

what they’ve said is that “A responsible government has to find 

ways to set tax rates and services that achieve a closer balance 

between revenues and demands.” So maybe, regardless of what 

Mr. MacKinnon has to say, there’s still some work to be done 

over there in terms of proper management of those resource 

revenues. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, in closing then, I would like to say that I 

would like to support the motion that was brought forward. I do 

agree that this Assembly should condemn this government for 

its lack of vision, that we should condemn this government for 

its actions and often its failure to act, which are hurting 

education and seniors’ care. We should condemn this 

government for its failure to deliver a smart growth strategy 

which includes diversifying our economy so that our prosperity 

is sustainable for the long term. And so, Mr. Speaker, I will 

support the amendment and I will vote against the motion. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural 

and Remote Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s a real pleasure to be able to take part in the 

address to the Throne Speech that was brought down by our 

government. 

 

First I want to thank a few people. I want to thank my wife 

Cindy. We just celebrated our 30th wedding anniversary last 

summer, and she actually is celebrating her birthday on 

Thursday, so wish her a happy birthday on Thursday. Just 

thinking about my children . . . I have three children. They all 

live and work in Saskatchewan, and I was thinking that’s quite 

a feat. We look back 10, 15, 20 years and how many young 

people stayed in the province and can say that they had no 

intentions of leaving the province and there were jobs and 

opportunity here in Saskatchewan. So I’m very pleased that my 

children are living and working in Saskatchewan. 

 

[21:00] 

 



3688 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

I’d like to also mention and thank my constituency assistant, 

Janet. She is very friendly and professional in her duties as my 

constituency assistant and does a great job, given the last year 

and a half. Since I’ve been the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health it’s been, as it always is, very important to have an 

assistant that looks after all the constituency issues, and she 

does a great job. 

 

I would also like to thank my office staff: my chief of staff, 

Megan, Selena, and Dale. And we work very closely — quite 

frankly, seamlessly — with the Minister of Health’s staff, the 

chief of staff, Kim, and Paula, Crystal, Michael, Brittany, and 

Sarah. So we work very well together, and I’d like to thank all 

those people for making our jobs much easier and enjoyable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is growing, and we want it to 

continue to grow. We’ve grown by more than 100,000 people 

in the last six years. Growth brings great opportunities but also 

challenges. Our Speech from the Throne focused on what our 

government will be doing to meet the challenges of growth. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to make a few comments 

about my constituency, the community of Biggar and the 

constituency of Biggar, and how growth has had a great impact 

on the constituency. 

 

In the town of Biggar there’s two major manufacturing 

businesses that make tanks for the oil industry and another that 

builds shortline equipment and adaptions for shortline 

equipment. And Prairie Malt of course. And a great demand for 

people to weld and put equipment together and all those jobs. 

 

And there’s a lot of people that have come through the 

immigrant nominee program. Very successful, fundamental 

actually to the businesses in Biggar and around the constituency 

and quite frankly across the province. In Biggar, and as many 

communities, most of the immigrants are from the Philippines. 

Most of them are Catholic, so they have, you know, not only 

bought houses and work in the manufacturing jobs in Biggar 

but also fill the schools and fill the Catholic church, quite 

frankly, which I am a member of, so I’ve got to know many of 

those people and they’re very wonderful people who do a great 

job for the community, raising their families. But we have 

people from all of the world as well from India, Pakistan, from 

the Eastern Europe, and all those people very productive and 

doing a great job, building our province and our communities. 

 

Biggar’s constituency always has been a farming community 

and I, like the rest of the province, have taken off a record crop 

and so the farming community is very vibrant and done well. I 

believe all the crop is in and it’s just fantastic yields. So Biggar 

constituency has a lot of things going for it. Real estate prices, 

of course, increased with the demand of more people coming 

into the communities in Biggar constituency. 

 

Biggar, and a number of communities, always been a railway 

town and that’s still a factor in the town of Biggar, but it’s not 

as big a factor as it once was. Many people, of course, also are 

retired farmers and have retired into the town of Biggar and the 

other communities. So it’s a very vibrant community and 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what our Throne Speech does, a number of things, 

but it has invested in Saskatchewan’s health care. It’s an honour 

to be an MLA and a minister in the government that recognizes 

the need for a health care system that can complement the 

growth of our province. 

 

I’m also pleased that our government recognizes that we need 

to build a health care system that would be sustainable into the 

future. Our government investment in health care overall has 

increased 41 per cent over the past six years. Almost $1 billion 

has been invested in health infrastructure over the past six 

years. 

 

Increased funding in order to decrease surgical wait times. We 

have more than 1,000 new nurses more now than when we 

formed government in 2007. Our goal was for 800 new nurses 

and we’ve met and surpassed that goal. 

 

Physician recruitment and retention is a big piece of my work 

as a Minister of Rural and Remote Health. Since 2007 there are 

more than 300 more doctors practising in Saskatchewan, but we 

know we still need more family doctors, especially in rural 

areas. 

 

Now we haven’t been sitting idly by. There’s many initiatives 

we’ve introduced to address this challenge. We have increased 

the physician training seats and doubled the residency positions 

in the province. Over 90 internationally trained physicians have 

passed our made-in-Saskatchewan physician assessment 

program and are working across the province, and most of them 

are in rural Saskatchewan. We provide up to $120,000 for new 

physicians who will practise in a rural or remote community for 

five years. 

 

A new locum program is providing relief to rural physicians 

who need time off. So there’s two locum pools. One through 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association, which they administer, 

and those doctors are more for short-term locum duties — 

weekends or holidays that doctors may take. We’ve asked the 

10 southern health regions to each of them have two locums, so 

a total of 20, plus one for the North to fill in on a longer term. 

So it would be locums that would work in the region that they 

were hired in. And we’re making progress on that; we still have 

a few more to hire. And they certainly relieve some of the 

pressures on hospital disruptions. We’re training more 

Saskatchewan graduates in smaller communities through the 

distributed medical education. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, since I was appointed to cabinet just a year 

and a half ago, I have been touring health care facilities in 

communities around the province. And to date I have visited 80 

communities in rural and northern Saskatchewan. I meet with 

doctors, nurses, and health care professionals in rural 

Saskatchewan. And I also meet with community leaders and 

hear first-hand about the challenges of the communities. It’s 

been very, very rewarding, first of all to see all the communities 

in rural and remote Saskatchewan, wonderful people in every 

community. Communities are well-kept and people are very 

proud of their communities. 

 

We’d go into a facility, whether it’s a hospital and/or a 

long-term care home and tour the facility, meet and greet staff, 

either while they’re working or just meet with them while 

they’re having coffee in the morning and afternoon when we’re 

there. Then we have a meeting with the community leaders — 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3689 

that’s the mayors and reeves and councillors and foundation 

heads — and sit down and talk to them about their concerns 

about health care in their community. And also we have a third 

set of meetings with physicians and nurse practitioners to get 

their take on the issues in health care in the community. Over 

the past year I’ve visited many communities including Stony 

Rapids in northern Saskatchewan, Shaunavon, Watrous, and 

Loon Lake, and of course many, many more. 

 

When I was first appointed to cabinet, the Premier directed me 

to go to Nova Scotia to tour Nova Scotia’s collaborative 

emergency centres or CECs. And I went there with Dr. 

Padayachee, the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] 

director, and we toured two CECs or collaborative emergency 

centres in Nova Scotia. And we certainly understand the 

stresses and strains of rural health care. 

 

And there is a number of reasons why physicians have 

historically not stayed in rural Saskatchewan, but the two, 

probably the most common ones, is that the physicians get 

burnt out. So there will be a physician that either by themselves 

or with another physician working 24-7, being on call, and after 

a while just can’t stand the pace and leave to somewhere else 

out of the province or even in the province. 

 

The other reason physicians do leave is to follow their family 

members. Sometimes physicians will follow their children to 

Saskatoon and Regina when they go to university or the other 

issue is their spouse would like to work at a job in their field of 

expertise and sometimes that’s an issue. Like I’ve always said, 

if the spouse is a registered nurse or worked in the health field, 

well we can work around that, but many times they don’t. And 

so those are all issues that put stresses and strains and reasons 

why physicians leave the community or the province in some 

cases. 

 

Now what the CEC or the collaborative emergency centre does 

is really, number one as far as I’m concerned, is it’s really a 

recruitment tool and a retention tool to keep physicians in rural 

Saskatchewan, and I’ll tell you why. The CEC is very flexible 

but generally speaking the nighttime model, the emergency care 

is looked after by a registered nurse and an advanced 

paramedic, generally from 8 p.m. to 8 a.m. So those two health 

care providers work in consultation with a STARS [Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society] emergency physician and when 

patients come in the door there’s three things that could happen. 

They are triaged and people that are just looking for an 

appointment with a physician because of shift work or because 

they can’t get an appointment will be asked to come back the 

same day or next day for a same-day or next-day appointment. 

Some people are just treated and released and the real 

emergencies are sent on by road or air ambulance or STARS to 

an emergency ward to be looked after by emergency 

physicians. 

 

The other key component of a CEC is the daytime model, 

which is looked after by primary health care providers, headed 

up by physicians, nurse practitioners, you know, a full array of 

health care providers, dieticians, you know, counselling for 

mental health and addictions, and in other types of health care 

that is needed. 

 

And so those physicians are working generally 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., 

12 hours, seven days a week. It’s flexible. On weekends they 

may not be working the 12 hours. They’d just have one 

physician, but it’s flexible, so people know they can get in to 

see a doctor on the same day or a next-day basis, which is very 

important. 

 

In Nova Scotia’s experience they found that about 85 per cent 

of the people that are going to their emergencies were 

non-emergent. They were just people that couldn’t get an 

appointment in a timely fashion. So that’s the other part, a very 

important piece. 

 

We learned many things. The SMA and the nurses and health 

regions and the ministry people were in Nova Scotia, both with 

me and on their separate trips. We had an information 

exchange. The officials from Nova Scotia came to 

Saskatchewan last fall and spoke about their experience, the 

things that they learned about setting up a CEC in their 

province. And so that was very rewarding for all of our health 

care providers and board members and people to understand 

what a CEC is, how it works. 

 

You know, obviously all the health care providers have to work 

together. The community is a very important part of making a 

CEC work. And so the good news is that we have our first 

collaborative emergency set up in Maidstone, Saskatchewan. 

And it’s working very well and serving the people of that area 

and, quite frankly, Highway 16 very well. 

 

Now we hope to have — we will have, quite frankly — more 

collaborative emergencies set up. Shaunavon is likely to be set 

up very soon, and working on Canora, Spiritwood, and Wakaw. 

And quite frankly this will spread out across the province and 

address some of the many needs of rural Saskatchewan where 

there’s a shortage of physicians in their community. It’s a great 

step forward, and we look forward to more of the collaborative 

emergency centres being set up. 

 

In our Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, long-term care was 

a highlight, and our government is committed to improving 

seniors’ care in the province. This past summer our government 

conducted the most comprehensive review of long-term care 

facilities ever undertaken in this province. As my colleague the 

Minister of Health has noted, we must do a better job when it 

comes to seniors’ care. 

 

[21:15] 

 

The review of care facilities indicated that while we are doing 

some things well, many concerns were identified in the 

long-term care facilities. That is why our government has 

created a $10 million Urgent Issues Action Fund to address 

issues identified based on each health region’s and facility’s 

needs. More baths, improved nutrition, better training to deal 

with patients with dementia are all part of that. We’re also 

expanding the Home First/Quick Response home care pilot 

programs to Saskatoon and Prince Albert, originally in Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

Another innovation is doctors’ house calls, another measure to 

improve seniors’ care. And this is really set up to keep seniors 

in their own homes, out of long-term care, out of hospitals. We 

will be announcing more details of that program that will 



3690 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

enable seniors to receive house calls from physicians, improve 

access to primary care for seniors. Seniors may not normally be 

able to access office-based physicians. I think that it needs to be 

pointed out, that team for doctor house calls, obviously 

physician-led, but it will include nurse practitioners and the full 

array of health care providers, primary health care providers, 

including pharmacists, dietitians, physiotherapists. Whatever 

health care provider is needed will be available through this 

program. 

 

Another innovation, Mr. Speaker, is our government has 

launched hot-spotting pilot programs in the coming year. This 

program will better assist high-risk patients who repeatedly 

show up in emergency rooms. Many of these patients are not 

well served by the current system, and hot-spotting will connect 

these patients with the appropriate services that they may need 

at an appropriate time.  

 

These patients may be in need of care for mental health or 

addiction issues. Patients who need this kind of help are not 

best suited by visiting emergency rooms at tertiary centres in 

Regina or Saskatoon. Some patients identified through 

hot-spotting may be better served through the mental health or 

addiction services, and our government has now rolled out the 

initial phases of the mental health and addictions action plan 

that was originally announced in May by the Health minister. 

We are now into the consultation phase of the action plan with 

an online tool released last week in order to gather feedback. 

Patients, family members, friends, front-line health care 

workers were all encouraged to provide feedback. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just speak a bit more about some of the 

other highlights in the Throne Speech. And I think that 

education obviously is very important. You know, the 

student-first approach that was announced will build on 

successes that are already being achieved in school divisions 

throughout the province. And the government has appointed 

Russ Mirasty and Patricia Prowse to lead the consultation. 

 

Interestingly I attended the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] convention just the other day, and I was told by one 

of the STF directors that the Premier of Saskatchewan was the 

first Premier of any political stripe to ever speak at the 

convention. So I think that speaks highly of the Premier’s 

commitment and our government’s commitment to education in 

this province. 

 

An important step in the development of student-first will be a 

wide-ranging consultation with teachers, administrators, 

parents, and students, as I mentioned, where those two people 

will be leading that consultation process. 

 

Now the member opposite was talking about P3s. And you 

know, our government just recently announced nine new 

joint-use schools. Now two things. They will be built by 

bundling the schools and P3s. The schools will be built in 

Saskatoon, Regina, Martensville, and Warman, and there will 

be savings and efficiencies by bundling, by having the 

contractors bid on more than one school at a time, so there’s 

efficiencies in that. 

 

And the member kept asking the question, well who will own 

these schools? Well it’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the people 

of Saskatchewan will always own these schools. There is never 

any doubt on that. I assume the school divisions will own the 

schools like schools are owned right today, but it’s very clear 

that the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of this province, 

will own these schools. 

 

Other things that our government has done since 2007: invested 

more than 600 million to build 20 new schools and undertake 

23 major renovations and additions to completing 

approximately 900 smaller capital projects. Our government 

has supported the development of 15 new pre-kindergarten 

programs and the development of 500 new child care spaces, 

bringing the total number of licensed child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan to more than 13,700, a 48 per cent increase since 

2007. 

 

I’d just like to tell a bit of a story. In Biggar we have three 

physicians right now, but the last physician came about a year 

and a half ago from Manchester, UK [United Kingdom]. And 

her and her husband have a small child. They wanted to leave 

Manchester because it’s a large city. They didn’t want to raise 

their family in such a large centre. They went to Australia and 

checked out health care there and they didn’t like it. They 

sought out Saskatchewan. They came to Saskatchewan. It came 

down to two cities or two communities they wanted to come to. 

One was Estevan and one was Biggar, my hometown. 

 

And I have a lot of fun with one of the lead physicians in 

Estevan because Dr. McKee decided to come to Biggar with her 

family rather than going to Estevan. And it’s interesting. Even 

though Estevan is not a very large community in terms of 

millions of people, it’s a boom town, and they didn’t like that 

atmosphere for their children. But the fundamental reason they 

came to Biggar, or they wouldn’t have come to Biggar, is that 

Biggar had a daycare and that was so important to them. And so 

that’s why we got our third doctor in Dr. McKee. And her 

husband and child are doing very well in Biggar, and we are 

glad to have them in the town of Biggar. 

 

Some of the other issues . . . or not issues but things that our 

government will be doing as far as education, SaskTel will 

invest $5 million over four years through the CommunityNet 

program to increase bandwidth and improve Internet access and 

speed at schools throughout the province. 

 

Just want to touch on some other items. You know, our 

government will spend more than $500 million in highways, 

bringing the total investment over the past six years to $3.7 

billion, 76 per cent more than in the previous six years. The 

investment is being used to rebuild or build 8,000 kilometres of 

highways, you know, and we can look at the new Circle Drive 

South bridge open in Saskatoon and the new overpass open in 

the west side of Regina. And again our government is exploring 

an opportunity to use public private partnerships or P3s to 

construct the south Regina bypass. 

 

Twinning No. 1, as was just recently announced, has been 

completed. And our government has started pre-construction 

work on three new twinning projects — Saskatoon to Clavet, 

Saskatoon to Delisle, and Estevan to Bienfait. So our 

government is moving ahead on a wide array of infrastructure 

needs and committing resources to that. 

 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3691 

Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government and ministries and 

Crown corporations have invested $13.2 billion, a 110 per cent 

increase over the previous six years, in infrastructure. Our 

growth plan is committed to investing 2.5 billion in 

infrastructure over the next three years. 

 

SaskBuilds, a new organization established to pursue 

innovation in infrastructure development, is exploring ways to 

complete large, high-cost infrastructure projects in a timely 

manner through the use of P3s. P3s will allow the government 

to advance certain capital projects more quickly while reducing 

costs, a very innovative form of financing and something that’s 

been successful in other provinces. 

 

Of course we have some major engagement internationally. 

Saskatchewan companies have exported a record $32.6 billion 

worth of products, which is a 10.3 per cent increase from a year 

before and triple the amount of exports a decade ago. Uranium 

is now moving into the Chinese civilian market. And you know, 

our resource sector continues to expand. BHP has decided to 

invest another $2.6 billion over the next three years in the 

Jansen project. They’re very confident in Saskatchewan. 

 

I can’t end my address without talking about and speaking to 

agriculture. Agriculture continues to be a driver in this 

province. Exports have climbed to $11.2 billion. It’s on pace to 

set a new record this year. And our government’s committed a 

record $27.7 million to agriculture research. 

 

We continue to support the federal government in trade 

negotiations such as the Canadian-European Trade Agreement 

and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and we continue to address 

trade irritants such as country of origin labelling in the United 

States. 

 

Our government has significant improvements to crop 

insurance to help farmers. And also our government continues 

to work with the federal government, Alberta, British 

Columbia, and Manitoba to develop a Western Canadian 

livestock price insurance program for cattle and hog producers. 

I think that’s very . . . a timely announcement, and that has been 

well received by all the producers.  

 

Now our government has been very fiscally responsible. Since 

2007 government debt has been reduced by $3 billion or 44 per 

cent. This has reduced total interest costs by $600 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to some of the initiatives we have 

already undertaken in many areas and particularly in health care 

and rural and remote health care, and providing timely and 

consistent access to patients in rural areas is a priority for our 

government. And we are making progress in doing that, but 

there’s always more to do, and we recognize this. 

 

This year’s Throne Speech confirms that Saskatchewan is 

growing and there are challenges to growth. Our government is 

committed to meeting the challenges of growth in health care as 

well as others. We have committed to build, as I said, nine new 

joint-use schools in areas of the province that have seen the 

most growth. We are continuing to improve and maintain 

highways and roads, and better roads in the province, in order 

to keep our residents safe. And our economy is continuing to 

diversify. But we need also to work to diversify our skilled 

workforce by educating and training workers so that those 

important jobs in our province can be filled. 

 

This Throne Speech and recent announcements by our 

government will attempt to address these needs. This Throne 

Speech sets a bold target and a wide range of initiatives, 

outlines some of the tools that are needed to reach those targets. 

In some cases they are lofty targets, but lofty targets are better 

than having no targets at all, and we are committed to achieving 

those goals. We are not seeking growth merely for the sake of 

growth. Rather we know that growth should be a means to 

provide a better qualify of life for all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I will be supporting the Speech from the 

Throne. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to stand in my place and offer my remarks 

on the Throne Speech. My colleagues so far have been eloquent 

in providing their feedback, and I’m honoured to participate in 

this discussion alongside my fellow members. 

 

To begin with, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge my wife 

Christine, thank her for her love and support. Without her 

support, I wouldn’t be able to be here to do the work that I do. 

So I thank her very much for that, and to my children, Allison, 

Stephen, Jeremy, and Kayla, for their support as well. They 

stayed in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

opportunities that are here for them as a result of what’s 

happened in this province over the last number of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also grateful for the help of my constituency 

assistant, Kelly Merriman, who keeps things on track in my 

MLA office in Saskatoon. In addition I extend my thanks to my 

staff in the legislature — Dawn, Jennifer, Marina, Mary, and 

Reagan — for all the work they do to help support what I do. 

 

Lastly I extend my gratitude to my friends and neighbours in 

my home constituency, Saskatoon Northwest. This October 

marks three years since the people of Saskatoon Northwest 

elected me to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I am truly 

humbled by their support. I had the opportunity to reconnect 

with a number of them this summer as I was out going door to 

door, and I continue to be encouraged by their ongoing support. 

And I appreciate all the feedback that I received. And because 

of their support, Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of working 

with a remarkable group of people on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, meeting the challenges of growth — this is the 

theme not only of our government but for our province on an 

upswing the likes of which would seem unimaginable a few 

short years ago. We are living in a new era of optimism, one 

which attracts families to build homes, leads businesses to 

invest, allows young people to work in their hometowns, and 

inspires pride among people across the province of 

Saskatchewan with their cherished past and future. 

 

[21:30] 

 

As a province, Mr. Speaker, we have confidence that our future 



3692 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

is one of opportunity. Yet even when circumstances favour us, 

we must make choices about the direction that we must take. 

The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, was a signal from our 

government to the people of Saskatchewan that we’re choosing 

a path of balance. It was a signal that we are moving forward 

with pragmatism and a spirit of community to ensure we meet 

the challenges of a growing province, a signal that we do not 

pursue growth for growth’s sake but so that we can achieve a 

better life for our families and for those in our communities. 

 

There can only be one reply to this Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is gratitude, not for the policies of a 

government, but for the opportunities to live in a place where 

we are discussing the challenges of growth. As we consider the 

initiatives of our government, let us do so with an appreciation 

for the opportunity Saskatchewan has to offer. 

 

Across the world, Mr. Speaker, governments are under pressure 

to address the causes and consequences of debt. Here in 

Saskatchewan, we are fortunate to have the lowest debt to GDP 

[gross domestic product] ratio in Canada. Since 2007, our debt 

has been reduced by $3 billion or 44 per cent. In addition, with 

more people in our province than ever before, 1.1 million, the 

debt per capita level continues to fall. 

 

Moreover, our thriving economy, based on innovation and 

productivity, makes us the envy of the world. We are on a pace 

for the best year of employment growth ever recorded. The 

latest labour force statistics show Saskatchewan unemployment 

rate is tied for the lowest in Canada for the ninth consecutive 

month. Youth unemployment is well below the national 

average, and off-reserve Aboriginal employment grew for the 

eighth consecutive month. For 22 consecutive months, 

employment has grown year over year. Compared to this time 

last year, Saskatoon’s employment was up by 11,900 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we exported a record $32.6 billion in 2012, triple 

the amount exported a decade ago. This includes a record 11.2 

billion in agricultural exports, the highest among the provinces. 

In our Saskatchewan plan for growth, we envisioned a province 

that is debt free. We are now in position to discuss how we will 

use our resource revenue after the debt is fully retired, an 

incomprehensible thought for a province once on the brink of 

bankruptcy. We will hear from Peter MacKinnon on the 

Saskatchewan heritage initiative recommendations on how to 

ensure our resource revenue becomes an enduring source of 

wealth for our province. 

 

Our government’s commitment to balanced budgets is an 

important component of our province’s economic well-being. It 

is not the only way we are striving to deliver good governance 

for Saskatchewan people. We are also improving public policy 

by enhancing disclosure in the machinery of government. Mr. 

Speaker, this fall our government will be introducing a new 

lobbyist Act and will establish an independent officer of the 

Assembly to oversee a public registry. This follows the 

excellent work of the bipartisan Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to whom I extend my 

thanks for their work. In preparing their report, the committee 

accepted nine written submissions. We followed this with a 

further consultation period where we invited stakeholder 

comments on the report. 

 

The new Act will make public the lobbying activities of 

corporations and paid lobbyists. While other chambers make 

headlines in their lack of transparency, we are introducing 

legislation to enhance disclosure. 

 

This Throne Speech also represents an anniversary for our 

government. The Throne Speech 15 years ago represented the 

first full session where the Saskatchewan Party filled the 

official role of opposition. Under the leadership of my hon. 

colleague for Canora-Pelly, eight members created something 

on the new political landscape of this province, a party which 

would grow to form government in 2007 and now has elected 

49 members. 

 

When my colleague from Canora-Pelly responded to the 

Throne Speech of 15 years ago, he laid out a clear plan for a 

stronger future. I quote his words which stand true today: 

“Government, lest we forget, is here to provide the essentials: 

health care, education, highways, and safe communities.” These 

priorities encapsulate the Throne Speech we heard last week. 

 

Our government has undertaken significant work to improve 

our health care system. In the past six years, the number of 

doctors practising in this province has increased by 300. This 

means more care for seniors, more care for children, more care 

available with shorter wait times. We are continuing to make 

health care a priority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will be announcing details of a program that will enable 

seniors with complex issues to receive house calls from 

physicians and nurse practitioners. We announced a new 

approach to delivering primary and emergency care in rural 

areas with collaborative emergency centres open 24 hours a 

day. Last month we opened the first collaborative emergency 

centre in Maidstone. We’re also launching an initiative to assist 

high-use, high-risk patients who are recurrent users of 

emergency health services. This will connect these individuals 

with appropriate services outside of emergency rooms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a growing province means larger communities 

and higher demands for services. We will focus our efforts to 

meet the challenges of this growth. Education is another area 

the member from Canora-Pelly identified as essential 15 years 

ago. We are fulfilling that vision by putting students first. Since 

2007 we’ve invested over $600 million to build 20 new 

schools. Now using a P3 bundling approach, we are building 

nine more joint-use schools. This model will enable the 

province to build more schools in less time than our typical 

procurement approach would allow. Internet capacity will also 

be improved in our schools, ensuring an innovative and modern 

education system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a growing Saskatchewan requires new schools 

and classrooms to support a growing population and teach our 

children and youth. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, our government 

will be taking action to make schools safer. Our province has 

already participated in a national approach to combat 

cyberbullying, working with federal, provincial, and territorial 

partners to recommend changes to the Criminal Code. In this 

session, Mr. Speaker, our government will respond to 

anti-bullying recommendations put forward by the MLA for 

Saskatoon Fairview based on consultations she has had with 

students, parents, and teachers. 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3693 

But our commitment doesn’t end in grade 12. Mr. Speaker, we 

are also investing in the province’s post-secondary sector. 

We’ve given record support to post-secondary institutions — 

$4.6 billion since 2008. Like many of my fellow 

representatives, as well as my colleagues in the law community, 

I’m a lucky alumnus of the University of Saskatchewan. Unlike 

the time we graduated, Mr. Speaker, students today are 

receiving part or all of their tuition costs back through the 

Saskatchewan graduate retention program. More than 40,000 

students have taken advantage of this program, making it 

attractive for young people to stay here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, challenges accompany this growth. 

Encouraging young people to stay and begin their lives here in 

Saskatchewan means, in Saskatoon Northwest, we have to buy 

slightly more candy at Halloween. But this is a challenge we’re 

happy to meet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in the province’s universities. 

We’re also investing in SIAST, evolving it into a polytechnic 

institute which combines the practical training of a college 

education with the in-depth study typically found at a 

university. Mr. Speaker, we are supporting our young people in 

reaching their career goals. In turn they are helping our 

community grow and prosper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third emphasis was on highways. A growing 

province means growing pressure on our roads, and our 

government is responding. Over the past six years, we have 

spent over $3.7 billion on our province’s highways. This year 

alone we will invest over $500 million. In Saskatoon this has 

meant the construction of the south Circle Drive bridge, which 

has made a significant difference in our city. We are also 

twinning a number of highways in and around Saskatoon. The 

twinning of Highway 11 to Prince Albert is now complete and a 

vital link between Saskatchewan cities and the province’s 

North. Pre-construction work has also begun on Highway 7 to 

Delisle and Highway 16 to Clavet. And to make these roads 

safer, Mr. Speaker, we will be acting on the recommendations 

of the Assembly’s Special Committee on Traffic Safety. In 

particular we will focus on tougher penalties for those who 

drink and drive. 

 

Safer communities. That was a priority of our party 15 years 

ago, and it’s an important part of our Throne Speech this year. 

It’s also of particular interest to me. Crime not only hurts 

individuals and victims; it harms entire communities. In 

Saskatchewan we are taking an innovative approach to crime 

aimed at bringing down incidence rates and helping victims to 

recover and rebuild. 

 

A community mobilization model, originally pioneered in 

Scotland, was first introduced in Prince Albert. This model 

fosters co-operation between the police, government ministries, 

human services agencies, and community-based organizations 

to respond to offenders. Since 2011, Mr. Speaker, overall crime 

in the city of Prince Albert has fallen by 18 per cent. We are 

encouraged by these early results. That’s why other 

communities such as Yorkton, Moose Jaw, La Ronge, North 

Battleford, Estevan, Weyburn region are also implementing the 

Hub model. 

 

But that’s not all we’re doing. Our government is committed to 

helping those in our community in their most vulnerable 

moments, including victims of crime. A major expansion to 

police-based victim services program has been launched to 

bring crisis and service supports to 34 new regions. These 

services provide information, support, and referrals to victims 

of crime. Working with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] “F” Division, programming has recently been expanded 

to nine police detachments in Assiniboia, Canora, Coronach, 

Esterhazy, Kyle, Melville, Moosomin, Wadena, and Wynyard, 

with plans to expand to 25 more police jurisdictions. By the end 

of the fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, these services will be available 

throughout the province. Through partnerships with police and 

volunteers, these services lessen the immediate and long-term 

impacts of victimization, helping victims to heal and for 

communities to move forward. 

 

And we are protecting vulnerable people in other ways. 

Following an inter-ministerial review of legislation affecting 

vulnerable adults in vulnerable situations, we are moving 

forward with amendments to improve protection for adults in 

our community who must rely on others to make decisions on 

their behalf. We are making sure decisions are made according 

to their own wishes and by those they trust, and ensuring 

appropriate safeguards apply to those who act on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat the words of my colleague one more time: 

government is here to provide the essentials — health care, 

education, highways, and safe communities. And, Mr. Speaker, 

as I’ve said, our Throne Speech does just that. A new program 

to enable some seniors to receive house calls from physicians, 

nine new joint-use schools, $3.7 billion for highways in six 

years, and new initiatives like the Prince Albert Hub and COR 

[centre of responsibility] to provide the downward trends in 

crime rates. 

 

On top of these essentials, Mr. Speaker, we continue to move 

forward with a spirit of community. A growing province allows 

us to pay for services like SAID, the Saskatchewan assured 

income for disability program. More than 11,000 Saskatchewan 

citizens with long-term and enduring disabilities now have 

enrolled in SAID. This year we boosted SAID benefits for a 

third time in four years. As a province, this is an important step. 

 

Our province is growing, Mr. Speaker, and our government is 

meeting the challenges of this growth. We can have the future 

we want, Mr. Speaker. I believe our government is going the 

right direction, ensuring the benefits of growth are used to make 

our province a better place. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I strongly support the direction 

outlined in the Throne Speech and I give it my full support for 

the benefit of our province, its people, and communities. Mr. 

Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech and I will not 

be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thanks for the 

opportunity to speak about the Throne Speech. First I’d like to 

say some thanks to some people: Meewasin constituency for 

electing me and giving me the honour to be able to be here and 

spend all this time with these great colleagues of mine. Next I 



3694 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

would like to thank the Meewasin executive for all their work 

and all their support and their help door knocking and taking 

care of the Meewasin constituency. 

 

I’d also like to thank my CA [constituency assistant] Matt, who 

takes care of the office and is there to answer any questions 

when I’m not around, and also to keep me informed to what has 

happened. 

 

I’d really like to thank my daughter Shanaya. She has 

doorknocked with me since she’s 12 years old — three 

elections — and not once has she ever complained and she’s 

always there for me. Finally I’d like to lastly to say thank you 

for my wife Sheila who has also always supported me in these 

campaigns. She supports me when I’m here in Regina doing the 

work that we do and, I don’t know, you can’t be here without 

your spouse’s help. It’s as simple as that. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have lived in Saskatoon for over 50 years and I 

have spent roughly 30 years in the north end of Saskatoon 

specifically, mostly in Meewasin constituency. And I’ve had 

the privilege of having the river valley accessible to Meewasin 

which has always been its east boundary since I’ve been 

elected. We go for walks quite often with our dogs along the 

Meewasin trail or the river trails in Meewasin, and it is rated as 

one of the top places in Canada to visit. Often while we go 

walking, we’ll stop down by the weir and we’ll look at the birds 

and the different beauties of Saskatoon from the weir area. 

 

The Riverworks Weir initially was built in 1939 and was one of 

many make-work projects during the Depression, and when the 

Gardiner dam was built in 1967, the weir was no longer 

necessary. Meewasin Valley Authority was created in 1979 by 

The Meewasin Valley Authority Act. I’m fortunate enough to sit 

on the Meewasin Valley Authority board and find out all kinds 

of different things that they’re looking at doing in the planning 

for the future. By the way, meewasin is a Cree word for 

beautiful. Meewasin is a conservation agency dedicated to 

conserving the cultural and natural resources of the South 

Saskatchewan River Valley. All the beautiful existing trails and 

all the rest that are on the drawing boards are developed and 

maintained by the MVA [Meewasin Valley Authority]. The 

future, they would like to build trails all the way to Whitecap 

Reserve and as far north as Batoche. 

 

The growth of Saskatchewan is why I got involved with the 

Sask Party back in the late ’90s as I was tired of watching 

people move to other places to work. When I graduated from 

mechanical engineering technology, most of my graduate 

friends moved to Alberta and other provinces to work. When I 

graduated from business administration at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], most of my graduating partners 

and friends moved away as well. When my kids graduated, 

some of them have moved away. This would have continued for 

generations as we all know what the NDP think of growth. We 

also know what happens with no growth and an aging 

population. You end up without a tax base to cover the costs of 

taking care of the elders. 

 

Since the Sask Party became the governing party of 

Saskatchewan in 2007, our population has grown by over 

100,000 people, which the NDP said was impossible. 

 

Here’s some quotes from NDP. MLA Doreen Hamilton said it 

in the Whitewood Herald: “The Saskatchewan Party plan to 

increase our population by 100,000 people in 10 years is more 

wishful thinking than statistically attainable.” 

 

MLA Harry Van Mulligen, NDP, said in the House here, so, 

Mr. Speaker, I quote: 

 

I say their plan flies in the face of reality, Mr. Speaker. 

Now it may well be an admirable goal, but it’s not very 

realistic, Mr. Speaker. It’s also, I might say, if this is the 

basis for their whole approach to government, that this is a 

shaky basis for an economic plan, Mr. Speaker. Because 

these plans, Mr. Speaker, if you’re not right, you will in 

effect take hundreds of millions, billions of . . . dollars to 

put it into a plan that is doomed to fail because the reality 

says that plan will fail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That was from MLA Harry Van Mulligen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege to sit on the Traffic Safety 

Committee. We travelled throughout the province, talked to 

various community groups all over the province. We also had 

received written documents from community groups from all 

over the province. And everybody was alarmed with drinking 

and driving and other statistics, like distracted driving. Last 

year in the province, 180 people were killed on our roads and 

highways, with distracted driving and impaired driving among 

the top contributing factors in those fatal crashes. This traffic 

safety action plan addresses these and other concerns with the 

goal of reducing death and injuries of the Saskatchewan roads. 

We are hopeful these initiatives will have an immediate impact 

on driving behaviour so we can all benefit from improved 

traffic safety in the province. 

 

In 2008, Mr. Speaker, 157 fatalities, of which 31 per cent were 

distracted and 51 alcohol related, by 2012 there were 180. 

Thirty-three per cent were alcohol related. Thirty-nine were 

distracted drivers. So there has been a large increase in that 

area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth over 100,000 new people. The NDP made 

statements. We have made statements, and we believe we are in 

the right direction. In Saskatoon the population in 2006 was 

202,340 people. Since the Sask Party became the governing 

party, the population in 2013 was 284,000 people in Saskatoon, 

of which over the last two years, 60,000 people of the 284,000 

have moved into Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon this 

year we opened a new South Bridge which took six years to get 

built. Of course, the Sask Party government took less than three 

years to get funding for the new bridge to start. Mr. Speaker, 

with a growing population, the need for more schools has been 

very real. With that, the Premier made an announcement at 

Dundonald School in Saskatoon that nine new joint-use schools 

would be built using P3 bundling through SaskBuilds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the leader of the NDP asked 51 times in the House 

for a school in Hampton Village. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many times? 

 



October 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3695 

Mr. Parent: — Fifty-one times. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s a lot of times. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Yes it is. And now he doesn’t even want them. 

He’s saying that P3s will not work. Mr. Speaker, with all this 

growth, government spent more than 500 million on highways, 

and Highway 11 twinning opened last week. With this new 

spending this government will have spent, over the past six 

years, $3.7 billion on highways. That’s 76 per cent more than 

the previous six years when they were in power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, housing is also top of the agenda for our 

government. This government has committed 344 million for 

expanding housing supply by 12,600 units and repair and 

update about 24,000 units by 2016. Last year Saskatchewan led 

the nation in housing starts on a per capita basis. Since its 

creation in 2011, Headstart on a Home has provided more than 

193 million to finance the construction of 1,159 entry-level 

homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a shortage of skilled workers, that’s what we’re 

hearing out in the community. We need skilled, trained 

workers. This government has invested where we can create 

1,000 new training seats this year, which includes 300 new 

apprenticeship seats, to a total number of seats of 6,700 — an 

increase of 76 per cent since 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has been very competitive over 

the years, and our government goal is to eliminate the ABE 

[adult basic education] wait-list by the end of the term of office. 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance, SGI, estimates that just 

30 per cent of on-reserve high schools in Saskatchewan provide 

driver training education. This has severely constrained the 

ability of First Nations students to obtain drivers’ licences, 

creating barriers to mobility and employment for those students. 

 

SGI has committed to fund delivery of education programs for 

on-reserve high school students in the province. It is anticipated 

that 2,600 First Nations students will take advantage of this 

program in the first year. 

 

Immigration is an important source of labour for our province. 

Our government was successful in obtaining more than 25 per 

cent of the new provincial immigration nominees the federal 

government allocated across the country this year. This raised 

the annual cap under the Saskatchewan immigration nominee 

program to 4,450 nominations. Our government will continue 

to press the federal government to boost the number of 

nominations to 6,000 per year. 

 

Our growing manufacturing industry is an important part of the 

Saskatchewan economy, providing stable employment to over 

27,000 people and over 14 billion in annual sales. In order to 

continue this growth, Mr. Speaker, in a competitive world, the 

industry will need to adapt new innovative measures. 

 

This government will seek to partner with manufacturing 

industry to create new manufacturing centres of excellence. 

This centre will focus on enhancing competitiveness, labour 

market development and initiative so that our manufacturers 

will continue to be successful both within Canada and abroad. 

 

One specific focus on the centre will be providing 

Saskatchewan’s First Nations and Métis people with the skills 

training needed for manufacturing jobs while encouraging 

assisting employers in hiring Aboriginal workers. This new 

centre of excellence will assist Saskatchewan manufacturers as 

they continue to diversify our province’s resource-based 

economy. 

 

Our government has established a Global Transportation Hub 

as an independent and self-sustaining inland port authority. The 

Global Transportation Hub added several new clients during the 

last year including Emterra Group, the city of Regina’s 

recycling contractor, and Morguard, one of Canada’s largest 

real estate investments trust. Canadian Pacific has completed 

the transfer of its intermodal operation from downtown Regina 

is now fully operational at the Global Transportation Hub. 

 

International engagement, Saskatchewan expanding the 

economy is fuelled by exports as a growing world buys more of 

what our province has to offer. In 2012 Saskatchewan 

companies exported 32.6 billion worth of products, a 10.3 per 

cent increase from the year before, and triple the amount 

expected a decade ago. Saskatchewan is now Canada’s largest 

per capita exporter. 

 

Our government understands that in a competitive world we 

can’t take this business for granted. Accordingly we are 

working hard to engage our customers, particularly in Asia, the 

fastest growing region in the world. Our government has 

worked hard to ensure that new international markets are 

available for our industry. 

 

For the first time ever Saskatchewan uranium is moving into 

Chinese civilian market. Our government will continue its 

support for the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 

which does an outstanding job in helping Saskatchewan 

companies promote their products and increase exports 

throughout the province. 

 

Our government will also create the Saskatchewan International 

Future Scholarship to provide up to 20 students annual with the 

opportunity to study business at an international institution 

provided they return to the province after they graduate. 

 

The Premier visited Washington, DC [District of Columbia] 

where he continued our province’s efforts to push the US 

approval of the Keystone XL pipeline and promoted 

Saskatchewan innovation. 

 

These are the reasons why I ran for the Saskatchewan Party and 

why I am thrilled with what’s been taking place over the years. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne 

Speech and I will not be supporting the amendments made by 

them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Deputy House Leader has 

moved that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 



3696 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2013 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 

11:30 p.m. tomorrow . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 1:30 p.m. I 

missed a one. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3671 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3672 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3675 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3678 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3687 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3691 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3693 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3677 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


