




















































Hansard: November 12, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 11A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3929 

 November 12, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Operating Under New Rules and Procedures  

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to inform the House at this time that 

we are now operating under our new rules and proceedings as 

approved by the fifth report of the House Services Committee. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I request leave to make an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has asked for 

leave to do an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, it’s my honour to introduce Chad and 

Darlene Krikau to their Legislative Assembly. Chad and 

Darlene, along with their two children, Liam and Kalyna, own 

and operate Stream Stick Farms Ltd. near Waldheim, 

Saskatchewan. This couple received the 2013 Saskatchewan 

Outstanding Young Farmers Award at Canada’s Farm Progress 

Show last June. 

 

The outstanding young farmers program recognizes farmers and 

couples who exemplify excellence in their profession. To be 

recognized by the outstanding young farmers program is no 

small feat. Winning this provincial award is a true testament of 

the Krikaus’ hard work, innovation, and dedication to their 

business. 

 

Chad began his grain-farming career by renting 110 acres of 

land from his father in 2007. The Krikaus owned and cropped 

531 acres, steadily expanding their operations to just over 2,600 

acres today. Chad and Darlene are also active in the community. 

They are committed volunteers and strong advocates for 

agriculture, taking the time to teach kids about where their food 

comes from. 

 

I would like to thank the Krikaus for their contributions to 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry. This couple is a shining 

example of the many hard-working farm families we have in 

the province, and they are very worthy of this award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that the Krikaus will be 

attending the outstanding young farmers national event at the 

Canadian Western Agribition this week. At this event, the 

winners of each provincial Outstanding Young Farmers Award 

are honoured, and one national award winner is chosen. I would 

ask my colleagues to join me in wishing Chad and Darlene the 

best of luck at the national event later this week during 

Agribition and to welcome them to their legislature. 

 

And before I do so, joining Chad and Darlene is Franck 

Groeneweg from Edgeley, Saskatchewan. Franck and his wife, 

Kari, were Saskatchewan’s 2011 outstanding young farmers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too on 

behalf of the official opposition would like to welcome the 

Krikaus to their Legislative Assembly and express our gratitude 

and thanks for the leadership that you show in the agricultural 

community in Saskatchewan, and just want to wish you all the 

very best this week at Agribition where we’re rooting for you. 

So all the best, and welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce a group of young and really 

exceptional leaders from the University of Regina’s Students’ 

Union. They are President Nathan Sgrazzutti, Brooke Paterson, 

Mitch Simpson, and Michael Young. Brooke is the 

vice-president of external affairs, Mitch is the vice-president of 

operations and finance, and Michael is the vice-president of 

student affairs. 

 

I was able to have a meeting with these student leaders today. 

They are erudite. They are articulate. They’re inspiring. In short 

these are strong leaders for the University of Regina, but they’re 

also strong leaders for the province of Saskatchewan. It was a 

delight to meet with them. I look forward to an ongoing 

conversation. I’ll ask all members to join me in welcoming 

these young leaders to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming these student leaders from 

the University of Regina to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

In addition to the accolades bestowed upon them by the 

minister, I also understand that President Sgrazzutti is quite a 

rugby player as well. And I know from seeing them around in 

the community, Mr. Speaker, the work that they’ve done on 

behalf of students, but in particular the impressive work that 

they’ve done on behalf of two international students, Victoria 

and Favour. It was work well placed, and of course that effort 

continues. 

 

We look forward to meeting with the folks from the student 

union — President Sgrazzutti, Brooke Paterson, Mitch 

Simpson, and Mike Young — I believe next week with the 

Regina MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], and 

again to join with the minister opposite in welcoming these 

leaders to their Legislative Assembly. 



3930 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce three very special 

guests who are seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

welcome to the legislature Keri Ziegler, CEO [chief executive 

officer] of the CPA [Chartered Professional Accountant] 

Saskatchewan Joint Venture and the Institute of Chartered 

Accountants of Saskatchewan; Betty Hoffart, CEO of the 

Certified Management Accountants of Saskatchewan; and 

Regan Exner, representing the board of governors of the 

Certified General Accountants of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals will gladly give up their titles of 

their respective separate accounting organizations as they merge 

into one unifying organization, which will be made possible 

through The Accounting Profession Act which was recently 

introduced in the House. I’d ask all members to welcome these 

three individuals to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to join 

with the minister opposite and welcome these leaders within the 

accounting profession in our province to their legislature. Ms. 

Keri Ziegler, Ms. Betty Hoffart, Regan Exner, thank you for 

being here today. 

 

More importantly, thank you for being involved in the crafting 

of the Act that’s been brought forward and what it will mean to 

the profession and to the designation. I know that in many ways 

the potential is here, that Saskatchewan is able to be one of the 

first to bring forward this Act. And we recognize as well how 

important this is to the accounting professional as it interfaces 

and connects with an international community. 

 

So we commend you on your involvement in the crafting of this 

legislation. We look forward to a little bit of consultation with 

you as we move forward. But quite simply, thanks for your 

leadership here in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to join with the Minister of Advanced 

Education and recognize the leadership from the University of 

Regina but also maybe identify one person that’s sitting in the 

gallery. I know the Minister of Advanced Education called him 

Mitch Simpson, but we like to know him as Mitch The Hammer 

Simpson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mitch is turning quite red. But Mitch is a good 

friend of our two boys, Craig and Mark, and has been part of 

the TV show, a major part of the show that showed him as a 

character that has some great ideas but doesn’t quite get it done. 

And I want to tell you that that’s a TV show, so you can’t 

always believe what you see. But in this case, you can believe 

what you . . . No, no. Great, great friend of the boys, and I think 

he’s in a couple more episodes of the eight episodes that will be 

aired over the next coming Fridays on MTV. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I would like to introduce three individuals 

seated in the east gallery, two are constituents and one is a 

resident of Saskatoon also. Jordon Cooper and his son Mark 

Cooper, and anyone who reads The StarPhoenix or is on Twitter 

knows that Jordon has varied interests and enjoys instigating a 

good debate from time to time, and his son Mark who’s in grade 

8 at Westmount School. They’re great individuals in our 

community, live just a few blocks away from us. 

 

And also with them today is Chris Powell, lives in Saskatoon 

now, but anyone who speaks with Chris will hear that he’s from 

Georgia. And so he’s weathered a few Saskatchewan winters, 

and he and his family now live in Saskatoon. So I’d ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these individuals to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join the 

Minister of Agriculture and the opposition critic in welcoming 

Chad and Darlene Krikau to their Legislative Assembly. 

They’re residents of the Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency. And 

I’d also like to take the opportunity to congratulate them on 

their award as Saskatchewan Outstanding Young Farmers 

Award. As well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just take a moment to 

thank them for the other efforts that they take time out of their 

daily life to come in and communicate at different 

announcements like Agriculture in the City. I can think where 

they come in to Saskatoon and communicate to people some of 

the processes and practices that they have on their farm, and do 

their part in communicating the safe and sustainable agricultural 

production that we have here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So thank you very much for that. And I’d like all members to 

join with me in welcoming them not only to their Assembly, but 

wishing them the best of luck as they go on to the national farm 

awards. So thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for increased support for 

education. And we know that education is one of the most vital 

services that the government provides to the citizens. And we 

know that this government has failed to provide adequate 

education funding and that this government would rather talk 

about standardized testing than hear from teachers and parents 

about addressing the real needs of today’s classrooms. I’d like 

to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and a plan with the necessary resources 

to provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan 

that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 

changes, that is based on proven educational best 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3931 

practices, that is developed through consultation with the 

education sector, and that builds strong educational 

infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 

the future. 

 

[Mr. Speaker], as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever 

pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of residents of Far Reserve Road. This road is used as 

the main road into the regional landfill which is operated by a 

tripartite agreement between the communities of La Ronge, Air 

Ronge, and Lac La Ronge Indian Band. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave Far Reserve Road, which has not 

been given the proper resources by this government. The 

dust on the road is causing respiratory problems for our 

elders and community members. It is also creating poor 

visibility for drivers, as this is a safety issue, in that we 

have students walking along the side of the road, very 

dusty, to schools. The road has a high volume of traffic and 

that this is the only way to the regional dump. 

 

It is signed by many northern residents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School. The undersigned residents bring to your 

attention the following: that the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School in North Central Regina has quite literally 

fallen apart. It’s been closed since last March and is no longer 

safe for students and staff. They point out that they’ve raised 

this issue with the Sask Party government for a number of 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They point out that any school needs a gym as a place for the 

school and the community to gather together to engage in 

cultural and educational activities and to promote physical 

activity which is good for the mind, body, and spirit of all 

children. They point out that the gym at Sacred Heart has 

played an important role in the school’s efforts to become a 

literacy leader, having served as a gathering place for the very 

successful reading assemblies and reading nights. 

 

They point out that the Sacred Heart Community School is the 

largest school in North Central Regina with 450-plus students, 

75 per cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. They point 

that enrolment has increased by 100 students over the past four 

years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 

improving. And they point out that as a matter of basic fairness 

and common sense, Sacred Heart Community School needs a 

gym. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the Sask 

Party provincial government to immediately commit to the 

replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred Heart 

Community School. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens from the city of Saskatoon 

here in the fine province of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition, and the petition is in 

reference to the rental purchase option program also known as 

RPO. The family that has signed the petition and that presented 

the petitions were supposed to be proud homeowners in their 

community. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Saskatchewan 

Party government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option 

for responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

the community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by many residents of 

northern Saskatchewan, and on this particular page, it is 

primarily from the Lac La Ronge area. And I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for the Philippines 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we are blessed as a province to 

have many Filipino families calling Saskatchewan their second 

home. In fact I am blessed to have many Filipino families living 

right in my own constituency. I’ve had the pleasure of getting to 

know many of them and experiencing their legendary 

hospitality and friendship. 

 

My thoughts and prayers have been with them over the last 

several day as news of Typhoon Haiyan has filled our TV 

screens and Twitter feeds. The storm was particularly 

devastating to eastern and central coastal provinces, and it is 

reported to have affected the lives of nine million people in the 

Philippines. This disaster came only three weeks after a 

7.1-magnitude earthquake that killed hundreds. 

 

Richard Gordon, head of Philippine Red Cross, describes the 

situation on the ground in the Philippines as absolute bedlam. I 

can only imagine the difficulty of being so far from loved ones 

in their times of need. I’m pleased to see the provincial 

government has committed $250,000 in immediate aid, and the 

federal government has committed to match charitable 

donations until December 8th. 

 

As Filipino families rally to support their loved ones back 

home, I hope all members of this Assembly and all 

Saskatchewan people will rally around them so they truly feel 



3932 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

supported here in their second home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Province Boasts Lowest Unemployment Rate in Canada 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Statistics Canada 

reported in its October labour force survey that employment 

numbers have taken quite a jump in our province, with 14,900 

more people working in Saskatchewan now than this time last 

year. 

 

For the 10th straight month, Saskatchewan has held the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada at 3.6 per cent. This is well 

below the 6.9 per cent reported nationally, Mr. Speaker. In 

addition to having lower unemployment than every other 

province, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s rate is now lower than 

49 of the 50 US [United States] states. Our province’s biggest 

cities also boasted impressive job numbers, with Regina and 

Saskatoon having the two lowest unemployment rates of all 

Canadian cities at 3.6 per cent and 4.4 per cent respectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this job growth in the province indicates 

increasing opportunities for all citizens in all demographics. 

Off-reserve Aboriginal employment was up by 3,800 positions 

for nine consecutive months of year-over-year increases. 

Aboriginal youth employment was also up by 1,800. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having the strongest job market in the country is 

just another reason to promote the Saskatchewan advantage to 

the rest of the nation and the world. I would like to thank all of 

the workers and the entrepreneurs in our province for helping 

achieve these wonderful results and helping move 

Saskatchewan forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Regina Thunder Wins Canadian Championship 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that 

Saskatchewan is a hotbed of Canadian football. Our history and 

tradition of amateur and professional football runs deep in this 

province. But, Mr. Speaker, we all know that respect on the 

gridiron must be earned, and it’s certainly enhanced by winning 

a championship. 

 

The Regina Thunder were established 14 years ago to fill the 

void created by the Regina Rams’ move to the university level. 

This past weekend the Regina Thunder took their rightful place 

among Saskatchewan’s historic football programs. On 

Saturday, in their first appearance in the Canadian Bowl, the 

Regina Thunder beat the Vancouver Island Raiders 55 to 26 at 

Mosaic Stadium, capturing their first Canadian junior football 

championship and cementing their place in Saskatchewan’s rich 

football history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, special congratulations go to first-year head coach 

Scott MacAulay, who also played on the very first Thunder 

team 14 years ago. Coach MacAulay has experienced first-hand 

the ups and downs that come with starting a team from scratch, 

and he is quick to emphasize that it’s not a one-person show. He 

credits the influence of past Thunder coaches since the team’s 

inception — Randy Shaw, Dwayne Ell, and Irwin Klempner — 

as well as all of the alumni who never got a chance to 

experience a championship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in congratulating every Regina Thunder player, coach, 

alumni, parent, trainer, board member, sponsor, and volunteer 

on their very first Canadian championship. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Affordable Housing for Prince Albert  

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in the House to inform all members that construction is 

beginning on a new 30-unit rental housing project in Prince 

Albert. 

 

Like other communities across our province, Prince Albert is 

growing. With that growth comes challenges in meeting the 

need for safe and affordable housing. That’s why in our plan for 

growth, Mr. Speaker, our government committed to addressing 

the need for new, medium-density, multiple-unit housing. How 

we are doing that in part is by selling close to 300 single-family 

units in Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and Regina, and then we are 

reinvesting those proceeds into new housing in those 

communities. 

 

The addition of the 30 new units in Prince Albert will help meet 

a real need for affordable housing in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that good housing is at the heart of 

individual and community well-being, and it helps maintain a 

strong economy and a high quality of life. That’s why I am 

pleased to inform this legislature that our government, through 

the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, was able to reinvest 

$5.6 million in the new rental units in Prince Albert. This 

project, and others like it, supports our government’s goal of 

improving housing availability and affordability across our 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Local Store Wins Top Independent Grocer Award 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise today in congratulating South Hill Fine Foods on behalf of 

all the residents of Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, South Hill Fine Foods was recently awarded the 

Top Independent Grocer of the Year in the small surface 

category for 2013. The award was handed out at the 51st 

Annual Canadian Independent Grocer of the Year Awards 

Ceremony in Toronto and is the most prestigious award of the 

organization. The ceremony was held in front of a gala audience 

of over 500 leading grocers, suppliers, and distributors at the 

country’s premier grocery conference and trade show. 

 

Mr. Speaker, South Hill Fine Foods is just down the street from 

my constituency office and I can attest to the constant stream of 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3933 

customers, including my family, going in and out their doors. 

The staff are always eager to assist and also exceptionally 

friendly. It is truly a first-class neighbourhood grocery store 

where you can always feel welcome and your business 

appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Harry and Shannon Watson, Dana Lougheed, and Perry 

Chambers for their strong presence in the community and their 

dedication to top quality products and services to all of us in the 

Moose Jaw area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

4-H Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize that November is 4-H Month. 4-H is one of the 

longest running and largest youth organizations in Canada, and 

2013 marks its 100th anniversary. Mr. Speaker, for 100 years 

the 4-H program has strived to encourage individual growth and 

leadership in young people by developing self-confidence, the 

ability to make wise decisions, and a responsible attitude 

towards community service. 

 

4-H has had a prominent presence in Saskatchewan and is an 

organization which truly understands youth and their need to be 

involved, accepted, valued, and heard. There are over 200 4-H 

clubs and over 900 4-H leaders across the province, and I 

myself was a 4-H leader for over 15 years, Mr. Speaker. 

Although the 4-H program has its roots in rural Saskatchewan, 

4-H Saskatchewan serves all youth throughout the province 

who are 6 to 25 years of age and of all racial, cultural, 

economic, and social backgrounds. Mr. Speaker, our 

government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, supports 4-H 

in Saskatchewan with a $300,000 grant this year. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing 4-H and all the 

great leaders taking part in this organization across our 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Support for Hydraulic Fracturing 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not often this side of the 

House agrees with the opposition members on issues. In fact it’s 

pretty rare, Mr. Speaker. So our members were happy when the 

members of the opposition, especially the members from 

Athabasca and Regina Lakeview, voiced their support on 

hydraulic fracturing in our province. Now, Mr. Speaker, some 

of the members opposite were a little surprised by the debate 

last week. They said this had been the NDP’s [New Democratic 

Party] position for quite some time. Really? But, Mr. Speaker, 

we don’t know what the NDP’s position is on just about 

anything anymore since they’ve taken down every bit of policy 

they’ve ever had off their website. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, our government supports fracking and 

the economic development it brings to our province. It’s part of 

the reason Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in 

the country, the second lowest rate in North America. It’s part 

of the reason we’ve been able to pay down the provincial debt. 

It’s part of the reason our new hospitals, schools, and roads are 

being built across the province. Now that we know we’re on the 

same page with the members opposite on fracking, that we 

agree that it is a safe, responsible practice being done in the oil 

and gas industry, we hope they will be speaking to the federal 

leader and trying to change his opinion against our oil and gas 

industry. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Infrastructure and Funding in Prairie Spirit School Division 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just teachers, 

Mr. Speaker, that are very upset with this government’s 

approach to education. School boards are also very frustrated. 

 

The Chair of the Prairie Spirit School Division recently wrote a 

very pointed letter to the Premier. The letter outlines significant 

concerns about this government’s failure to properly consult 

and engage with elected school boards as well as front-line 

educators. It also raised concerns, Mr. Speaker, about budget 

shortfalls and this government’s failure to support local 

innovation. 

 

My question to the Premier: has he read the letter? Does he 

accept the specific criticisms that are identified, Mr. Speaker, or 

does he simply dismiss them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Leader 

of the Opposition for the question. Mr. Speaker, I think the 

local MLA and various ministers of Education have been 

discussing with trustees from this particular division, from this 

part of the province — and also with mayors and other 

community leaders and, very significantly, parents — about the 

need for a new school in Prairie Spirit, Mr. Speaker, including 

Mayor Muench and Mayor Spence who I believe are on the 

record as supporting the government’s announcement for new 

schools coming — the new joint-use school — that are 

referenced for two communities in that particular division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we note as well that this year enrolment alone up 

256 students. Mr. Speaker, we note that enrolments overall have 

increased 14 per cent in the area, that Martensville school is at 

235 per cent of capacity. 

 

We’ve also said though pretty clearly that, as we move forward 

with new schools, they will be joint-use in the truest sense of 

the word. They will share infrastructure. We will achieve 

savings on a joint school use basis just as we are in the Chinook 

School Division with the school under way, Mr. Speaker, in my 

hometown. We’ll engage with the school division certainly and 

talk to them about their specific concerns, but we’re building 

new schools there and in the member’s riding. We wish he’d be 

supportive of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



3934 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we support new schools and, as 

we’ve said, we want them done in the smartest way, the 

cheapest way, and the fastest way. And we’ll get into the 

discussion, Mr. Speaker, about the schools. 

 

But my question to the Premier was whether or not he accepts 

the criticisms that are made in this letter from the Chair of the 

school division. And one area of great concern identified in the 

letter, Mr. Speaker, has to do with funding shortfalls. Here’s 

what the board Chair says, “We are anticipating another $1.5 

million decrease to our budget next year. The strong student 

achievement results in our school division cannot be sustained 

with this ongoing funding shortfall.” The letter also says, 

“Another budget shortfall for our school division will mean 

further cuts to staff and programs despite a growing school 

population.” 

 

My question to the Premier: can he guarantee that the Prairie 

Spirit School Division will not yet face again budget cuts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again it’s important to 

check the facts of the Leader of the Opposition in question 

period. I will note though, before I do that, that the Minister of 

Education and the MLA for the area will be meeting with the 

board on the 15th of this month, I believe it is, when they’re 

there to announce a brand new school in Warman built by this 

side of the House, together with trustees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also would note for the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition that, for the first time ever, our budget provided $98 

million to Prairie Spirit, the first time ever that projected 

enrolments were recognized in a budget, Mr. Speaker — $3.6 

million increase for projected enrolments even as members 

opposite planned for decline when they were in office, part of 

the reason that we’re playing catch-up now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition to that, $13 million for supports for learning . . . 

Well they’re in the budget. The Deputy Leader’s shaking his 

head. Facts are stubborn things, Mr. Speaker, including the fact 

that since we took office, operating funding for this part of the 

province, for education there, is up 24.2 per cent. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the specific concerns raised in the 

letter by the Chair of the board of the school division, Mr. 

Speaker, those were not my words. Those were his words in a 

letter, Mr. Speaker, talking about the budget shortfall that 

they’ve experienced and what that will mean for their students 

in the coming year if they face yet another cut. 

 

Another key concern raised by the Chair, Mr. Speaker, has to 

do with the space crunch the students are facing today. Valley 

Manor Elementary School in Martensville, Mr. Speaker, is 

currently at 235 per cent capacity. By next year, Mr. Speaker, 

there will be 20 portable classrooms attached to the school. To 

put that in context, there are only 11 classrooms in the original 

school building. 

 

The Chair’s letter, Mr. Speaker, makes it clear that they need 

and support a new school, but they also state, Mr. Speaker, that 

that’s not enough with respect to the current crunch faced and 

the innovative solutions that they have brought forward. 

Something needs to be done now. However, Mr. Speaker, when 

this board brought forward an innovative solution, it was simply 

dismissed by the ministry. My question to the Premier: why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is a valid debate to have 

in the legislature. I would hope again that the Leader of the 

Opposition might recognize the fact that this government has 

built a new school in Warman for middle years. The expansion 

at the Martensville High School is under way, and it’s going to 

be completed, Mr. Speaker, within a year. And significantly that 

we’ve just announced the construction of effectively 18 new 

schools, and two of the joint-use schools for this area exactly, 

and they will use an innovative partnership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will also note that a week ago, that member stood up on 

education issues in his Speech from the Throne, and he 

intimated this: that in The Battlefords there were kids wearing 

winter coats in classes because, and I quote, “The heat was 

turned down as a result of budget constraints by this provincial 

government.” These are his words. We also have a letter from a 

school division, Mr. Speaker, from the director of education for 

Living Sky School Division. It says this: 

 

My understanding is that in the legislature on November 

5th, inaccurate information about Living Sky School 

Division was reported as factual. The implication is that 

students are currently in classrooms in North Battleford 

with coats on because the board of education has instructed 

staff that the heat be turned down. This is not the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so with respect to this issue or the one we’re 

debating today . . . Well they noted by the way that this did 

happen in the past, in the long past when members opposite 

were in power, Mr. Speaker, when no schools were being built 

and education was underfunded by the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the situation the students 

experienced in The Battlefords area were reported, Mr. Speaker. 

What we see here with the Premier’s response is really the 

take-home theme in the letter written by the Chair of the school 

division. And it’s that this Premier and this government, Mr. 

Speaker, has a dismissive approach. When a concern is raised 

— legitimate concerns about funding, about buildings, about 

local innovation, Mr. Speaker — it’s just dismissed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This Prairie Spirit School Division proposed a Sprung building 

approach to address the extreme space crunch that they have in 

Martensville. A Sprung building is already going ahead in 

Martensville High School and will house the largest physical 

activity complex in the entire province. Here’s what the Chair 

says, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: 

 

At a time when effective practices and innovation are 

being encouraged, this approach was dismissed by the 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3935 

ministry. As a result, our students and staff members 

continue to struggle in cramped quarters. Prairie Spirit 

would encourage the government to reconsider this 

decision and continue the discussion to find an innovative 

solution to our urgent need in Martensville. 

 

Not my words, Mr. Speaker — the Chair of the school division. 

My question to the Premier: will you listen to these concerns 

and support an innovative solution for the space needs in 

Martensville? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — He just said, not my words, but his words. 

He said, Mr. Speaker, in the Legislative Assembly, on his feet, 

in this school in North Battleford that “The heat was turned 

down as a result of budget constraints forced by this provincial 

government.” When faced with the facts from that school 

division, I would expect that Leader of the Opposition to stand 

up and say that he was wrong, that he ought not to have said it 

without checking his facts. 

 

And with respect to the Leader of the Opposition’s question, 

he’s saying, why won’t the government support an innovative 

plan to build schools in this area? And it’s precisely what this 

government is doing, Mr. Speaker: 18 schools, nine joint-use 

P3s, Mr. Speaker, the kind of joint-use that actually achieves 

savings. In Alberta it saved a quarter of a billion dollars in 

terms of the school approach they took on bundling and also on 

joint-use facilities, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to move ahead. In 

terms of this particular riding, this particular school board area, 

we are building new schools, we are expanding schools, with 

two more to come, two more joint-use schools. When will 

members opposite stop playing politics and support new 

schools in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Health Care Conditions and Staffing 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Bob Laurie had a letter in the paper last week 

saying: 

 

. . . our acute-care and long-term care facilities have been 

reduced to embarrassingly inadequate staffing levels, 

infection control has become compromised due to 

non-replacement of environmental service workers, and we 

appear to be moving away from the goal of providing 

high-quality, compassionate care to patients and residents. 

 

To the minister: does he agree with Bob Laurie’s concerns or 

does he stubbornly dismiss them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we certainly take the words of Mr. Laurie very 

seriously, Mr. Speaker. We take that under advisement as we 

look to build budgets for our health regions, Mr. Speaker, 

knowing that our health regions have received significant 

increases to employ full-time and part-time workers across the 

system, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will know from the 

discussion in this legislature over the last number of years when 

we looked just at long-term care facilities — knowing that 

we’re dealing with the same number of long-term care facilities, 

Mr. Speaker, the same number of beds, Mr. Speaker, as we 

were when the members opposite were government — there are 

now 700 more full-time equivalents working in long-term care, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working very hard to address issues around 

staffing and the quality of care that we can provide, Mr. 

Speaker, and we are very pleased to stand on our record in this 

regard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Health minister can keep 

dismissing those concerns and keep questioning the stories that 

are coming to light, but we keep hearing more and more details 

that show how real, how real those concerns are. 

 

The opposition learned over the weekend that there’s a rodent 

infestation at the cancer clinic here in Regina. To the minister 

. . . And the member from Estevan laughs. To the minister: is he 

aware of this, and what is he doing to ensure patient safety is 

not compromised? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think one only has to look to this 

government’s record when it comes to the proper staffing levels 

within our health care system, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite will know that in the last days of the NDP 

government, it was well known through the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses and other organizations that we were short 800 

nurses in this province, registered nurses in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did this government do? It signed a 

partnership, a historic partnership with SUN [Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses]. It worked towards addressing the 800 gap in 

RNs [registered nurse], Mr. Speaker. And not only did we do 

that, Mr. Speaker, we exceeded that by over 200, Mr. Speaker, 

to the point where we have more than 1,000 RNs working in the 

system than when the members opposite were the government. 

So we don’t dismiss these issues. In fact we have shown 

examples, Mr. Speaker, of where we have addressed this. 

 

With regard to the Cancer Agency issue, Mr. Speaker, I was not 

aware of this but we’ll certainly be looking into this with the 

Cancer Agency. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Bob Laurie’s letter referenced embarrassingly 

inadequate staffing levels and significant concerns about 

infection control due to the non-replacement of cleaning staff. 

We heard concerns about this from retired nurse Suzanne 

Stewart. She said the hospital was filthy when she had surgery, 

and her family had to clean her hospital room and her bathroom 



3936 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

because the staff was stretched too thin. And now we know 

from internal documents that there is indeed an infestation of 

mice at the cancer clinic. To the minister: has he heard enough 

to finally admit that this government has created significant 

problems in our health care system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re always, Mr. 

Speaker, taking these issues very seriously. That’s why, as I’ve 

mentioned previously, Mr. Speaker, we knew that there was a 

large gap in terms of the number of RNs that we need in this 

province, and we worked hard to address that. We will ongoing, 

with future partnerships with an organization like the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that within long-term care itself, Mr. 

Speaker, there are 14 per cent more nurses working in 

long-term care today than there was in 2007. Important to 

know, Mr. Speaker, when you keep in mind the fact that we’re 

working with roughly the same number of long-term care 

facilities and the same number of beds that the NDP were when 

they were government, when the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, elected them . . . or defeated them, Mr. Speaker. A 10 

per cent increase in the overall staff within long-term care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working hard to address the other provider 

unions as well, ensuring that we do have the proper complement 

of staff, Mr. Speaker. And the budget allocations by this 

government in six years I think have demonstrated, Mr. 

Speaker, that we are taking this issue seriously and addressing 

it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s disappointing that no matter 

how many stories come forward and how many concerns are 

raised, this government continues with its no-cause-for-alarm 

attitude. Last week we heard about a toddler in the Outlook 

hospital putting her hands into an uncovered container of dirty 

needles that had been left on the floor. Both of her hands were 

poked several times by the used needles. The 19-month-old 

little girl is now on antibiotics and she will have to undergo 

repeated blood tests over the next two years to screen for 

infections. 

 

If mice in our cancer clinic aren’t a big enough deal for this 

government, surely this story is. To the minister: has he heard 

enough to finally admit that this government has created 

significant problems in our health care system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the issue that 

the member opposite raised is certainly one of great concern, 

the situation in Outlook, Mr. Speaker. We took immediate steps 

once we were notified, as did the region, Mr. Speaker. The 

biohazard containers in this treatment area were removed 

immediately, Mr. Speaker. The region undertook a region-wide 

audit to ensure that other types of biohazard containers that 

contained sharps were not in an area that would be accessed in 

this way, Mr. Speaker. 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health issued last week a 

province-wide safety alert to every single health region in this 

province as well as the Cancer Agency, instructing them to take 

immediate action to audit all facilities. They will be reporting 

back in 30 days on this matter, Mr. Speaker. This is an issue of 

grave concern, Mr. Speaker, and we are working hard to 

address these issues. We take them very seriously. We do not 

dismiss them as the members opposite would have us do, Mr. 

Speaker, or have us believe that we do. These are issues of great 

concern. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Response to Futures Fund Report 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, late last week the government 

accidentally leaked its own report on the Saskatchewan futures 

fund. My question is to the Premier: will he listen to this report 

and will he commit to putting a cap on the provincial 

government’s reliance on non-renewable resource revenue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 

the member for Regina Lakeview for the question. This is very 

much under consideration. To the point of the question, there 

were several recommendations — 10 in fact — in Peter 

MacKinnon’s report. We want to thank him for his work. It was 

a good piece of work. He’s looked at a number of different 

models from around the world and it appears to me that he is 

favouring — as many would, I expect — a Norwegian model 

with a few changes to it to make it a bit more 

Saskatchewan-friendly, if I could use that term, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re going to consider the report very carefully and there will 

be a formal response from the government in due course. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have been clear that we 

want the provincial government to reduce its overreliance on 

the one-time, non-renewable resource revenues. And we also 

want the provincial government to establish a proper savings 

fund. Saskatchewan people know that just because you’re still 

paying off your mortgage, it doesn’t mean that you don’t also 

save up for your children’s education. That’s just common 

sense. And that’s exactly the kind of smart growth approach 

that we’ve been advocating, and we’re pleased to see that Peter 

MacKinnon also calls for that in his report. 

 

My question is to the Premier: will he listen to this report and 

will he commit to establishing a savings fund in the next 

budget? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I think it’s 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, to look at the history of this particular 

issue. There was the Heritage Fund in the province of 

Saskatchewan which was ended in 1992 after successive 

administrations didn’t use the fund for its proper intended 

purposes. I think we’d all agree on that. 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3937 

I also credit the New Democratic Party. In the last election 

campaign they proposed a futures fund, Mr. Speaker. And after 

the campaign, although we were honoured to win an historic 

mandate, we weren’t afraid to look at ideas presented by 

members opposite, to potentially implement them. And that’s 

the genesis for the Peter MacKinnon report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the New Democrats who went through that 

historically bad campaign for their side of things and the leader, 

the interim leader who just asked the question and the current 

leader, have yet failed to say that they were incorrect about 

anything, that there were any other ideas. It really was a 

snowstorm and a whole bunch of reasons why they lost. 

They’re the political equivalent of The Fonz, Mr. Speaker. They 

can’t say that they’re wrong — without of course being as cool 

as The Fonz, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On this side of the House, we’ll look at these ideas. Mr. 

MacKinnon has now tabled his report as a result of the NDP 

campaigning on this idea, Mr. Speaker. And in the budget or 

before the budget, we’ll more formally respond to the report. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Contributions of the Film Industry and Support for 

Creative Industries 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a new report out on the 

economic impact analysis of the film industry, and it’s an 

incredibly positive report, Mr. Speaker. In just the past five 

years, the film industry has contributed half a billion dollars to 

the province — but it’s not to our province, Mr. Speaker. That 

half a billion dollars of economic benefit went to the province 

of Manitoba. To the minister: is the government envious? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, we are well aware of the 

report out on the film industry in the province of Manitoba. 

We’ve chosen a different public policy path here in the province 

of Saskatchewan. We have in place today, Mr. Speaker, a fund, 

a $5 million fund that will benefit all the creative industries in 

our province. What I would note for the hon. member, in the 

province of Manitoba the last time I checked, they were running 

in excess of a $500 million deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they increased their provincial sales tax this last 

budget from 7 per cent to 8 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, a single 

mother in Manitoba making $25,000 or less pays almost 400 

per cent more in provincial income tax in the province of 

Manitoba than here in Saskatchewan. I think that’s better public 

policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — The minister should tell that to all the creative 

people who had to leave this province because of their policy 

decision. Mr. Speaker, this government drove the film industry 

out of our province. It was a reckless decision. It not only hurt 

our arts and culture scene but it left our economy even less 

diversified. 

 

The chamber of commerce says our economy is losing $45 

million every year as a result. Meanwhile in neighbouring 

Manitoba, their economy is reaping the benefits of wise 

investments — half a billion dollars in just five years. A small 

investment in the form of a film tax credit means a big payoff. 

 

To the minister: will he admit this government made a mistake, 

and will he commit to restoring the film employment tax credit? 

 

The Speaker: — Before we proceed, I would ask for members 

to quiet down on their private conversations or take them 

outside of the Chamber. I recognize the Minister for Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

first and foremost, the chamber report is just flat out wrong. It’s 

false economics, Mr. Speaker. They continue to quote the 

number $44 million a year in production value. That’s 

production value, Mr. Speaker, of which only 60 per cent is 

spent in the province of Saskatchewan. The other 40 per cent is 

spent on the procurement of goods and services outside the 

province of Saskatchewan where no taxes are paid to this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Secondly, we have followed a different public policy path in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. I know the former critic said that 

nobody in the creative industry contributes to our economy 

except the film industry. We take a different view on this side, 

Mr. Speaker. We believe that publishers, the visual artists, the 

theatrical producers, the musical producers, as well as the film 

industry . . . Well the member for Saskatoon Riversdale said 

that on budget day. I can quote it. I can read it for the hon. 

member for Saskatoon Centre if he would like. Matter of fact, 

why don’t I put it in the record? “. . . is not going to stimulate 

film production here in Saskatchewan . . . It does nothing for 

the economy and that’s the bottom line,” Mr. Speaker. The 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale said that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the film industry contributed $74 

million to Manitoba in 2009. Last year it contributed $130 

million. Premier Selinger has said, “It shows the industry is 

maturing and gaining credibility not only in North America but 

internationally as well.” In fact Premier Selinger says it’s a sign 

that the province’s investments in the media industries are 

paying off. To the minister again: will he admit this government 

made a mistake and will he commit to restoring the film 

employment tax credit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, here we have yet again another example of the NDP 

suggesting that there’s money for anything and everything in 

the provincial budget, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, last year 

on budget day the member for Lakeview, the former interim 

leader of the NDP, said there should be more money for film. 

And where would we take it? We’d take it from agriculture, 



3938 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

from municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we know that agriculture is still the backbone of our 

economy in this province. Secondly, we know the infrastructure 

deficit that exists in both urban and rural municipalities, Mr. 

Speaker. We are not going to take money away from agriculture 

and municipalities with respect to infrastructure needs, Mr. 

Speaker, to chase provincial tax credits that is a race to the 

bottom, Mr. Speaker. We know the province of Manitoba has 

engaged in this race in competition with Ontario and Quebec 

and British Columbia, of which the province of British 

Columbia is spending in excess of $400 million in provincial 

tax credits this year, Mr. Speaker, and they’re at 80 per cent 

unemployment. We’ve chosen a different public policy path. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, when this government chose to 

drive the film industry out of our province, it badly hurt our 

province’s arts and culture scene, and that is discouraging. That 

decision also left our province’s economy even less diversified, 

and we’re losing $45 million a year, every year, as a result. And 

that’s why the chamber of commerce is even frustrated by this 

decision. Now we look at Manitoba where they are reaping the 

benefits of a smart investment, yet this government continually, 

stubbornly dismisses concerns about its decision to scrap the 

credit. To the minister: why won’t the government just admit it 

made a mistake, and why won’t it fix it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just to give the hon. 

member some advice on the other side, if you’re looking for an 

economic model to follow in Canada, I don’t suggest you 

follow Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that NDP 

government in Manitoba is running in excess of a $500 million 

deficit, Mr. Speaker. They increased their provincial sales tax 

from 7 to 8 per cent in this last budget. A single mother in 

Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, making $25,000 or less, pays almost 

400 per cent more in provincial income tax in the province of 

Manitoba than she would pay in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. We think that’s better public policy. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Supporting Disaster Relief for the Philippines 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, members of this House, as is the case with people right 

across our province, all over the world, are very familiar with 

the devastating effects of Typhoon Haiyan, that that typhoon 

has left the country completely devastated. Mr. Speaker, I note 

that the city of Tacloban, a community about the size of Regina, 

is virtually flattened. A city like ours, like our capital city, 

utterly destroyed, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine? 

 

At least 10,000 people are dead as a result of the storm. 

Thousands of homes and businesses have been demolished. 

And survivors now — and we’ve seen this unfold on our news 

on telecasts and on televisions on a daily basis — survivors are 

desperate for food, water, and shelter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the president of the Philippines, Benigno Aquino, 

has declared a state of national calamity, and that’s exactly what 

this is. It is a calamity, national in scope, Mr. Speaker; we 

would argue international in its scale. This tragedy has been 

keenly felt here in our province. We feel it because 

Saskatchewan today has a stronger connection to the 

Philippines than ever before, and the connection has always 

been strong. 

 

In the last three years alone, close to 10,000 of the newcomers 

settling in our province have come from the Philippines. They 

have settled in our major cities, but they have also settled in 

smaller communities in rural and urban Saskatchewan. They 

have enriched our province beyond measure, and we hope that 

others will follow them. 

 

Because the Filipino community in this province is comprised 

of such great citizens, hard-working, community-minded people 

who are helping build Saskatchewan, it is understandable that 

the outpouring from Saskatchewan people has been to the 

degree that it has been already since the typhoon struck. It’s 

because they are our friends and neighbours. We work with 

them. We do business with them. We socialize with them. We 

worship with them. And today in their hour of need as they face 

heartbreak and uncertainty, we want to be there for them. We 

want to console them. We want to let them know that this 

province is standing by them, that we support them. Because 

this is Saskatchewan, and when our friends and neighbours are 

in trouble, we come to their aid. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we announced that the Government of 

Saskatchewan will donate $250,000 to the disaster relief effort 

in the Philippines. The money will go to the Red Cross, an 

organization that provides, as we well know, invaluable service 

and help when natural disasters strike. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to see other provinces and the 

federal government contributing to the relief effort. We note, 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government has also said they will 

match the donations of individuals and businesses from our 

country to go to the relief effort. We also note that thousands of 

individual Canadians are already standing up for the people of 

the Philippines. They are already giving, knowing perhaps that 

the federal government was matching it, but arguably many 

didn’t. They did this long before I think the federal government 

made their announcement. 

 

We can only imagine, Mr. Speaker, what the great Filipino 

community is going through today in Saskatchewan as they 

think about their family and friends at home because we can see 

what their family and friends are going through in the wake of 

this storm. 

 

Yesterday I had a chance to speak with both the Filipino consul 

general and with the Filipino ambassador to our country, His 

Excellency Leslie Gatan. And, Mr. Speaker, I indicated to both 

of them that our province was going to be there for them. We 

offered our prayers, we offered our assistance and anything else 

we can possibly do to bring relief. 

 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3939 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the House to 

join me in conveying our full support and best wishes to the 

Filipino people and our commitment to not break faith with 

Filipinos who live here in our province and contribute much, as 

they also are facing this tragedy from their homeland. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 

Premier for those remarks. And as I said earlier on in the 

proceedings of the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

pleased that the province is able to make this contribution of 

$250,000 to assist with the relief efforts. 

 

And, you know, the remarks that the Premier said about the 

contributions that Filipinos have made to our province are 

absolutely true. For generations in the earlier waves of 

immigration, Filipinos have contributed greatly to 

Saskatchewan. But as well in more recent years, Mr. Speaker, 

we have seen many Filipinos choose Saskatchewan as home 

and make huge contributions. And I know in my . . . as other 

members of the Assembly know, after being in a Filipino home 

and experiencing their hospitality, their kindness, their warmth 

and spirit, their generosity, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we 

as a province recognize their contributions and help out in a 

way that we can. 

 

Many Filipinos, Mr. Speaker, are people of very strong faith, 

whether it’s Catholic or whether it’s Protestant. And in a 

Christian tradition we know, Mr. Speaker, that we often extend 

prayers to other people for their care and hoping for 

intervention. And it’s one thing for us to do that, for me to do 

that as a non-Filipino, but when it is someone who is thinking 

of home, thinking of relatives, uncertain about their 

whereabouts or their safety, thinking about home communities, 

Mr. Speaker, we know how it’s even more important to have 

those prayers, but it’s also important to have action, and faith 

without works is dead. 

 

So it’s appropriate that while we also extend our prayers, we 

also extend some action. And that’s why I’m, as I said before, 

pleased to see the province stepping up in this way and making 

a contribution of $250,000. So with that I would thank the 

government for doing that, and on behalf of the opposition I 

extend our best wishes and our prayers to those who are worried 

about loved ones and worried about home. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 101 through 184. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

101 to 184. 

 

[14:30] 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 

112, An Act respecting the Accounting Profession and the 

Institute of Chartered Professional Accountants of 

Saskatchewan and making consequential amendments to other 

Acts referred to as The Accounting Profession Act. 

 

The provisions in this bill, Mr. Speaker, will establish a new 

self-regulating body called the Institute of Chartered 

Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan, CPA Sask. This bill 

will merge the chartered accountants, CAs; certified 

management accountants, CMAs; and certified general 

accountants, CGAs into one profession. The proposed Act 

would grant a new common CPA designation to all CAs, 

CMAs, and CGAs in Saskatchewan that are in good standing. 

This Act would replace The Chartered Accountants Act, 1986; 

The Management Accountants Act; The Certified Management 

Accountants Act, which was Bill 27 of 1999-2000 not yet 

proclaimed, Mr. Speaker; and The Certified General 

Accountants Act, 1994. These Acts would be repealed with the 

proclamation of the new Act. 

 

CAs, CMAs, and CGAs together represent all of the 

professional accountants in Saskatchewan, with approximately 

4,400 members and 970 students. The merger is supported by 

these groups. Extensive consultation was conducted by the three 

existing accounting bodies with their membership, and the 

supportive vote to merge resulted. This merger is part of a 

broader initiative to merge provincial and national professional 

accounting associations across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of regulatory and economic 

benefits of a merger. CPA Sask will operate under a new 

integrated certification program that is internationally 

recognized. The new program will combine the best of the 

existing programs. Unification of the accounting profession 

creates a modern and streamlined regulatory regime for 

Saskatchewan’s professional accountants, reflecting the best 

practices of existing organizations, including codes of 

professional conduct, practice inspection, and disciplinary 

processes. 

 

An accounting profession and financial regulatory system that 

is internationally recognized as being robust, competitive, and 

consistent will better support Saskatchewan’s economic 

objectives. Professional accountants play an invaluable role in 

Saskatchewan’s economy. Major capital investments and 

financial transactions made in Saskatchewan involve 

professional accountants. 

 

Introductions of this Act resulting in the merger and a modern, 

streamlined regulatory regime will have benefits to the public 

through the assurance that CPAs are trained, licensed, and 

regulated by the accounting profession to use accounting, 

auditing, and assurance standards published by Chartered 



3940 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

Professional Accountants of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill also provides protection to the consumer 

in that they can feel assured that accountants are qualified to 

provide a service in their designated specialty. The provisions 

are supported by the CPA transitional steering committee 

representing the three existing accounting bodies in 

Saskatchewan. The main provisions of the bill, Mr. Speaker, are 

as follows. 

 

Establishing CPA Saskatchewan as a corporation and providing 

for the transition of CAs, CMAs, and CGAs, as registrants of 

CPA Sask. Next, setting out bylaw-making abilities. Approval 

of bylaws will coincide with the proclamation of the Act. 

 

Providing for the registration and licensing of both members 

and firms. Firms will be granted a licence to provide audit and 

assurance services where one or more members of a firm meet 

the requirements for licensing. Licensing requirements will be 

prescribed through regulatory bylaws. All rights currently 

available to members will be retained. 

 

Reserving the practice of professional accounting to licensed 

CPAs. This means that only licensed CPAs will be able to issue 

audit, review, and other reports on financial statements, 

attesting that they are in accordance with CPA Canada 

standards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rationale is that only CPAs are trained and 

regulated to perform work in accordance with CPA Canada 

standards. The public can be assured that service is based on 

rigorous standards from licensed and regulated professional 

accountants. Mr. Speaker, this will help to also protect the 

consumers that rely on accountants. By employing a CPA, the 

consumer can feel comforted that they are working with a 

qualified specialist. 

 

I should also mention that main provisions, Mr. Speaker, also 

include protecting the use of the CPA designation and the use of 

the title professional accountant for CPAs; setting fines to 

protect title designations to not more than 5,000, 10,000, and 

$20,000 for a first, second, and subsequent offence; providing 

for fines in disciplinary matters of up to $50,000 to allow the 

CPAs the ability to levy an appropriate fine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill contains transitional provisions to effect 

the merger. For example CPAs will be required to use their 

legacy designations — that is, CA, CMA, and CGA — in 

tandem with the new CPA designation for a period of 10 years 

after the Act comes into force. This was identified as a critical 

aspect of the unification proposal that was agreed upon by the 

CA, CGA, and CMA members in Saskatchewan. With the 

repeal of the existing Acts, Mr. Speaker, consequential 

amendments in the bill will ensure references to these Acts and 

to CA, CMA, and CGA designations in other legislation and 

regulations are replaced by new references under this proposed 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act will not be proclaimed until the regulatory 

bylaws have been approved. Work is under way with the CPA 

steering committee to ensure the regulatory bylaws are available 

for approval on a timely basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 112, The 

Accounting Profession Act. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act be now read a 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to, on behalf of the official opposition, certainly participate in 

the debate around Bill 112. 

 

I think it’s important to note that from our perspective that we 

obviously know that many of the firms that were indicated by 

the Act or involved by the Act did have some consultation with 

us as the opposition. I understood that they also consulted with 

the government. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that this is exactly the approach that we in the 

opposition want to take when it comes to the growth of 

Saskatchewan overall. 

 

Where there’s opportunity and where there’s good 

collaboration, where there’s good co-operation and where 

there’s good information that’s involving a number of agencies 

or boards, and in this case professions, when we talk about the 

future of Saskatchewan, we in the opposition want to see that 

kind of effort undertaken. And there’s no question from our 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, that we see Bill 112, The Accounting 

Profession Act, which is quite frankly a very simple approach, 

in combining all the skills, combining all the value of each of 

the different three bodies in the province into one body that is 

going to be, as the minister alluded to, robust, competitive, and 

competent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you look at the chartered accountants 

themselves. And over time, some of my involvement in 

government and certainly in opposition, is there were many 

occasions when we were in government where we would go sit 

with a number of accountants in the different boards that were 

out there and the different folks that were involved with the 

accounting profession. And, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really, 

really important is that these professional people gave us 

invaluable advice on a number of fronts. And I can remember 

meeting with a number of these organizations at the Hotel 

Saskatchewan, in which we talked about some of the challenges 

that the province had, some of the issues that the province had 

to deal with and, Mr. Speaker, we also sought their advice on 

how we spend our money wisely. 

 

So there’s no question whether you’re a certified general 

accountant or whether you’re a chartered accountant or whether 

you’re a certified management accountant, these organizations 

and these groups have contributed a great deal to our province, 

not only in the past, but certainly I relish their role in the future 

because these are professional people, professional people that 

have contributed a great deal to the business community but 

have also contributed a great deal to the province when it comes 

to advising the province on how best to spend their resources 

and how best to position the province overall to ensure good, 

solid, intelligent growth for many, many years to come. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at the first blush at this particular bill, we in 

the opposition certainly applaud the efforts of the folks that are 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3941 

involved in this profession by coming forward and sharing the 

information, not only with the government but with the official 

opposition. And I often maintained to a number of groups and 

organizations out there that a well-informed opposition is just as 

effective as a well-informed government. 

 

And here, Mr. Speaker, is a very good point raised by the 

accounting profession in the province where they, again being 

very smart people, went to both the government and the 

opposition and said, look this is what we think is a great idea. 

We think it’s going to make Saskatchewan a better place to do 

business. And certainly from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, we 

in the opposition always relish that role that certain 

organizations and professional people bring to the Assembly, 

and in this case the accountants. We encouraged other 

organizations to follow the lead of the accountants and come to 

the Assembly, come to the official opposition and share with us 

some of your dreams and aspirations on how we can make 

Saskatchewan a better and stronger province. And the 

accountants done this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s one of the reasons why I would like to read into the 

record the letter that was given to the government and certainly 

to the opposition. And the purpose of reading this letter, Mr. 

Speaker, is to give credit where credit is due — to give it to the 

leaders within the accounting industry that on many occasions 

gave us when we were in government some very good advice 

and gave us some very sound, strategic advice, which, you 

know, on many, many occasions we took. Now here they are 

once again, Mr. Speaker, coming to the Assembly with some 

very sound, wise investment, some very sound strategies. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that the history of the accountants, whether 

it involves any one of the three organizations that the minister 

alluded to, that they indeed have given some sound advice over 

the years, and that’s advice that we ought to take. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to read for the record this particular 

letter, and it’s, again, a letter from the three organizations that 

are impacted by this particular bill. And the bill is dated 

November 7th, 2013: 

 

Subject: Unification Legislation Introduced in the 

Saskatchewan Legislature 

 

Dear Member: 

 

The CPA Saskatchewan Joint Venture is pleased to 

announce that the provincial legislation to formalize the 

unification of the three accounting bodies in Saskatchewan 

was introduced today in the Saskatchewan Legislature. The 

legislation, The Accounting Profession Act, outlines the 

standards that will define CPA Saskatchewan as a 

professional self-governing body. 

 

Keri Ziegler, CA, CEO of the CPA Saskatchewan Joint 

Venture, noted that the new unified body will benefit the 

public by eliminating confusion over the qualifications of 

the different designations for accountants and by 

improving the standards of the profession. 

 

“Through this unification initiative, we have brought 

together the best qualities of each of the different 

predecessor organizations. Our members will benefit from 

the best of all three worlds,” said Ms. Ziegler. 

 

An essential component of the unification agreement is a 

transitional measure known as tagging. Future graduates of 

the new CPA certification program will simply use the title 

“CPA” after their names. However, current members of the 

predecessor associations will distinguish their different 

qualifications by using “CPA, CA,” “CPA, CMA” or 

“CPA, CGA.” The tagging will be mandatory for 10 years; 

after that point, use of legacy designations will be optional. 

 

Ms. Ziegler thanked officials in the Ministry of Finance 

and Ministry of Justice for their assistance in bringing the 

legislation forward. 

 

“Many people have invested a great deal of time and effort 

to bring unification to fruition. I want to thank everyone 

involved, both in the organizations and in government, for 

all their hard work and dedication.” 

 

A number of other steps must still be taken before the 

unification is officially completed. Until the bill is enacted 

and comes into force in Saskatchewan, the three existing 

accounting bodies will continue to cooperate fully with the 

competent authorities to ensure a smooth transition to the 

new organization. Until the new CPA legislation in 

Saskatchewan is enacted, CA, CMA and CGA members 

are required to use their current designations without the 

tagging. 

 

Unification of the accounting profession continues to 

progress across the rest of Canada. Recently CGA 

Manitoba and CGA Ontario announced that they are 

joining the discussions. Now all 40 of the accounting 

bodies in Canada are either unified or participating in talks 

to unite under Chartered Professional Accountants. 

 

We will continue to keep you updated as things progress, 

and will be posting information as it becomes available to 

our websites. 

 

Regards, 

 

Rick Peddle, FCA 

ICAS President 

 

Gayle Holman, FCMA 

CMA SK President 

 

Mike Lawton, CGA 

CGA SK President 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I think is really important is from the 

industry perspective, they have forwarded that particular letter 

to their stakeholders. And I think it’s important for 

Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan and the business 

community and the corporate sector and certainly the CBO 

[community-based organization] sector and the municipal 

sector, the list goes on and on and on, so those organizations 

that will be impacted on a positive note, Mr. Speaker, by the 

unification effort of this particular industry. 



3942 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s important is that again, from my 

perspective, having these discussions with the accountants and 

their proposal, their idea, their thrust, their intelligence, I think 

it’s really important for the people of Saskatchewan to know 

that the opposition themselves are saying, thanks so much. 

Thanks so much for the updates. That makes a world of 

difference when you have an intelligent approach to a problem 

that we think we can fix together by engaging the opposition. 

 

Now one of the things that we ought to know is that as we go 

through the legislation, this bill being proposed today, we have 

the opportunity as the opposition to look at the bill closely, to 

work with the industry impacted, to seek advice from some of 

the other organizations that may have some questions, to talk to 

the municipal sector, to talk to the business people, to talk to a 

number of agencies that may have some good ideas which they 

want to raise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think overall, you look at the immediate reaction of the 

opposition. We think that this is a great first step. It’s a great 

idea. It comes from intelligent sources. And what is best for 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that we have to embrace those 

that come forward with some good unification efforts to provide 

some intelligent services and make sure that Saskatchewan 

benefits from for years and years to come. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important, what’s important, 

Mr. Speaker, is that this is also part of the smart-growth strategy 

that we in the NDP talk about. By making sure that we position, 

make sure that we position our industries that can make a 

significant difference, that could provide some intelligent 

direction that we engage in, and we listen to them, Mr. Speaker. 

And that we listen to them. Because after all, that’s the reason 

why we’re in this Assembly, is to ensure that we listen to 

people and bring forward and support positive change. 

 

Now our new leader, Mr. Speaker, has talked about making sure 

we do the right thing, making sure we do the common sense 

thing. And when the government comes forward with things 

that make sense, Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to give our 

support to the particular effort and to do research to make sure 

that there is no hidden surprises by the Sask Party government. 

 

That’s one of the reasons why at the outset we say, this is a 

great idea. So we want to learn more. We want to be supportive. 

And we want to tell the accountants, bravo. We want to tell all 

the organizations, good for you for bringing forward this kind 

of legislation and these kinds of ideas to ensure that your 

industry can function 100 per cent, to ensure that Saskatchewan 

is well served. 

 

And the words again, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll echo, I think are 

really, really important, is to make the industry, the accounting 

industry, robust, competitive, and competent. I think those are 

three words I think absolutely everybody understands. And, Mr. 

Speaker, from the opposition perspective, we think this 

certainly ties in with our vision for smart growth in 

Saskatchewan, something that we think that we ought to 

support and certainly are favourably looking at supporting, this 

Bill No. 112. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at the 4,400 members and there is, I 

would say, no question in our mind that as these services 

become more and more available, there’s more and more 

industries and businesses that are going to need these services. 

 

So when you see three solid groups working together to make 

their services to industry, to companies, and to a number of 

CBOs and to different organizations become more streamlined, 

more competitive, more robust, more competent, then who 

wins, Mr. Speaker? Who wins? The people of Saskatchewan. 

Who wins are the accountants that have brought this idea 

forward. And who wins overall is the future of our province, the 

younger generation, when some of these positive developments 

happen and it strengthens our province for many, many years. 

That’s who the benefit would be felt by, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

certainly something that we in the opposition would support. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no question that when I talk about 

the history of the accountants and the letter that they’ve sent to 

each of their members, the general direction and thrust of what 

they’re trying to do within this particular bill, that there is a lot 

of good, common sense concepts and approaches with this 

particular bill. And we want to take our hat off to the three 

organizations that are impacted. 

 

Now we want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that this particular 

government does not make a mess of things because we 

obviously applaud this particular effort. And again from the 

opposition’s perspective, we’re going to be having more and 

more discussions with different groups that may be impacted, 

seeking their advice. It’s nothing . . . I don’t think we’re too 

alarmed with what the thrust of the bill is, but we certainly want 

to seek advice. And, Mr. Speaker, in this particular business as 

MLAs, seeking more advice, getting more input, Mr. Speaker, 

is not a major problem nor is it an impediment to the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is simply allowing us the time to tell the public, 

the people of Saskatchewan that on this particular bill the 

concept is fairly clear. Industry supports it. The industry that 

it’s impacted, the accountants, they put in all their three 

organizations into one organization. And their idea is to make 

sure that the people understand their services, they have the 

same qualification, and it ends confusion. It may end 

duplication. It may end a lot of other problems. 

 

And from our perspective as the opposition, I think supporting 

this particular bill wouldn’t be problematic. But, Mr. Speaker, 

as in any bill, we want to take the time to read it, to talk to a few 

of the impacted parties, to continue liaisoning, being 

co-operative and connected to the accountants. These are some 

of the things that we want to continue to do over the next couple 

of months. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, our initial response is 

that this particular bill is positive. We accept the advice and 

direction of the accountants overall, and I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 112. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3943 

Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise again in the legislature today 

to move second reading of Bill No. 99, The Public Employees 

Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public employees pension plan is a defined 

contribution pension plan administered by the Public 

Employees Pension Board. The plan provides a means of saving 

for retirement to its membership. That membership may include 

the employees of executive government, members of the 

Legislative Assembly, Crown Corporations, as well as a variety 

of government agencies. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, as of March 31 of 2013 there were close to 

53,000 plan holders of PEPP [public employees pension plan], 

P-E-P-P, with $5.6 billion in plan assets. I should also mention 

that this number also includes 79 different employers. 

 

Member and employer contributions are calculated as a 

percentage of the member’s total gross regular earnings. Unless 

otherwise specified in an agreement, the contribution 

percentage is five per cent by the member, and member 

contributions are made by payroll deduction. Contributions to 

PEPP are tax deductible up to a maximum set by the Income 

Tax Act of Canada. Members do not pay taxes on contributions 

or the accumulated investment income until they withdraw an 

amount from the plan. Contributions are forwarded to the plan 

and are used to purchase units in the PEPP investment option of 

the member’s choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, PEPP offers members the choice of six asset 

allocation funds, and they are: accelerated growth fund, growth 

fund, balanced fund, moderate fund, conservative fund, PEPP 

steps fund. Members may invest in the short-term bond fund 

either in addition to or instead of investing in one of the six 

asset allocation funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the world is always changing. Therefore 

investment options are also always changing. It is desirable, Mr. 

Speaker, to amend The Public Employees Pension Plan Act to 

do the following: clarify that a simple majority of board 

members is required for all decisions made by the board; allow 

the board to undertake short-term borrowing for the purposes of 

the administration of The Public Employees Pension Plan Act; 

allow the Lieutenant Governor, by order in council, to designate 

the default fund into which all member contributions shall be 

deposited unless otherwise directed by the member; provide 

that the Lieutenant Governor may order that members who have 

never chosen a fund for their PEPP funds be moved into the 

default fund; and authorize the Lieutenant Governor by 

regulation to permit the plan to receive members and funds 

from a registered pension plan wanting to become part of the 

PEPP and to state which specialty funds members transferring 

into PEPP are eligible for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Public Employees 

Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased to stand up today to give our initial comments 

on Bill 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And just to give the folks back home a bit of perspective, what 

typically happens in the fall sitting is the government itself . . . 

Because I understand there’s a couple of students that are 

watching, as they take an interest in this particular Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, which is great to see. But there’s an opportunity 

for us to . . . As the government brings forward legislation or 

new bills, some of the things that they want to do differently, 

they do it in the fall sitting. And what typically happens is that 

as the opposition, we give the first comments or the first 

thoughts on any bill that the government has forward. And it 

certainly gives us the opportunity over the next several months 

to research the bill and to talk to different folks that may be 

impacted by the bill and to of course bring forward some of 

those arguments at the next sitting, which is the spring sitting of 

2014. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So right now, the first few months of the fall sitting, we’re 

looking at the bills. We’re looking at the Throne Speech that 

they presented and we’re also doing question period and we’re 

also doing a number of other business in the fall sitting. But 

clearly they intended the fall sittings to hear what the 

government’s plans are when it comes to bills in particular and 

to see which groups that are going to be impacted and what the 

impact might be, and to take the time, the two or three months, 

to research and to talk to different stakeholders to see if the bill 

has any alarms or any problems that is created to them. 

 

So I think quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, when we look at Bill 99 

as the minister alluded to and very briefly explained what PEPP 

is all about . . . And PEPP, of course, is P-E-P-P. It’s the public 

employees pension plan, and what it is is that, as the minister 

alluded to, is different members of the government belong to 

this public employees pension plan. They contribute a certain 

amount. The government contributes a certain amount. And 

they put these two amounts together, and of course the PEPP 

plan investment amount and that of course forms the basis of 

some of the employees over time that wish to retire, that they’re 

able to do so with some adequate income. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many organizations, many 

corporations that do have these pension plans in place, and the 

province of Saskatchewan, through their employees, do have 

this pension plan in place. And as we pointed out on a number 

of occasions, this bill is about workers in our province who do 

have a public pension plan. We think that’s something that we 

should continue doing to protect the worker, Mr. Speaker, to 

protect the worker to make sure that as they contribute a great 

number of their time and many times their health, and many 

times their precious time away from their family, that when 

they do retire, when they do leave the public service, that they 

have an adequate savings, or in this case an adequate pension 



3944 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

plan to help them in their retiring years. 

 

So this is what PEPP is all about. And what the minister’s 

talking about today is some of the changes to PEPP which I 

think are fairly significant. You know, we talk about borrowing 

money for operations. Like what does that all entail? He’s 

talking about bringing new members into the PEPP plan. Who 

are some of those target groups? Like where is PEPP now in 

terms of bringing new members on board? Are they permitted 

or are they limited bringing some of these new members that 

the minister spoke about? These are some of the things that we 

have to find out as the opposition. 

 

One of the things that we need to always remind people of that 

are out there, and I know there are many people work for 

government over time. Highways workers, health care workers, 

Mr. Speaker, forest fire protection workers, FPWs — all these 

groups, organizations, they’ve worked many, many years. They 

put a lot of time on the line and, Mr. Speaker, after the years 

and years of service, we need to make sure that they have that 

adequate retirement income as I mentioned because they’re 

saving; they’re saving and the government of course is 

managing. 

 

But what they need to find out is we need to make sure that this 

government is listening to those working people, the working 

people that are saving their money for their retirement. Even if 

you’re 24 or 23, when you start off at a young age of course it’s 

better. But even as you begin to look at retirement, if you’re 50, 

55 years old, you’re looking at working for another 10 years, 

you have to know what is being planned within this bill, Bill 99. 

We need to know, and let people out there know, that The 

Public Employees Pension Plan Act, there are some changes 

being proposed in this particular bill. How is that going to 

impact you? How is that going to affect the pension plan that 

you’re currently maybe developing or maybe accessing now? 

Those are some of the impacts that we need to know, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I always maintain that there’s some very, very smart 

people out there that monitor what activity occurs under the 

pension plan Act. Now I see obviously, Mr. Speaker, that there 

are some significant changes. And we’re not ringing in the 

alarm bells from the opposition’s perspective when it comes to 

the initial information that we have received from this minister 

and from this government. But, Mr. Speaker, as the opposition, 

we worry every day that there is a hidden agenda by that 

particular government. 

 

And when it comes to trying to protect the public service, their 

record is abysmal, Mr. Speaker. They have fired workers. They 

have done their very best to walk away from the public sector, 

the working man and woman. And, Mr. Speaker, when we have 

that kind of activity on one hand and then we see them 

meddling in the public employees pension plan, we begin to 

wonder, what is the objective? What’s going on here? And 

that’s the reason, that is the reason, Mr. Speaker, that we sit in 

the Assembly and we monitor what the government is trying to 

do. 

 

And many times, even though they state at the outset that this is 

what their Act is trying to do, what this bill is trying to do, 

many times you feel, and we see, that this government does 

something totally opposite and arbitrarily and at the expense of 

working men and women of this particular problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we need to see this government respect and to 

listen to the working people more and more and a lot better. 

That is one of the fundamental things that we say in opposition 

— when you don’t consult with people and you do your own 

agenda, put your own bills in place, people out there will be 

angry. And the thing that we want to avoid, as the official 

opposition, is to let the government do what they wish. And we 

need to expose what their plans are, what some of these bills are 

going to impact, and we need people engaged to give us advice 

and direction. 

 

And I go back to my earlier statement in that a well-informed 

opposition is just as effective as a well-informed government, 

because in this Assembly we will certainly challenge the 

government and hold them to account because they have 

stubbornly dismissed a lot of issues and concerns that many 

working people have made to the government over the past 

seven years that they’ve been in power. 

 

So one of the things I think is really important is that we want 

to continue seeing supports towards the working people. That if 

large corporations and business can have a profit then we 

believe, on this side, that the working men and women that 

helped develop the industry, that helped develop this province, 

should also have a profit called a pension plan. Nothing wrong 

with that concept, Mr. Speaker. It’s all about smart growth. And 

the thing that’s important is that when we look at the pension 

plan per se, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that this 

government is listening to the people that they’re impacting. 

 

And on this bill when we see, as I mentioned earlier, when we 

see the ability for PEPP to borrow money, when we see the 

ability to bring in new members, we begin to ask questions like, 

how much money’s required? What is the money for? Who are 

these new members? And the list goes on. And you know, as 

the minister spoke about some of the other provisions that the 

Lieutenant Governor has the ability to do, which is primarily 

government, then we need to pay attention to some of those 

issues that the minister made reference to in his opening 

statement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re also seeing in Saskatchewan that 

people are doing their part. There are many people as you look 

throughout the province, they are doing their part. We see a lot 

of folks, young and old, that they’re working harder and they’re 

working longer and they wish to continue to contribute to our 

provincial economy, and that’s a good thing. And that’s exactly 

our point in the opposition — that if the people are doing their 

part, if they’re working harder, they’re working longer, and 

they’re working as they get older, then that is primarily a good 

message to government is to make sure that you respect that 

effort, that you don’t try and pull a fast one, so to speak, when it 

comes to those people’s pension plans, Mr. Speaker. I always 

maintain that you’ve got to watch how the Saskatchewan Party 

government treats the working men and women, because so far 

their record has not been good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things that we talk about when we talk about 

the government listening, when we talk about the public 

pension plan and how employees and governments are saving 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3945 

together, when we talk about the people doing their part, Mr. 

Speaker, when we talk about trying to understand what this 

particular government is up to on this particular bill and taking 

the time to understand what the impacts are, Mr. Speaker, it’ll 

be a great thing to bring up, expanding the CPP, the Canada 

Pension Plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As you know we have a provincial plan, and of course you’ve 

got the national plan where people are all contributing to the 

Canada Pension Plan. And when one retires, having the income 

not only from your old age security but having it from your 

CPP and of course from your public pension plan, we can see a 

lot of folks out there that could benefit if it’s properly 

developed and if it’s properly funded. 

 

Now we haven’t spoke about how the mix, how the mix could 

occur between those particular incomes. Because I know a lot 

of the older people in my particular riding, and a lot of them, I 

feel kind of sensitive to some of their issues because they talk 

about affordability. There are a lot of people in northern 

Saskatchewan, older people that have reached the age of 65, and 

they get about 11 or $1,200 a month. Many of them are living in 

their own homes, Mr. Speaker, and that’s all the money that 

they have. And then maybe perhaps if their spouse is still with 

them, then they get a spousal amount as well.  

 

But generally many of the older people back home live on fixed 

income with very little supports from CPP and very little 

support from a pension plan because many of them did not 

work when they were younger. They had to care for their family 

or they lived off the land or they didn’t ever work for 

government. They worked for private contractors. Whatever the 

case may be, as they hit 65, many of these older people simply 

have X amount of dollars to live on each month, and many 

times that amount is 11 or $1,300 a month, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a lot of people out there simply don’t understand. How 

could many of the elders in the North live on that kind of fixed 

income? It’s because when they were younger, nobody talked to 

them about a pension plan. Nobody talked to them about the 

value of saving some of your assets or your earnings over a 

longer period of time to give you a better income when you got 

to age 65, Mr. Speaker. A lot of them didn’t have that 

opportunity. A lot of them needed to learn about those 

opportunities. But more so, a lot of them were busy raising their 

family and many of them were living off the land to raise their 

family. And as they retired and got older, they are finding out 

that sometimes that fixed income is not enough to make ends 

meet. 

 

So whether it is heating your home or whether it’s buying 

groceries or paying the power bill or helping your grandson or 

your granddaughter with clothes, we understand and we hear 

the fact that many elders are having a difficult time, a very 

difficult time on surviving on 1,100 or $1,300 a month. And 

many of them have that problem, Mr. Speaker. Let us not fool 

ourselves. Many of them have that particular problem. 

 

And that’s why, on this side of the Assembly, the NDP talk 

about redesigning and re-engaging a CPP component to making 

sure that many people in our communities aren’t suffering like 

having that low income base. Many of them are suffering now, 

and we need to find ways and means in which we can position 

those older people to be able to enjoy the latter part of their 

lives comfortably well. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of them don’t 

do that today. 

 

So when I talk to young people, when I talk to young people 

about their future I always tell them, look, make sure you’re 

safe at work. Make sure you’re making a good salary, but also 

make sure that you’re aware of their pension plans and their 

benefits, what’s in place for you as a working person to ensure 

that you’re able to save for the future. So I tell a lot of young 

people if they’re working for any of the mine sites or the 

forestry companies or they’re working for a private contractor 

or for government, it’s important that they look after that, Mr. 

Speaker. Have those discussions because if you’re 24 years old 

or 20 years old and you’re starting your career, then you’ve got 

to know that in 45 years, you know, you’re going to have to 

retire. 

 

And you can’t survive in this day and age on 11 or $1,300 a 

month. And we see many of our elders struggling so much. And 

let us learn off those struggles to make sure that we properly 

manage our finances when we’re young so we’re able to plan 

for retirement. Even at the age of 20 years old, you’ve got to 

plan for your retirement because many of our elders didn’t have 

that opportunity, weren’t aware of it or were not given the 

opportunity, and today now you see how many of our elders are 

struggling to make ends meet. And that struggle that they’re 

having, that the younger people ought to learn from that and 

start saving for their future, either through a pension plan and 

either through some improvements made to CPP. And the list 

goes on as to what options may exist, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important that under the public employees 

pension plan, that all the changes announced in Bill 99, that we 

take the time again — the several months that is required — to 

be able to understand what is being proposed. I do not trust the 

Sask Party government when it comes to protecting the public 

employees of this province one bit, Mr. Speaker. I do not trust 

them one bit. 

 

However what I do trust, Mr. Speaker, are the PEPP 

administrators. I think the PEPP administrators and the board 

they have here — they have the board that they have in place — 

the employees and the management and the board, I think 

they’re doing a wonderful job, Mr. Speaker. I think they have a 

track record that many private investment firms envy. I think 

that they have . . . The return on some of their investments are 

remarkable. And the loss, I remember in ’08 they had a loss. I 

think they had a minimal loss even though it was dramatic for 

some people. That they’re able to minimize that loss based on 

their management and their experience and certainly their 

ability as a team, those are some of the things I would point out 

to people. 

 

We trust the PEPP administrative team, the board, the staff, and 

the management. We trust that they’re making good 

investments, and we trust them to do the things that they’ve 

been doing over the past to make sure that the rate of return for 

all their investors has been remarkably high. And their 

performance has been good. It’s been consistent, Mr. Speaker. 

Their approach has been professional. They’ve been on time 

and on target and above target. 

 



3946 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

[15:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we learned within the 

NDP is that if an organization is doing well, you do not 

interfere with the process. And that’s why if some of the 

changes being presented here by the government is intended to 

complement that effort by the PEPP team, then of course we in 

the opposition would want to know that, would want to make 

sure of that before we move forward with some of the changes 

being designed and being presented by the right wing across the 

aisle here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s one of the reasons why, when it comes to bills of this 

sort, that the opposition takes the time to talk to the 

stakeholders and do what they can to strengthen our hand when 

we sit in the Assembly and hold that government to account. 

And this is the reason why we ask organizations to meet with 

the opposition — or stakeholders or people in general to meet 

with the opposition — and bring forward some of your 

concerns on this bill or any other bill for that fact. And one of 

the things that I think that’s one of the great opportunities in the 

province is the democracy and the freedom for people that come 

forward and voice their single opinion on any bill being 

presented by the government, whether it’s provincial, territorial, 

or federal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I’ll point out, there’s so many moving 

parts to the pension plan. There are so many players. There are 

so many opportunities, so many challenges. It’s just an amazing 

matrix of opportunity when it comes to planning for your old 

age. And we’ve got to pay attention to these things. You’ve got 

to pay solid attention to them. And on many occasions I find 

that there isn’t that attention afforded to some of these changes 

being made by the government. And that’s one of the 

challenges we have in opposition is to make sure we tell people 

that we’re able to help, that we’re able to do some of the work 

that is necessary if you afford us the time and the information 

and the intelligence to argue back on some of the changes being 

made. 

 

Again some of the challenges we have on this particular bill all 

go back to what the minister alluded to earlier — inviting new 

members, borrowing money, some of the changes being made 

to the Assembly. We need to make certain that those changes 

aren’t contradicting the good work being done by the PEPP 

management team. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we will take the time, we will 

invite stakeholders, and we will hold this government to 

account on any bill they bring forward. That’s their job as the 

official opposition. So on that note I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 99. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 99, The Public Employees 

Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

 

Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les 

garderies d’enfants 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 

my pleasure to rise today to speak about Bill No. 98, the child 

care amendment Act, 2013. This amendment will repeal The 

Child Care Act which is currently English only and replace it 

with bilingual legislation. 

 

These amendments came about as a result of requests from the 

Conseil des écoles fransaskoises, CEF, and the Association des 

parents fransaskois, AFP, for The Child Care Act to made 

available in French in order to ensure the requirements outlined 

in the Act could be understood and interpreted correctly by 

French language child care providers and their professional 

organizations. These organizations noted that the legislation 

outlines direction related to children’s health and safety. 

Direction is referred to on a daily basis by the child care sector, 

and they are supportive of the amendment. Having the Act 

available in French is important for the six francophone child 

care centres that are presently operating within the province and 

for all future French language child care centres and 

francophone families. 

 

There are no substantial changes to the Act as a result of the 

bilingual translation, but some minor changes were made that 

are housekeeping in nature: first, removal of alphabetical listing 

from interpretation; secondly, removal of previously repealed 

sections; third, legal modernization of language; four, 

reorganization of sections for clarity; five, references to 

department change to ministry; six, section on inspections and 

investigations split to provide legal clarity and, in addition, 

allows the investigations section to include search of vehicles. 

 

These legislative changes will also require bilingual 

amendments to The Child Care Regulations, 2001. It is 

anticipated that the bilingual regulations would be made 

available after the Act is passed and will coincide with the 

proclamation of the Act. This change will meet the needs of 

francophone child care providers in our province as well as 

those who will choose to offer francophone child care in the 

future. It will ensure the requirements can be easily understood, 

available, and remove any issues with translation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 98, an Act to 

promote the growth and development of children and to support 

the provision of child care services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved 

that Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased to be able to stand today to talk about Bill 98. 

And of course The Child Care Act, 2013, Bill 98, our 

interpretation at the outset, Mr. Speaker, just basically 

indicating from this particular government that this bill replaces 

old legislation and gives the government more powers to do 

investigation into all offences — likely meaning people running 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3947 

their own unlicensed daycares, Mr. Speaker — to talk about 

providing a French interpretation, and so on and so forth, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we want to make sure that when it comes to child care, Mr. 

Speaker, we think that child care is one of the pivotal pieces in 

Saskatchewan’s brave new economy in the sense of building a 

lasting economy for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, for a 

number of years, is that you’ve got to provide the proper 

measure of support to working families that are out there. We 

know, we know and every person in this province knows that 

providing safe, affordable child care for working men and 

women is a crucial component to good, solid growth for many, 

many years, not only for our economy, Mr. Speaker, but for our 

family and this flourishing industry of providing care for 

children in the province. 

 

So when you look at some of the bill itself where they talk 

about trying to penalize those that might be operating an 

unlicensed daycare, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question from the 

opposition’s perspective that we want to make sure that those 

that may be operating an unlicensed daycare would . . . 

Uncertified workers and perhaps in places that shouldn’t have 

children in care, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that we 

don’t tolerate any of those activities. From the opposition 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, we want to 

have safe, affordable daycare or child care that is being 

administered by highly proficient boards and highly trained 

personnel, Mr. Speaker. That is the objectives and standards 

that the opposition, the NDP, have in mind, Mr. Speaker, when 

we talk about child care. 

 

We know in child care, Mr. Speaker, that you’ve got to have the 

spaces. You’ve got to have the spaces, and you’ve got to have 

those supports to working men and women that are able to drive 

forward the economy for many, many years if they don’t have 

to worry about having their child in good care of a licensed, 

safe, certified daycare, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you talk about The Child Care Act of 2013, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no question from the NDP perspective that we 

should never have, we should never tolerate anybody operating 

illegal daycares. Because, you know, if they’re not supervised 

properly, if they’re not certified, and certainly if people are not 

going there to do visits, inspections, to make sure that we have 

the proper supports in place, Mr. Speaker, the proper supports 

in place, then that person or that organization should not operate 

a child care centre, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So from our perspective, we want to make sure that we point 

out that this is something that we should not tolerate as a 

province. And the opposition perspective, we do not tolerate 

those that may operate illegal child care operations, especially 

those that are run by uncertified workers, and those that may 

have challenges to their fire codes or challenges to their 

facilities of this sort. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know, as I mentioned at the outset, when 

we see the bill come forward by the minister talking about child 

care spaces, you know — and the bill itself, 98, it doesn’t talk, 

Bill 98 doesn’t talk about putting more resources into child 

care, Mr. Speaker — what does this particular government do, 

Mr. Speaker? It talks about penalizing unlicensed child care 

spaces, or child care operation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we on the NDP side clearly see that there is 

a need for more child care spaces. We see that as clear as day, 

Mr. Speaker. Now what happens is this government is not 

matching the need for more child care spaces. Instead of talking 

about commitments towards child care spaces, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re talking about penalizing unlicensed daycare operations. 

Now who is going to argue with that? You shouldn’t have an 

unlicensed daycare operation for the issues I raised earlier. You 

should not be allowing anybody to operate an unlicensed 

daycare service, Mr. Speaker. They should not be allowing that 

at all. 

 

So that being said, Mr. Speaker, the only initiative that this 

particular government has brought forward when it comes to 

child care supports, Mr. Speaker, is the proclamation of this 

particular bill saying that if anybody operates an illegal daycare, 

we are able to prosecute them. And that’s it. Nothing else from 

the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So our argument from the NDP perspective, we agree, as our 

leader indicated, where it makes sense, we ought to agree with 

the government if they’re doing things right. If something 

makes sense with the people of Saskatchewan, we are going to 

agree, is what the current leader has indicated. It is common 

sense. It’s good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So it comes to unlicensed daycare centre, I want the 

government to hear me. We agree that we should not have 

people operating illegal daycare centres, especially those that 

are using uncertified care workers, especially those that may be 

putting children at risk as a result of a faulty space or even a 

facility that doesn’t meet proper regulations and inspections. So 

that said, Mr. Speaker, that’s our position on unlicensed 

daycares. They should not be tolerated. They’re running risks, 

and they’re a problem to the system. 

 

Now let’s shift gears, Mr. Speaker. Let’s shift gears to the 

argument about more child care spaces. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

listened to the members opposite as they begin to heckle a little 

bit over here. The problem we have and, as I’ve said it time and 

time again, under the smart growth strategy that the NDP have 

in place, there are many, many components to our smart growth 

strategy, Mr. Speaker. The three or four pillars that we talk 

about when we talk about environmental protection, when we 

talk about worker protection, when we talk about inviting 

investment, Mr. Speaker, those are pillars of what the NDP 

smart growth strategy is. And that we should protect the 

economic well-being and social well-being of the province of 

Saskatchewan at all costs, Mr. Speaker, that is primarily in our 

minds when we talk about smart growth. 

 

But a big part of the smart growth is how you offer supports to 

the working men and women. A pension plan is a darned good 

start, Mr. Speaker, but they’re meddling in that. Protection at 

the workplace is a really good start, Mr. Speaker. Well they’re 

meddling on that too as well, Mr. Speaker. To be able to bring 

. . . engaged industry, to engage with different unions and 

making them collaborate and cooperate on the future growth of 

Saskatchewan, well they’re dividing the people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a lot of the things that we speak about when we talk about 



3948 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

the smart growth, one of the components is how do you support 

the working men and women, Mr. Speaker. And I mentioned 

pension plan. I mentioned safe workplaces, and I mentioned 

good, solid pay. Those are things that people in Saskatchewan 

understand. 

 

But a big component of our smart growth strategy, Mr. Speaker, 

is also affording supports to the working men and women. 

Things like affordable homes, that makes sense, Mr. Speaker, 

where you have a young couple with two or three children or 

one or two children, where they want to own their own home. 

Well the Saskatchewan Party has not realized that’s a major 

problem for many young working men and women. There are 

many young families that’ll never have that Canadian dream of 

owning their own homes because the house prices have gone 

through the roof and are unreachable or just too high in terms of 

a price to pay for many of these young families. But does the 

Saskatchewan Party care about that? No they don’t, Mr. 

Speaker. They care about their rich friends and insiders, not the 

many working men and women that are out there. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The other challenge that a young couple has, Mr. Speaker, is 

child care. When you look at them wanting to go to work, the 

mom and the dad, the partners wanting to go to work, and they 

have a child that they have to care for, or a couple of children. 

Some of them may go to school. Some may be in daycare. You 

look at what options you afford these families, these young 

families that are starting off. 

 

Child care spaces, Mr. Speaker, they have not done enough 

when it comes to child care spaces in this province, full stop, 

period. They have not done enough to help young men and 

women that are trying to get their first home, to help them 

afford their first home. They have not done enough for that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Despite all the back-patting that they do, they have failed 

miserably in helping young couples trying to get their first 

home and helping young couples with child care spaces — 

which they’re willing to pay, which they are willing to pay as 

long as it’s a good, affordable price, Mr. Speaker — to allow 

them to go to work, allow them to continue training, allow them 

to continue building this economy knowing that their child is in 

a safe place, a nurturing place, Mr. Speaker, and an affordable 

place. And the Sask Party has failed miserably on that front 

when it comes to trying to help Canadians, Saskatchewan 

families finally own their own home and having them be given 

the opportunity for affordable and safe child care options, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I look at this bill, Bill 98. Nothing there. One or two pages, 

and all they talk about is penalizing those that are operating 

illegal daycare spaces. Well, Mr. Speaker, it goes without 

saying, nobody should be operating an unlicensed daycare. 

Nobody should be looking after children with uncertified 

workers. Nobody should be operating a daycare where there is 

some faulty facilities that they’re using. That’s all common 

sense things that people in Saskatchewan understand, and they 

certainly do not support that kind of activity when it comes to 

child care spaces. 

 

So that being said, we’ve got the bill off the way. Now we’re 

waiting as the opposition to see, okay what have they got 

coming forward for child care? Well, Mr. Speaker, just 

stone-deaf silence from that side, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 

activity. There’s no action on child care, the affordability of 

child care. 

 

And that again, from our perspective in the opposition, we say 

to the people of Saskatchewan, once again the Saskatchewan 

Party has disappointed us. And once again they have failed. 

Despite given the booming economy, growing population, 

money in the bank, they have failed Saskatchewan families that 

are working harder and trying harder. They continue dismissing 

families that are telling them these are the issues that are 

important to us. And yet the Sask Party continues to back-pat 

themselves and not pay attention to the people out there that 

have real issues on affordability of good, licensed daycare. That 

is the issue. 

 

It’s not penalizing unlicensed daycare centres, you should do 

that anyway. That should be a gimme, a slam dunk. That’s what 

it’s all about. But instead of making this big bill, their main 

announcement when it comes to childcare is they’re going to go 

after unlicensed daycare. Well, Mr. Speaker, if there’s an 

unlicensed daycare operation, shut it down. 

 

But from our side, we’re totally unimpressed with how the Sask 

Party has been trying to change the channel, trying to divert 

people’s attention away from the real issue, which is helping 

families buy homes, helping families with affordable, safe 

daycare needs, Mr. Speaker. And that is a crying shame, despite 

all the money and all the booming economy and the growing 

population that they inherited from the previous NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, I will go on this particular bill, that once again — 

once again — the Sask Party is using spin and PR [public 

relations] and bills like Bill 98, you know, just to try and 

change the channel. The fact of the matter is you haven’t done a 

darn thing for child care spaces. You haven’t done a darn thing 

to help young families afford new homes, Mr. Speaker. You 

haven’t done a darn thing to help people, to help working 

families instead of you just simply back-patting yourself. What 

you’re doing now is you’re selling off the Crowns, and you’re 

now bringing in private schools where people can’t even access, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that goes to another point. Under their P3 [public-private 

partnership] models, Mr. Speaker, under their P3 model 

scenario are childcare spaces going to be allowed in that 

school? I think there’s a lot of value behind our argument under 

the community schools concept where you actually have 

community groups that are using the facility in the evening, you 

have childcare spaces in that school. 

 

Under the P3 model, when they’re hiring their corporate 

buddies to build our schools and to privatize our schools, the P3 

partners will own those schools. They will control access to 

those schools. Under the P3 model are they allowing things like 

childcare spaces to be integrated with the design of that school, 

Mr. Speaker? Good question. And I bet you, Mr. Speaker, that a 

lot of consideration on their part has not been taken into account 

when they sit down with their corporate partners in developing 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3949 

these P3 models. 

 

So these are some of the questions we need to ask when we talk 

about accountability and transparency under the P3 model that 

the Sask Party is trying to push. They are pushing privately 

owned schools that limit access to the community that it’s 

supposed to serve. And that severely limits the school’s ability 

to become a community school and to do innovative approaches 

like allowing childcare spaces within that school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the community schools concept is a great concept. 

It allows many, many aspects of the challenging life of a young 

student to be incorporated in that school, to support that student 

so they stay in school. And, Mr. Speaker, once again we see 

how the Sask Party has stubbornly refused . . . They’re 

unwilling to learn and to listen now to the people of 

Saskatchewan. What their mantra is, is we’re going to go 

private. We’re going to privatize Information Services 

Corporation. We’re going to privatize our schools. And you 

know what’s going to happen is we’ll get to announce those 

schools today. But guess what? Future generations will pay for 

it. And guess what? Somebody else will control access to it. But 

the main thing is to get the announcement today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again, on this particular bill, Bill 98, The 

Child Care Act, I wonder if they incorporated some of the child 

care needs that we spoke about here into some of the new P3 

partnerships. I would like to see that particular aspect become 

very, very clear when it comes to their P3 mantra. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest to the people of Saskatchewan, they 

have not taken any of those, any of those into account. 

 

So again I point out that this particular bill, Bill 98, The Child 

Care Act, is rife with problems that they don’t want to talk 

about. They’ve identified one problem, dealing with unlicensed 

daycare spaces, and that’s it. That’s as far as the bill goes. It 

doesn’t talk about the demand for more child care spaces. It 

doesn’t talk about the challenges of young families in buying 

their home and getting their own home. It doesn’t talk about the 

challenges of child care for some young mothers and young 

fathers that are trying to go to work to build this economy even 

stronger. It doesn’t talk about any of those issues, Mr. Speaker, 

not any of those issues. It talks about a negative, and none of 

the positive. 

 

And that’s exactly why, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are getting tired of this old Sask Party 

government. They’re seven years old, and their age is starting to 

show on them, Mr. Speaker. They have no innovation. They’re 

stubborn. They only listen to their friends. And they ignore 

what the many families in Saskatchewan have asked them not 

to ignore, and that is meeting some of the needs of these young 

families that are coming here to make Saskatchewan their first 

home, and those that have lived here for many, many years 

want to have their first home. So together I think those two 

partners — the people that moved to Saskatchewan and those 

that have lived here for many years — can indeed build a brave 

new, bold province. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, dealing with the unlicensed 

daycare centres, we need to do that. Dealing with the child care 

spaces in Saskatchewan, the Sask Party gets a big fat F from the 

opposition. A big fat F on being able to deliver. A big fat F on 

helping young families own their own home, Mr. Speaker, and 

a big fat F of not having the innovation nor excitement to build 

a lasting economy in the province, an economy that helps the 

rich as well as the poor, to help the urban as well as the rural, to 

help the immigrant as well as the native Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. That is what I think smart growth is all about from the 

NDP perspective. 

 

And right now Bill 98 doesn’t touch any of those issues at all, 

Mr. Speaker. But rest assured, over the next couple of months 

we’re going to have a lot more to say about child care spaces. 

We’re going to have a lot more to say about this government’s 

failings to the young families of our province. We have a lot 

more to say about that, Mr. Speaker. So on that note I move that 

we adjourn debate on Bill 98. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Government Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013. This bill amends the existing assessment 

management agency Act to ensure the agency is properly 

funded to provide its services to the municipal and education 

sectors. 

 

Saskatchewan’s property tax system raises revenues based on 

taxable property assessments. The annual property taxes 

generated from the assessment system, which was $1.52 billion 

in 2012, are an important funding source, consisting of $929 

million for municipalities and $595 million for the education 

system. 

 

Consultations occurred with the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency to ensure the amendments meet the needs 

of the agency and provide it the flexibility to raise required 

revenues. Further feedback from SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] indicated that there are no 

objections in consideration of this bill. 

 

Changes in the bill include: first, repeal provisions relating to 

the 65/35 per cent split sharing of SAMA [Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency] funding responsibility 

between the province and municipalities, since this prevents the 

agency from seeking greater funding from the municipal sector. 

 

Second, to make related financial amendments that provide 

SAMA greater flexibility respecting increases to municipal 

requisitions, provide timelines that are achievable and ensure a 

properly funded agency, and make it more administratively 

efficient for government to make its financial payment to 



3950 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

SAMA earlier. 

 

Third, to make miscellaneous amendments of a non-financial 

nature. These better reflect the agency’s present roles, 

responsibilities, and practices, and respond to the changing 

responsibilities of the ministries of Government Relations and 

Education respecting the education funding system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, government has a direct interest in the delivery of 

property assessment services in a timely, accurate, professional, 

and consistent way, and in ensuring public confidence in the 

property assessment and taxation system. The ability to do 

property reinspections, to update assessments, and to conduct 

annual maintenance inspections to add new properties to the 

assessment roll are affected by the level of funding to SAMA. 

 

School divisions and municipalities both end up forgoing 

increased property taxes from assessments which are not up to 

date. This could also end up directly costing the provincial 

government more for grants to school divisions. The potential 

financial benefits for SAMA’s client municipalities and the 

education sector of up-to-date property assessments, achieved 

through annual maintenance inspections and reinspections of 

municipalities, could be significant. 

 

In 2012 property tax revenues were split, with 61 per cent going 

to municipalities and 39 per cent to education. Mr. Speaker, the 

amendments related to funding will provide for a fairer balance 

of financial responsibility for assessment services to 

municipalities and the province. These financial amendments 

will be made retroactive to January 1st, 2014 to correspond to 

SAMA’s fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting that 

municipal SAMA requisitions have been stable for over 10 

years. Municipalities are the main beneficiary of the property 

tax system, and revenue-sharing funding has seen significant 

increases in funding for municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, provincial interests in SAMA and property 

assessment are outlined in the Act. The province will continue 

to provide funding for the assessment system. Government 

increased SAMA’s operational funding for the 2013-14 fiscal 

year by $522,000. The actual amount of provincial funding to 

SAMA will continue to be determined in the provincial budget 

process. And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 

No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 

2013. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Government 

Relations has moved that Bill No. 100, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

am very pleased to be able to stand today and to provide our 

initial look at Bill 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, which primarily deals with SAMA. 

 

And for a lot of folks out there that might not know what 

SAMA does, it assesses properties throughout the province. It is 

a fairly complicated way of determining how your land taxes 

are being set. There are a number of different players. Of course 

as you know, there’s the business community that pay land 

taxes. There are the private residences in the cities that pay land 

taxes. There are small homes in some of the smaller 

communities that pay taxes. And the RMs [rural municipality] 

have varying degrees of property classes out there. So to be able 

to assess your property taxes is a fairly complex and 

complicated task throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So who’s been the leader in that particular regard? It hasn’t 

been so much government or some of the municipal players. 

Really it’s been the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency which has primarily been in existence for a number of 

years. So one of the things that obviously that this particular 

bill, from what I can gather, Mr. Speaker, is that it really 

clarifies a lot of the language when we’re dealing with SAMA. 

And it also talks, as the minister alluded to, looking at the 

funding needs that are required to operate SAMA efficiently. It 

also removes some of the school divisions from assessments, 

and so on and so forth. 

 

So there is, any time you have changes to a very complicated 

and very, very tough role to play when you look at assessing 

taxes, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of impacts you’ve got to be 

very careful on. A lot of people in the province, you know, they 

look at their tax bill on a regular basis. And the tax bill varies, 

as I mentioned, from place to place, from property to property. 

And we have to make sure that some of the changes in this very 

complicated matrix of assessing property values and thereby 

assessing taxes, Mr. Speaker, you have to be very, very careful 

when you undertake that particular role. 

 

Now we can understand that there’s some value here in a sense 

that if you want to be able to do the assessment so you’re not 

seeing certain classes of property or certain homeowners or 

certain property owners paying really high tax prices . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Leave for extended introductions, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers has requested leave to make an extended introduction of 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

take a moment to welcome some guests seated in your gallery. 

It’s a rather large group, so I won’t have the opportunity to 

name everyone. But I want to say a big thank you to all of you 

for being here. We really appreciate it. 

 

The group joining us today includes members from the 

Saskatchewan Breast Cancer Connect, SBCC. It’s a newly 

incorporated organization to help patients, health care 

practitioners, and breast cancer related support groups. 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3951 

Recognizing the existing efforts within our province to fight 

breast cancer, SBCC will help patients become knowledgeable 

about cancer and its treatment. 

 

From this group we have Deb Koptie — can you give a wave 

please as I say your name — Anthea Fritz, Andrea Soby, 

Colleen Kot, Jan Derwores, Nancy Hordern, Diana Ermel. 

 

Also joining this group today are Pam Frigon and Garry Frigon 

from Lisa B Originals. They manufacture custom breast 

prosthetics for Saskatchewan residents who have undergone 

breast cancer surgery. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to welcome Jordana Buchan, 

Debbie Hagel, Tammy Chamberlin, Gail Garden, and Heidi 

Clay. These ladies are all breast cancer survivors and I have no 

doubt that they act as an inspiration and support system to many 

currently battling breast cancer and their families. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank all these individuals, and 

of course the other guests joining them here today, for their 

efforts and for their support they offer countless individuals in 

their fight against breast cancer. So I would like everyone today 

to please welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and thank the member from Saskatchewan Rivers for that, that 

great introduction. On behalf of the official opposition, I’d like 

to welcome everybody from Saskatchewan Breast Cancer 

Connect here to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

In terms of the work of advocacy that you’re doing alongside 

the very demanding work of surviving and taking care of your 

own health and working with your family to see yourselves 

through these challenging times, that you’ve met that challenge 

and have moved beyond that to advocating, not just for your 

own situation but for others as well, is pretty remarkable. 

 

And I just want to remark on that. On behalf of the official 

opposition, we look forward to the meeting that we’ll have later 

today. I believe our health care critic will be in attendance at the 

presentation of the petition and the further work of advocacy 

that will be going on. But as you all well know in the gallery, 

and as many of us in this Chamber know, cancer affects in so 

many different ways. And that this is the response that you as 

individuals and as families and as community have mustered in 

the face of this cancer is inspiring, to say the least. So please 

keep up the great work, and we look forward to meeting with 

you very soon this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to welcome those that are fighting to bring more 

awareness to the breast cancer challenge in our province. And 

as tough and difficult that the work is that you’re undertaking, it 

still makes the world a better place for many, many survivors 

and families that have lost loved ones. So please continue on 

with your fine work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, getting back to the Bill 100, I think what’s really 

important is that, as you look at the myriad of challenges when 

it comes to assessing property taxes throughout the province, 

we need to make sure that some of the impact and the decisions 

made are clearly understood by as many stakeholders as 

possible. There are many organizations that are impacted when 

we assess property taxes overall. Like I mentioned at the outset, 

there are the homeowners, there are the property owners, there 

are the business owners, there are the corporate interests — all 

these different players out there need to have some very good 

information and relevant information in front of them to 

determine how the impacts and some of the changes of this 

particular bill will impact their business or their family or their 

bottom line. 

 

Now what I think what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, is that people 

are doing their part. We see that people throughout the province 

are working hard. They’re working very hard to save up for 

their first home, something that many people still say is not 

achievable for young families because the price of houses have 

gone through the roof. And as I mentioned earlier, young 

people are having difficult time, a very difficult time in trying 

to buy their first home. And young families are struggling, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And when we look at the affordability of homes for young 

families, one of the first things that come up of course when 

you go to see a bank and you talk about a mortgage is of course 

your principal, your interest, and your taxes. They’re the PIT. 

Those are some of the things that the banks look at. And they 

start looking at the cost of buying your own home, your first 

down payment. They also incorporate the taxes, exactly how 

much of the taxes are you responsible as a new homeowner. 

And if you start seeing the taxes going high for some of the 

property owners, it becomes even more unaffordable for young 

families. So we see, Mr. Speaker, that young families are trying 

harder. 

 

You look at the challenges of daycare, child care spaces for 

their children as being one of the problems that I mentioned 

earlier and then you start talking about affordability of homes 

and then you talk about the taxation on top of that — that all 

impacts families throughout the province of Saskatchewan. And 

that’s why, as the official opposition, we take a great interest. 

We take a great interest when this government comes along and 

talks about reassessing how properties are being taxed, Mr. 

Speaker. 



3952 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

When they talk about SAMA, the agency that looks after the 

assessment process, SAMA over the years has done a pretty 

good job, Mr. Speaker. They have been out there and trying to 

alleviate some of the strain on certain property classes. And 

they have been trying to work with SUMA and SARM and the 

different agencies out there. But as I mentioned at the outset, 

when you start tinkering with SAMA and start tinkering with 

the property tax process, Mr. Speaker, there is some significant 

problems when you add to the myriad of challenges that SAMA 

has in trying to make sure that you properly tax people and 

fairly tax people when it comes to their property. 

 

So we see there’s no question in our mind that one of the 

biggest challenges of young families is affordability of a home. 

And having property taxes that are unfairly placed on that new 

home or existing home that they’re buying is going to be a 

deterrent for young families. So we take a special interest in this 

particular bill to ensure that property taxes don’t negatively 

affect young families from buying their first home. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, history will tell us and it will teach us that 

throughout the early years that many young families were able 

to start buying their own homes at 40 or 50,000; some even less 

than that in the earlier years. Now that was affordable for many 

young, young families that were starting off owning their 

homes, say 30, 40, 50 years ago, where families were able to set 

up in a city, buy a home for 20 or 30 or 40,000 and then begin 

to raise their family and to begin to build a life. They also 

understood that property taxes were also affordable at that time. 

But today that reality is young families, for a starter home that’s 

in half-decent shape, half-decent shape, all of a sudden it’s 3 or 

400,000, Mr. Speaker. And that’s an incredible challenge for 

many young families that may not have the help from their 

parents or may not have the income. Their opportunity to own 

their own home is becoming farther and farther out of their 

reach. And that’s a crying shame that we’re not putting 

Saskatchewan people first, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you look at that affordability issue, what you don’t 

want to do is you don’t want to complicate that opportunity that 

a young family may have in owning their own home by putting 

in an unfair tax system in place where they’re paying more 

taxes than their neighbour, and paying more taxes than other 

parts of a particular community or city. So it’s important that 

we look at all options when it comes to taxation and property 

taxes, Mr. Speaker, because it does have an effect on young 

families that may want to buy their first homes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s also important is that you assess the 

value of certain homes. I’m not sure how the system works, and 

this is why we need to take the time to understand this bill, but 

I’m not sure how the system works between what a bank may 

assess the value of that home versus how SAMA might assess 

that value of that home. Is there collaboration between the two 

values, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Because the bank could easily tell you, based on their banking 

information, this house may be less valued than what SAMA 

would value it at. So the bank says your home is only worth 

300,000, but SAMA says, well we think your house is worth 

400,000. Well which appraised value do they use when they 

assess your taxes? Well that extra $100,000 difference could 

make a significant, could create a significant problem for a 

young family. 

 

So that’s my whole point when you start talking about SAMA 

and how you’re looking at property tax hikes every year or two 

years, how you’re evaluating your property, how you’re 

incorporating some of the challenges that the young people may 

have when they’re trying to buy their own home. 

 

When we do things in government, when we try and look at 

ways and means in which we could strengthen Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, we on the NDP side of the Assembly say that we 

ought to do something significant for young families in the 

province. Whether there have been families that have been 

living here for 50 or 100 years or new families that joined the 

growth of our province, that we need to position them and 

position them well when it comes to owning their first home. 

And every initiative that we have, Mr. Speaker, should be 

focused on that particular point. 

 

And we are not doing enough. Everything from unaffordable 

child care spaces where the mom and dad can’t go to work, 

unaffordable housing prices where the family can’t afford to 

buy their first home, and they’re crammed into an apartment, 

Mr. Speaker. And then we talk about taxation, what this 

particular bill is talking about, Bill 100. We need to incorporate 

that thinking more and more into how we could smartly grow 

this province for many, many years to come. 

 

And that’s why, on this side of the Assembly, we talk about 

smart growth, Mr. Speaker. We need to incorporate any 

challenge, any challenge or any omission of effort, any 

omission of effort into trying to recognize the challenge that 

young families have when it comes to property, and that the 

taxation of that property, we need to address it and assess it. 

And that’s why, from our perspective, when our leader stands 

up and says, if the government is doing something correct, and 

it’s common sense, it’s going to help the province of 

Saskatchewan, we will support it. But if this government is 

doing things not properly or not thinking things through, which 

you find evidence of this on a continual basis, then we need to 

stand up with the people of the province and tell them that what 

they’re doing is wrong, and we need to inform the public as 

much as we can, through the venues of the Assembly, to explain 

to the people why they’re doing things wrongly. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And from our perspective, everything from daycare spaces 

being not existing to the unaffordable homes for young families 

and the taxation of those homes, Mr. Speaker, it all has a 

residual effect on young families that get discouraged and may 

never have the opportunity of owning their own home. So 

taxation, property taxes are a huge, huge challenge for them as 

well because every time you make a mortgage payment, as you 

would know, Mr. Speaker, there’s principal, interest, and taxes 

— principal, interest, and taxes. And taxes have a significant 

. . . A significant part of that particular mortgage payment each 

month is due to property taxes. 

 

So when you have bills that come along and talk about 

assessments, when you have bills of this sort, Bill 100, that 

talks about property tax hikes, the impacts on SAMA, how 

SAMA is funded, all of these, all of these are interconnected 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3953 

and certainly from our perspective need to have a lot of 

discussions. 

 

So I tell the people that are out there today that may be 

watching the Assembly — there’s probably not a lot, Mr. 

Speaker, but the people that are out there today — that any, any 

effort, any effort that is going to impact negatively on assessing 

your property, we need to know as the official opposition. Our 

job is to hold the government to account on some the things that 

they’ve failed to do, Mr. Speaker. Our job in opposition, as our 

new leader indicated, is to applaud the government on some of 

the initiatives that they might be doing properly but with some 

improvements can do better. And what we’re finding evidence 

of, Mr. Speaker, instead of this government taking initiatives 

that we’ve developed over the years as an outgoing 

government, what they have done is instead of trying to 

improve the programs, they’ve cancelled some of those 

programs that talk about the values of such things as home 

ownership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to talk briefly about the taxation system in the 

North, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk about the taxation system up 

in the North, that we are treated much the same as the rest of the 

province, which is good. Nobody’s arguing that the North needs 

special treatment or a special deal. The North wants to hold 

their own. You look at our economy overall, through our 

mining sector, our forestry sector, and oil and gas sector, the 

tourism sector, the North is really holding their own. 

 

Now when it comes to property taxes, Mr. Speaker, and paying 

those property taxes, or paying some of the property taxes on 

some of the leased land in and around our northern 

communities, Mr. Speaker, that all goes to a central fund called 

the northern revenue sharing trust account. And you look at all 

the taxes collected over the years. And today you ask the 

question, is some of those taxes, are they of benefit to the 

northern communities? Do we have decent roads? The answer 

is no. Do we have decent schools? The answer is no. Do we 

have some post-secondary training? The answer is no. Do we 

have some critical shortages in housing? The answer is no. So 

our argument is we’re paying our property taxes, and we’re 

paying a lot of taxes out of the North. Why aren’t we getting the 

benefits? And that’s one of the reasons why I think from 

SAMA’s perspective, we have to find out. We have to know 

from the northern perspective, so as northern MLAs we can tell 

the people, we can tell the people, yes, we are getting our 

benefits from taxation, the taxation that we pay on our homes or 

from our rec properties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these are things that affect far and wide some of the 

challenges that young families have, not just in our big cities, 

but the small towns and villages and of course the northern 

communities as well. So I think there is, as I mentioned at the 

outset, SAMA has a wide-reaching impact. They’re not just 

impacting a few people. They are impacting a great number of 

folks, including young families. 

 

So we’ve got to be very careful. When this government meddles 

in certain organizations that are intended to be fair and proper 

and to be ethical in how they develop tax laws and of course tax 

properties . . . or tax on properties, we have to make sure we 

pay special attention to these bills to be very careful that this 

particular government is not trying to pull a fast one, as they 

say, by sneaking in some of their right wing agendas to some of 

these bills that may at the outset appear to be benign, so to 

speak, Mr. Speaker, but clearly, clearly that there might be 

some ulterior motive that we want to find out about, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now again from our perspective, we want the people of 

Saskatchewan to tell them that we want to be transparent on this 

bill and every other bill that this government brings forward. 

We need to know who it’s impacting and who they are 

impacting, Mr. Speaker. We need to know who they consulted. 

We need to know whether they’re listening to that advice 

because we find out, Mr. Speaker, that when a government says 

consultation, consultation doesn’t necessarily constitute 

agreement, Mr. Speaker. When the government gets up and 

says, well we’ve consulted with this group, well we find out a 

few weeks after they consulted with the group that the group 

told them, no way do we support that particular initiative. So 

consultation is a lot different from agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why you’ll never hear any member on that side of 

the Assembly say, we have an agreement with them. Instead the 

buzzword they use, oh, we consulted them. What they don’t 

admit, Mr. Speaker, when they say, we consulted them, they 

should include this last phrase in some of their statements. We 

consulted them. They didn’t like it worth a heck, but we don’t 

care. That’s what they should say over there. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is one of the fundamental problems that we find in the 

province, is that this government has stubbornly refused to 

listen to people. They don’t take into account the fact that 

people are doing more, and they’re finding . . . we’re finding 

that this particular boom and the enjoyment we all have, there 

are many, many, many people being left out. And there are 

many organizations being left out and many sectors and many 

regions being left out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why as an opposition we’re paying very close 

attention to all their bills, to all their bills. And this SAMA bill 

talks about taxation and how they’re going to fund SAMA. 

They’re going to talk about all the different ways that they’re 

going to . . . It cleans up the language, they say. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, any time the Sask Party meddles with language to an 

agency that by and large has been doing a decent job, and that’s 

SAMA, then we in the opposition pay very close attention to 

what they’re doing. And so far, Mr. Speaker, they’re not 

addressing the real issues when it comes to affordability of 

homes and taxation of those new homes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out again that people are doing 

their part. There’s no question that they’re working harder, 

they’re working smarter, and there’s many, many more people 

working. And we applaud that effort by those people. We 

applaud the agricultural base that has generated great revenues 

for this province, not just this year, but many years to come. 

The corporations, the oil and gas companies, we want to see 

them continue coming to Saskatchewan and building this 

province. We’ve had a great history, Mr. Speaker. The oil and 

gas industry have had a great history in the province. We want 

to see that economy continue building. 

 

And this particular opposition will address every threat to that 

economy as best we can. And when we see a confused 

government bring forward legislation that is not properly vetted 



3954 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

through the public, that is not dynamic enough to ensure that 

growth goes for many, many years, and is not properly 

consulted with the impacted organizations and groups, then we 

as an opposition will stand up and we will fight back for those 

people that do not have a voice in that government or this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. That is our role and we relish that role. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you look at some of the issues attached to 

taxation, land taxation. I’ve talked about the affordability of 

new homes. I’ve talked about the cost of living. I spoke about 

the cost of rentals, Mr. Speaker. I spoke about buying your first 

home and ensuring that everyone benefits from the boom that 

Saskatchewan’s enjoying. Those are certainly common sense 

approaches that I think people in Saskatchewan will applaud. 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan are very generous people. 

They’ll simply say, look, if we’re all enjoying the boom and 

everything’s going great, then we need to strategically invest 

some of the dollars we have to make sure everybody benefits — 

young and old, rich and poor, the healthy and not so healthy, the 

North, the South, the East, the West, the cities, the urban parts 

of the province. We need to all benefit from this largesse that 

we enjoy as a province. And what we’re finding, Mr. Speaker, 

is that there are only a few, a few of the chosen friends of the 

Sask Party that actually benefit overall from the great boom that 

they’re having. And there are many, many groups, many groups 

that are being left behind. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we look at Bill 100, and we want to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan one thing. You’ve got a couple of more 

months to address these bills and to consult people on these 

bills. And what the opposition will not do is turn around say, 

well we consulted with them and that consultation was good 

enough. We want their agreement that some of these problems 

addressed in these bills are problematic to their organization or 

to them. 

 

So those people out there in Saskatchewanland, if you have the 

opportunity to participate in this democratic process, then I 

would suggest you join us online and participate in assessing 

this particular bill, Bill 100 or any other bill that this 

government brings forward, and see how it may impact you and 

your property tax. See how it impacts, whether it’s a good 

impact or a bad impact. We need to know those things. And we 

have a couple of months, and that’s one of the reasons why as 

an opposition we use the venue of the Assembly to clearly tell 

people in the province that our solution is not simply 

consultation but our objective is agreement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we afford time to 

debate this bill. And we’ll begin the research process that is 

required for this particular bill, and the outreach to the different 

organizations and groups and communities will begin as a result 

of this fall sitting. So on that note, I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the Government House 

Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To ask for 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding the order 

dated November 7, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Rescinding of Order for Bill No. 605 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There has 

been discussion between the parties and, if you seek it, I believe 

you will find unanimous consent for the following motion: 

 

That the order dated November 7, 2013 for second reading 

and committal to the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies of Bill No. 605, The Public-Private 

Partnerships Transparency and Accountability Act be 

rescinded; and further, that the said bill be placed on the 

order paper under private members’ public bills and orders, 

adjourned debates. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the order dated November the 7th, 2013 for second 

reading and committal to the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies, Bill No. 605, The 

Public-Private Partnerships Transparency and 

Accountability Act be rescinded; and further, that the said 

bill be placed on the order paper under private members’ 

bills and orders, adjourned debates. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? All in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All opposed say nay. The motion is carried 

unanimously. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Personal Care Homes Amendment 

Act, 2013. Mr. Speaker, the intent of this legislation is to 

improve accountability and better inform residents and families 

about personal care home inspection results. The Ministry of 

Health is responsible for licensing and monitoring personal care 

homes to ensure that the residents receive safe and appropriate 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3955 

care in a safe and appropriate environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government strives to improve the quality of 

life for all Saskatchewan people. Increased transparency will 

assist people when selecting a personal care home for 

theirselves or their loved one. It will also provide increased 

incentive for personal care home operators to provide the best 

possible care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is anticipated to pass in as early as 

the spring session in 2014. Should that be the case, Mr. 

Speaker, it would allow inspection information to be posted on 

the Ministry of Health website later in 2014. Mr. Speaker, the 

legislation responds to recommendations from both the 

Provincial Auditor and the Provincial Ombudsman that there 

should be more information about personal care homes 

available to the public. Inspection reports will indicate where 

homes need to make improvements to meet required standards 

and help people make informed choices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to note that personal care homes are 

privately owned and operated and are not the same as long-term 

care facilities commonly referred to as nursing homes or special 

care homes, which are part of the publicly funded health 

system. There is sometimes confusion around the two, so I 

mention this to point out the difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I am pleased to move second reading of 

The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013. Thank you. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased to, on behalf of the official opposition, be the first 

member to respond to this particular bill, Bill 111, The Personal 

Care Homes Amendment Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the main point of this particular bill for those 

people that may be watching is personal care home inspections 

are to be made public. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that 

we want to say that’s the thrust of this particular bill is that this 

government is not addressing the chronically low staffing levels 

in our health care system. 

 

Now I noticed the minister spoke a bit about the fact that these 

are not government-owned facilities; these are private care 

home facilities. But, Mr. Speaker, the responsibility to ensure 

that the elders are properly taken care of — the older people in 

our province, the pioneers of our province — it is absolutely 

everybody’s responsibility. They can’t simply slough it off on 

the fact that this is a private care home, that really the 

government has no role in it. I think if the government is putting 

any money into these private care homes, if anybody is putting 

any money into these private care homes, then they have a 

responsibility to ensure that these private care homes are 

providing the adequate service to our elders and to the people 

that are living in these homes, the senior citizens of our 

province. 

And that is something that we’ve noticed over the last couple of 

years, that this government is getting worse and worse at caring 

for the seniors. Our leader has been bringing up on a continual 

basis where health care workers are coming forward, a retired 

nurse coming forward and saying, we’ve seen some of the 

activity. We’ve seen some of the challenges of not only within 

the health care system, but in some of these private care homes 

where seniors are being left unattended for hours on end, Mr. 

Speaker. and it’s primarily because of understaffing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we within the NDP don’t want to ever see, 

don’t want to tolerate nor do we ever want to see any effort to 

warehouse senior citizens in this province. That would be a 

shame and that would be a black mark on the history of the 

province of Saskatchewan if we ever saw that kind of attitude or 

that kind of practice ever occur in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

Because many of us, as we all know, we’re going to be the ears 

and eyes of some of the groups and organizations out there that 

are crying foul over some of the treatment. And we’re telling 

the government today, we’re telling the government today that 

it is primarily as a result of your understaffing where the 

problems exist. 

 

And the minister, through Bill 111, is bringing home, is 

bringing forward The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 

which is basically saying that the home inspections of these 

care homes are to be made public. Well, Mr. Speaker, one 

would assume and one can easily assume that the records of the 

performance of these care homes should be public. It probably 

is public. All he had to do is just go online and maybe check out 

each personal care home to see their record or maybe talk to the 

families or research that particular facility. And so this whole 

notion of Bill 111, when we talk about the personal care homes, 

the major thrust is simply saying, we will make public the 

personal care home inspections. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP on this side of the Assembly are 

saying there should be a lot more effort on this front, a lot more. 

And what is causing the challenges, Mr. Speaker, within these 

personal care homes is the fact that the staffing levels are 

dangerously low. They’re dangerously low to a point where 

we’ve brought case after case in this Assembly to explain to the 

government. 

 

In this day, where you have unprecedented revenues coming 

into your coffers, where you have a booming economy that you 

inherited, where you’ve had a growing population, should we 

not commit adequate resources to our senior citizens, to our 

elders, to those that are living in these homes to ensure that 

they’re able to live in these homes in dignity, Mr. Speaker? Is 

that a very tough thing to ask this government? Is that a difficult 

thing to ask this government to do? 

 

When we hear how many . . . the horror stories of some of our 

seniors being left without proper care for a number of days, of 

calls being unanswered — calls for help, Mr. Speaker — of 

some of the care homes not being properly cleaned nor 

maintained, Mr. Speaker, and the only response we have from 

this, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they’re going to do their, allow 

the inspection records to be made public. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what the opposition has been 

asking for. I don’t think it’s what the people of Saskatchewan 



3956 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

would want for their senior citizens. They want to see action on 

the home care front. And we see that this government has failed 

miserably when it comes to trying to take care of the seniors in 

these care homes where the problems are persisting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, and I do this from the perspective 

of a press release, you know, where the press release quite 

frankly indicates that, and I quote . . . Cam Broten of the 

Saskatchewan NDP indicates, “Government seniors-care review 

does not address biggest problem.” So, Mr. Speaker, the press 

release that our leader issued in reference to the care home 

challenges are very, very clear and concise in this press release. 

The leader has indicated that there are problems, persistent 

problems that this government, it ignores and does not address. 

 

Now what we would point out is the personal care home 

inspections to be made public under Bill 111. Mr. Speaker, I go 

back again pointing out that we have been telling the 

government day after day here that it is chronically, the chronic 

low level of staffing in some of these care homes is what the 

problem is. You’re allowing seniors to go unattended for a 

number of hours. We are asking them to look into the matter, as 

opposed to simply responding by saying, oh we’re putting the 

inspections online now. That’s not what the people of 

Saskatchewan asked. It’s not what the NDP asked for. We 

asked for some concrete action. 

 

They turn around and say, well we’re going to now be putting 

$10 million into the problem. Well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people 

in Saskatchewan don’t know that $10 million is a one-time 

fund, one-time fund. Once that’s expended, Mr. Speaker, then 

guess what? There’s no more money after that. 

 

So they may be able to fix a boat ramp or a ramp to go into a 

seniors’ home, an accessibility ramp. They may be able to fix a 

bathroom, Mr. Speaker. But it still does not address, it still does 

not address, still does not address the challenges of staffing, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s one of the things that’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, is that when you look at these issues overall, that 

$10-million-dollar fund will be expended. And it will not result 

in any improvement to service nor will it result in any more 

staffing at these care homes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the challenges that we would 

remind the member or the government overall is that there are 

seniors that are sometimes sitting in washrooms for hours on 

end. They’re pushing call buttons with no answers, Mr. 

Speaker. Families are coming to these homes and asking, how 

bad can it get before the families are forced to do something, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And these are some of the things that we always talk about on 

this side of the Assembly when we tell the government again, 

you’ve got . . . The common sense thing to do is to share the 

largesse you have, to share your money. Don’t sit on it and brag 

about it day after day here, Mr. Speaker. Don’t talk about the 

booming economy and the growing population, and in the 

meantime you’re allowing seniors to be warehoused in some of 

these units without care or regard for them. 

 

And that’s one of the things that really upsets a lot of people in 

the province when they see that their grandma or grandpa or 

their mom and dad are being treated in such a bad fashion. It is 

not something that the Government of Saskatchewan ought to 

ignore, Mr. Speaker. So on our side of the Assembly, given the 

fact that you’ve got the money, given the fact that you’ve got 

the resources, given the fact that you’ve been given the 

mandate, why are you failing our seniors in these care homes 

that are feeling the pressure of being ignored, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And you bring some of these cases forward, as we have. You 

bring some of these cases forward as the NDP opposition have, 

and the government simply ignores them. They simply ignore 

the needs that the many seniors are bringing forth through their 

family spokespersons and, Mr. Speaker, that is a crying shame. 

It is a crying shame when you see that kind of reaction by the 

government from people within the province that have a 

legitimate argument and a legitimate point that their mom or 

dad or grandma or grandpa — whoever it may be, great aunt — 

that they are having some very difficult times in some of these 

care homes, and about the only response that the government 

has brought forward is simply to put in a $10 million one-time 

fund and no increase in staffing levels and no minimum care 

standards. 

 

That’s the thing that really upsets us on this side of the 

Assembly, when we tell the government that you ought to have 

some minimum care standards for senior citizens so we know 

that at the very minimum they’re getting a number of hours of 

support, a number of hours of care right in these homes, and the 

government steadfastly refuses to do that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we go back to our point, back to 

our point as the opposition, the fact that, the fact that 

understaffing is the main problem in some of these homes. 

Understaffing is the main problem in some of these homes. And 

how can the government callously disregard those points and 

those issues raised by the families that come to this Assembly 

and engage the opposition and tell them, we ought to do better 

as a province? You ought to do better as a government. We all 

have to do better when it comes to the care of our seniors. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the government of the day does not 

accept responsibility and simply sloughs it off and doesn’t do 

anything to address the problem, then guess what? The vast 

majority of people out there are going to pick up the slack 

themselves, and they’re going to come to the Assembly. So we 

would encourage them to continue coming to the Assembly and 

bringing forward those concerns that their loved ones are going 

through a lot of indignity in some of these homes. And that 

should never ever happen in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why from our perspective, that’s why from our 

perspective when we have bills of this sort, it really brings 

home, it really brings home a lot of issues. It brings to light the 

fact that this government is ignoring the problems that we have 

persistently brought forward when they simply talk about 

putting online the inspections that they make at some of these 

facilities, and that was their solution to addressing the 

challenges within the private home care industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many people in our 

province whose story we have not heard yet. We know that. 

There are many, many families whose stories may never be 

heard. And the proper thing to do, the proper thing to do from 

our perspective, as we have indicated and our leader has 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3957 

indicated, is you’ve got to set some minimum standards to 

ensure that people that are in these homes have the adequate 

time and attention from qualified staff to ensure that they’re 

properly cared for. That’s very simple, very basic, and very 

straightforward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to have my grandma 

around when she was about 96. She was a fairly old lady. And 

the last couple of years, she just basically laid in her hospital 

room in Ile-a-la-Crosse and couldn’t speak to anybody. But one 

of the things that was most amazing, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

staff there treated her very well. Because as she grew up, Mr. 

Speaker — and that’s one thing we didn’t know, and it’s the 

story of many, many other families in our province — my 

grandma helped raise a lot of kids in our home community, and 

she had 13 of her own, and she had grandkids. And she cared 

for a lot of people in our community, like many other grandmas 

and grandfathers do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when she laid in that hospital room, many 

people came to visit her. And some of the nurses and some of 

the staff in the facility came to visit her as well, and they’d 

watch her. They’d turn her over to make sure that she didn’t . . . 

was comfortable. And a lot of times when you have seniors 

laying in beds for hours on end, they sometimes develop bed 

sores just from not being able to move. There’s circulation 

problems, Mr. Speaker. And you’d see the incredible respect 

that they had for my grandmother because, in her early years, 

she done a lot for our community and she helped a lot of 

families. 

 

Now in our particular family, our grandmother was the 

matriarch of our family. Like we’d all go visit her and we’d sit 

with her, and she’d tell us a lot of good stories. She was a great 

grandma. And we really benefited from some of the kindness 

that she showed. She had shown many families in her early 

years because families will do that. As you help one another . . . 

That’s basically the message that I got from her is if you’re not 

in this world to help one another, what are you here for? That 

was some of the messages that I got from her over time. 

 

But I can tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker, that the staff in our 

facility back home treated my grandma with great respect and 

she died a peaceful death one night. She died a very peaceful 

death. And I think the biggest thing is that she died with a lot of 

dignity, and she didn’t suffer. In some ways, Mr. Speaker, you 

would think, you would think that it’s just God’s way of 

thanking her for her service. 

 

Now what we don’t want to do, Mr. Speaker, is see the day 

where we forget about that. We don’t think that the elders in our 

lives . . . We as a government need to not think that the elders in 

our lives are a burden. They are the pioneers. They’re the 

people that built our communities. They’re the people that built 

our families. They’re the people that built this province. And 

we have to understand that. We have to understand that they are 

the ones that got us to where we are today. They are the ones 

that really contributed to our province in many great ways and 

in many ways that we will never know or understand. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now going back to my grandmother, Mr. Speaker. We learned 

so many lessons from how the staff at the hospital took care of 

her and, you know, we saw this as we were visiting every day. 

And we assume, Mr. Speaker, we assume that this is the kind of 

treatment that every elder gets, but we were sadly mistaken. 

There are many elders that sometimes die a lonely death. And, 

Mr. Speaker, of course our prayers and thoughts go out to all 

the elders because you lose so much when you lose an elder. 

And in this day and age, that’s not the thing that we ought to do 

as a province. If we have the resources, if we have the resources 

— you know, the appeal to all people as human beings — if we 

have the resources, then we must take the time and we must do 

the actions necessary to ensure that there’s adequate care for our 

seniors in this province. 

 

A fundamental thing, if you invest in the seniors and take care 

of the children well, your future is going to be bright. That’s 

just fundamental in my beliefs, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we 

look at some of these issues being raised today, and I say to the 

government that we ought to do a lot better. And am I scolding 

the government? Absolutely I’m scolding the government. We 

ought to do better on the personal care home. We ought to do 

better to understand the affordability and the issues that our 

senior citizens face today. And we ought to have respect for all 

seniors — north, south, rural, urban, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the things that’s really important is that you do your 

very best. Given the resources you have, you do your very best. 

And that’s all that we ask of you as an official opposition. 

 

And so far, Mr. Speaker, this government once again has got a 

big, fat F when it comes to taking care of our seniors in these 

private care homes because the job is not getting done, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t know how more plainly I could explain to the 

minister and to the government. The job is not getting done. 

When you don’t insist on minimum standards, when you don’t 

insist on making sure you have enough staffing levels, and 

when you don’t insist on performance by these private care 

home owners, if you just simply ignore the problems happening 

in these homes, then you’re the problem, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

not the seniors. It is the government not reacting and responding 

to a crisis that the NDP have brought forward and will continue 

bringing forward over the protests and howls of the 

Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I look at this particular bill and I say to the people out there, 

we have a lot of work to do. We’ve got to move a lot of 

mountains here to convince the Sask Party government who 

have stubbornly ignored these concerns. We have to do a lot of 

work to make sure people out there know that seniors’ care is in 

crisis in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got 

to know that seniors need us more than ever today. For one 

simple thing they ask for, for one simple thing. It’s to have the 

proper care that in the event that they ever were to pass away, 

that they can pass away with one thing that they all want to pass 

away with, and that’s dignity, Mr. Speaker, with dignity, 

knowing that they were treated well in their latter years. And 

what is wrong with that? What is wrong with that? 

 

So not only is affordability a challenge for our elders, but the 

proper care and the proper resources to ensure that care, the 

minimum standards, the good government oversight, and the 

action required to make sure this problem doesn’t persist, Mr. 

Speaker. 



3958 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

And when I look at Bill 111, it doesn’t do any of that. It doesn’t 

do any of that, Mr. Speaker. It just simply talks about 

maintenance records being made public. And I say it’s a crying 

shame, and I say to the minister and to the government that you 

ought to do better given the resources that you inherited from 

the previous government. And so far you have failed these 

people of Saskatchewan. You have failed our families, and you 

have failed our senior citizens. And I don’t want to hear any of 

them talking about senior care for the next number of years, Mr. 

Speaker, because they have failed miserably on that front by not 

addressing this problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I would point out, the government is not addressing 

the chronically low staffing levels in these care homes. The 

government is not insisting on minimum standards and good 

conduct in these personal care homes, Mr. Speaker. Their only 

solution is a one-time fund needed just for fixing up a few 

problems here and there, a few band-aids here and there, but not 

addressing the main issue, and that is the short staffing that is 

occurring. 

 

So once again I would tell the people of Saskatchewan, we want 

your stories. We want your input. We want your action on this 

front. And we need to force the Saskatchewan government to 

realize, the Saskatchewan Party government to realize the 

manner in which they’re treating our seniors is horrible. It is 

horrendous. You need to start moving forward. You need to 

address the issue and stop ignoring the concerns being brought 

forward by the families through the official opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that my colleagues have a lot more to 

say. I’ve got a lot more to say. I’d tell you about the stories that 

I have. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to give them adequate 

time to share their stories, my particular colleagues. And we’re 

going to have the families . . . We’re encouraging the families 

to look at this bill, Bill 111, and to see if it meets your needs 

and your requirements to ensure good care of your grandma or 

your great-aunt or your grandpa. 

 

And you look at this bill, and about the only thing the bill does, 

it talks about care home inspections to be made public. So if 

they’re made public and there are glaring problems and glaring 

omissions, is the government going to react to it? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can almost guarantee you, based on their past 

performance, the answer is a big fat no. This government will 

not, will not respond to the crisis. They simply want to hope 

that this problem goes away. But the opposition’s going to 

make sure it’s in their face every single day. You’re failing our 

senior citizens. You’re failing our families. And you’re failing 

those that care for our senior citizens of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So on that note, I know we have a lot more to share. We’re 

going to invite people to participate and to look very closely at 

this bill, not for what it’s intended to do but for what it’s failing 

to do, Mr. Speaker, what it’s failing to do. So on that note, I 

move that we adjourn debate on Bill 111, The Personal Care 

Homes Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise to move second reading of Bill 101, The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013. As I do, I’d 

also like to join colleagues from both sides of the House in 

recognizing our guests from the Saskatchewan Breast Cancer 

Connect. We appreciate your courage, your ability and capacity 

— unique capacity — to help champion this important cause for 

families and communities right across our province. And so to 

all of you, I know we’ll have a chance to speak in a few 

minutes, but I want to offer my special and sincere thanks for 

your courage, your bravery, and your capacity to articulate in 

ways that is increasingly meaningful for people across our 

province. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, as I rise today to move second reading of 

The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013, our 

government has worked diligently to demonstrate our 

commitment to post-secondary education and skills training. 

We’ve done that since the first day we’ve been elected. We 

continue to seek to be responsive to the needs of our 

post-secondary institutions while at the same time also being 

responsible to citizens right across the province. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m requesting that the Legislative 

Assembly support the following several proposed amendments. 

These amendments will undertake and do a number of things. 

First, they will help to clarify the awarding of diplomas in the 

list of powers of convocation, and that’s under section 11. 

 

Next, they’ll help to ensure that individuals elected to represent 

the senate, most specifically and especially outside of student 

members of the senate, they will work to ensure that they 

represent the senate, will be graduates of the university. And 

this is as per section 24. 

 

Third, the amendments will clarify the process by which student 

members of the senate are elected, and this is afforded action in 

sections 29 and 32. As well, the amendments will amend the 

term of office for the senate’s nominees to the board to allow 

them to serve a three-year, a third three-year term. That is 

section 45. 

 

As well, they will amend the powers of the council to facilitate 

the appointment of student members on hearing boards. This is 

section 61. And they’ll address the requirements of the 

corporate seal. That is section 98. 

 

Mr. Speaker, importantly the amendments that will allow a 

senator to serve a third three-year term will bring parity 

between the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the board 

appointments made essentially by cabinet, and those elected by 

the senate. These are the members of the board that are eligible 

to serve as board Chair or Vice-Chair, so we think it’s 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3959 

important that there is parity in the number of terms that these 

individuals can serve. Being eligible to serve three terms allows 

the members to gain expertise as members of board before 

serving as Chair or Vice-Chair, which helps the University of 

Saskatchewan maintain continuity and expertise in its board 

leadership. 

 

The remaining amendments are what we might call routine or 

perhaps even housekeeping in nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan submitted a letter 

earlier this year to the Ministry of Advanced Education 

requesting these amendments to its legislation. Mr. Speaker, the 

Ministry of Advanced Education has consulted with the 

University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina on the 

proposed amendments. Both institutions have provided letters 

of support for these amendments. 

 

With respect to the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

the ministry has worked closely with the institution on the 

proposed amendments through ongoing discussions via the 

university secretary’s office. The University of Saskatchewan 

consulted with the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union 

and the Graduate Students’ Association and they have both 

provided letters of support for these proposed amendments. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that while 

many of these amendments are routine in nature, the 

amendment to section 45 will help the University of 

Saskatchewan maintain continuity and expertise in its board 

leadership. I am honoured to have the opportunity to speak to 

these amendments today. And, Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 

2013. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 101, The University of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased and happy to participate in the debate and of 

course give the initial comments on behalf of the opposition in 

reference to this particular bill, Bill 101. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to start off or preface on my comments with the basic 

statement that in the country as a whole, our U of S [University 

of Saskatchewan] I think has the second highest tuition of all 

the provinces and jurisdictions of our country — the second 

highest tuition rate for many of our young students. 

 

And when we talk about some of the bills here today, it’s 

basically, from my perspective, it talks about how they appoint 

their senate and their board. Mr. Speaker, there are more 

pressing issues in this province than worrying about how we 

confer board appointments. And, Mr. Speaker, I would point 

out that from the university perspective, I think, I think, whether 

it’s the U or R [University of Regina] or U of S, that we ought 

to make a concerted effort to look at ways and means to which 

we can make education more affordable, as opposed to 

tinkering with board appointments or senate appointments, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I would point out, I would point out if the work of the 

university is so pressing by this Sask Party government, it’s so 

important to the Sask Party government and the minister 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, and the minister opposite, then why is it, 

why is it . . . The fundamental question I have is, why does it 

remain the second highest tuition in the country at our 

university? Big question, Mr. Speaker. Why is that? The burden 

of debt on some of the families and the young students is going 

to be on their backs for years and years to come. And what 

great announcement did the Sask Party have today, Mr. 

Speaker? It’s about tinkering with their board appointments. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, like I 

mentioned in some of the other comments, they want to see 

more action from this government. They want to see a great 

strategy on how the universities will roll out their plan for 

educating our young people to build this economy for the next 

20 or 30 years. They don’t want no tinkering. They want a 

major overhaul and they want excitement. And they want the 

government to be dynamic. They want everything to happen the 

good old-fashioned way through hard work, through good 

vision, and to some proper resources, Mr. Speaker. And we see 

none of that from this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I point out — whether it’s a right wing agenda to 

privatize our schools or to sell off the Crowns or to starve the 

universities, Mr. Speaker — we can’t understand from this side 

of the Assembly how they could do so much harm with so 

many resources that they inherited back in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

How could they not get things right despite all the good 

opportunities that they inherited from the previous 

administration and the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

That is what’s totally beyond us on this side of the Assembly. 

How could they have messed up so many things, so often, and 

on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[16:45] 

 

And again the universities, the universities, Mr. Speaker, I look 

at the universities again. They’re having a lot of challenges. 

We’re hearing of cutbacks. We’re hearing of layoffs. We’re 

hearing about the fact that many of the students are now 

assuming a lot of the debt and now, Mr. Speaker, a lot more 

debt than the students of the past. 

 

So again you go back to some of these points and you ask the 

fundamental question, one fundamental question. Why is it that 

the tuition rates for the university student in the province of 

Saskatchewan is the second highest in the country? Why is 

that? Why is that? And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Not a 

peep from the Sask Party. Because if I was them, I would be 

just as embarrassed to answer that question as it was posed to 

me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The bottom line is the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina need our help and all the different colleges 

need our help and they need our help now, Mr. Speaker. And if 

they don’t get that help, if they’re being ignored, Mr. Speaker, 

then what you’re going to find is you’re going to find tinkering 

that’s happening right now as a result of this bill and not 

addressing the main issue, the big issue, the fundamental issue, 

is why are our students paying the second highest tuition in the 

country of Canada? That’s the question I have for the minister, 



3960 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s a lot more issues I want to raise on this particular 

bill, but I want to point out that’s the fundamental question we 

have. They cannot answer, Mr. Speaker. But we have a lot more 

people coming forward with a lot more of those points on this 

particular bill. So on that notion, I move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 101, and I take my seat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 101, The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after some brief remarks, I will be 

moving second reading of The Wildfire Act. 

 

The primary focus of the new legislation is the prevention of 

wildfires, over 50 per cent which are human caused. The 

Prairie and Forest Fires Act of 1982 was developed in the 

1950s and then updated in 1982. It is one of the oldest pieces of 

wildfire legislation in Canada and has not kept pace with 

current wildfire issues or policies. It is inefficient in terms of 

implementing key protective measures such as fire bans, and 

requires a complete rewrite. 

 

Each year we are seeing greater loss of homes and businesses as 

a result of wildfires. The devastating impact of wildfires on 

communities can be seen, an example is Slave Lake in Alberta 

last year, resulted in a significant portion of that city destroyed 

by wildfire. In 2003 in Kelowna, BC [British Columbia] over 

300 homes were lost. We see the devastating impacts of 

wildfire in California and Colorado. Saskatchewan though is 

not immune. In 1999 seven homes were lost in La Ronge, and 

in 2002 some 54 homes and cabins were lost at Turtle Lake. 

 

In the new legislation, the first of its kind in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, provisions will be included for adoption of fire 

prevention measures dealing with building construction and 

vegetation management to better improve the survivability of 

structures from a wildfire and create a safer area to conduct 

firefighting activities. These measure will only apply to any 

new development within the provincial forest and some 

designated parkland and is an important step in the right 

direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The proposed new wildfire Act before the House will update 

terminology, clarify administrative responsibility, clarify 

responsibility for wildfire and liability for causing wildfires, 

and define ministry responsibility and liability. Its purpose is to 

provide the provincial government with legislative authority to 

address the prevention, management, control, and extinguishing 

of wildfires as well as provide the provincial government with 

legislative authority to create related regulations. 

The Wildfire Act is based on the principle that risk to human 

life, community infrastructure, economic and social values shall 

be managed in careful balance with the important ecological 

role of wildfire in a sustainable environment. Furthermore it 

recognizes that the responsibility and accountability for 

reducing the likelihood and consequences of wildfire is 

appropriately shared by government with individuals, industry, 

Crown corporations, and municipal authorities to ensure the 

protection of people, property, and public assets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed Act aligns with the goals of the 

government’s growth plan by supporting safe development of 

Crown forest lands. It will provide additional protection and 

security for industry and residents and improve the protection of 

infrastructure and management of the province’s natural 

resources. 

 

The new legislation will enable administration of industrial and 

commercial operations under the ministry’s results-based 

regulatory framework. This will be done with the establishment 

of the wildfire prevention and preparedness code chapter. 

Several industry sectors such as oil and gas operations, mineral 

explorations, road construction, public utilities, outfitting, peat 

moss operations, and railway operations were not included 

under the old legislation but have been a cause of fires. Mr. 

Speaker, they are now indeed included. 

 

As wildfire danger increases, additional prevention and 

preparedness measures specific to each industry sector will be 

triggered resulting in fewer industry-caused fires. By taking 

measures to protect their infrastructure from wildfire, industry 

will face reduced disruption by extending their duration, the 

duration of their operations, and can continue to operate safely 

when wildfires occur in the vicinity. 

 

The legislation will require all industries, including public 

utilities working in the provincial forests and designated 

parkland, to complete fire prevention and preparedness 

procedures and practices that will help decrease the number, 

cost, and area burned by industry-caused fires. 

 

The wild land interface is an area where structures are built 

close to or within the forest. As a result, the potential for 

wildfires does exist in this region. The wild land interface will 

continue to expand as continued growth and economic 

development initiatives take hold across northern 

Saskatchewan.  

 

The significant property loss as a result of wildfires has 

occurred in interface areas and is expected to increase unless 

more proactive measures to reduce wildfire hazards are indeed 

instituted. In order to accomplish this, The Wildfire Act will 

enable development of a wild land interface code chapter 

requiring new developments of a permanent nature on land 

within the Crown provincial forest to conform with fire smart 

principles. It will incorporate fire hazard mitigation measures 

related to building and subdivision planning, design, 

construction, vegetation management, and maintenance. 

 

The new Act also places greater emphasis on prevention and 

preparedness measures with respect to and of fire. For 

non-conformance, it places additional liability on individuals 

and industry for not only firefighting costs and expenses, but 



November 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3961 

also for the value of Crown timber, damages, and rehabilitation 

of Crown forest land, and damages to property. 

 

This proposed wildfire Act will also enhance client service and 

reduce government administration by moving from a system 

currently requiring permits for all burning activities to a 

risk-based notification system. Only the highest risk activities 

will require permits in the future, Mr. Speaker. The remainder 

will require either a burn notification or no notification at all if 

identified as a low risk. The ministry notification process will 

avoid the false dispatch of costly resources. 

 

The proposed new legislation further clarifies where rural and 

municipalities and the Crown are responsible for controlling 

and extinguishing wildfires within rural municipalities. It also 

provides assurance to all municipalities that the minister will 

determine if costs for firefighting assistance provided by the 

ministry constitute an excessive financial burden on a 

municipality. 

 

It includes regulations to determine partial remission of costs 

where warranted. We listened to rural municipalities, Mr. 

Speaker, and we retained the status quo on the 4.5 kilometre, 

3-mile buffer zone adjacent to provincial Crown forests and 

clarified the way costs can be indeed shared. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation is fully supported by the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, SARM. 

Since we became government, we have been working diligently 

to make changes to the way we regulate. We have listened to 

stakeholders, first to understand their perspectives on the 

proposed legislation, then to make appropriate adjustments that 

meet the needs of both stakeholders and government. 

 

The legislation will also build on several important 

commitments of this government, our commitment to economic 

growth, and our commitment to the sustainable management 

and long-term health of Saskatchewan’s provincial forest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Act will align our province with the 

legislation of other Canadian wildlife partner jurisdictions; will 

treat resource stakeholders consistently, including industries 

under the New West Partnership Agreement; and reflect the 

ministry’s current results-based regulations initiatives. The 

proposed wildfire Act will support and promote the protection 

and management over natural resources. Furthermore, Mr. 

Speaker, the Act ensures that Saskatchewan will continue to 

sustain a safe, healthy environment and foster economic and 

recreational development which is vital to our province’s 

thriving economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I move second reading of The Wildfire 

Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Environment has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased to be able to stand today in the Assembly to 

respond initially to Bill 107 on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot, a lot of questions on this 

particular bill. And we’re going to take the time, Mr. Speaker, 

to research all the different consultations that the minister 

alluded to in his opening statement because we think that there 

are some significant challenges, not only for the RMs but for 

many of the villages and the towns that are along the forest 

fringe of our province. And we’re going to take a very special 

attention to some of the statements that he made as a result of 

this particular bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know, I know that the member, the current 

member from . . . or the current Minister of Agriculture, and I 

think the Minister of Housing, and one more of the members of 

the government took a tour of northern Saskatchewan when 

they were in opposition. And you should have heard the phrases 

on the radio. My goodness. The let-it-burn policy, they don’t 

care about the northern forest, they don’t care about the 

northern people. 

 

And guess what, Mr. Speaker? Who created the let-it-burn 

policy? It was the Sask Party all along. So they’re letting our 

forests burn. And there’s nothing of any value there. They’re 

letting the forests burn, Mr. Speaker. So I remember their little 

trip to Fond-du-Lac and a few other northern communities 

where they said, oh this terrible NDP government is letting it 

burn. And here, Mr. Speaker, they were developing their own 

let-it-burn policy. So I guess my only point is, this wildfire Act, 

Mr. Speaker, is probably the only thing . . . The only value I see 

in this particular bill, it might be a good fire starter for their 

let-it-burn policy in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s all I see in this particular bill. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, what I would point out as well is that there 

are many people that want to participate in this bill. There are 

many organizations that want to have their say in this bill. And 

when you start sending bills to RMs and to small villages and 

towns that can’t afford to pay a forest fire fighting cost bill, 

either you’ve made sure you’re fire smart, otherwise we’ll send 

you a big bill for this fire we’re going to shut out for you . . . 

And industry is in the same boat, Mr. Speaker. If they 

accidentally start a fire, they’re going to have to start paying 

firefighting costs. 

 

Look at some of the Crown corporations. If some of the activity 

in SaskTel or SaskPower, if they create a fire, guess what’s 

going to happen? They’re going to bill SaskPower, and guess 

who’s going to pay for it? The consumer, the people like you 

and I that pay our power bill. That’s who’s going to be paying 

the price if there is a fire created by any of our Crown 

corporations. Once again, all intended to weaken the Crown 

corporations of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly what this right wing government is intending 

on. They don’t listen to anybody. They don’t consult. They do 

what they think is right. And Mr. Speaker, that kind of arrogant 

attitude will get you in trouble. So on that note, I know we have 

a lot more folks that want to talk on this bill, and they will. So 

on that point, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn the debate 

on Bill 107. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



3962 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Operating Under New Rules and Procedures  

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3929 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3929 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3929 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3929 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3929, 3951 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3930 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3930 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3930 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3930 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3930 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3950 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3930 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3931 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3931 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3931 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Support for the Philippines 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3931 

 Province Boasts Lowest Unemployment Rate in Canada 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3932 

 Regina Thunder Wins Canadian Championship 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3932 

 Affordable Housing for Prince Albert  

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3932 

 Local Store Wins Top Independent Grocer Award 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3932 

 4-H Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3933 

 Support for Hydraulic Fracturing 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3933 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Infrastructure and Funding in Prairie Spirit School Division 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3933 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3933 

 Health Care Conditions and Staffing 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3935 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3935 

 Response to Futures Fund Report 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3936 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3936 

 Contributions of the Film Industry and Support for Creative Industries 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3937 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3937 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Supporting Disaster Relief for the Philippines 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3938 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3939 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3939 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3939 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3940 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3943 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3943 



 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3946 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3946 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3949 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3950 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3954 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3955 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3958 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3959 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3960 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3961 

MOTIONS 

 Rescinding of Order for Bill No. 605 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3954 

 

 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




