




















































Hansard: October 31, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 6A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2013, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3769 

 October 31, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: — Introduction of guests. We’re setting new 

records here twice this week. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefit from the rental 

purchase program, option program also known as RPO [rental 

purchase option]. These families are very proud homeowners in 

their communities. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent to own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many northern people. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today presenting a petition in support of 

replacing the gym at Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

The petitioners point out a number of things, Mr. Speaker. One 

is that the school and community have raised this issue with the 

Sask Party provincial government since 2007 without 

resolution; that the gym at Sacred Heart has played an 

important role in the school’s efforts to become a literacy 

leader, having served as a gathering place for the very 

successful reading assemblies and reading nights; and 

moreover, Mr. Speaker, that Sacred Heart Community School is 

the largest school in North Central with 450 students, 75 per 

cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following actions to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to 

immediately commit to the replacement of the gymnasium 

of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens from Melfort, Maple Creek, 

and Swift Current. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

Health Care Providers Week 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day health 

care providers in Saskatchewan work tirelessly to provide their 

patients with high-quality care. They are dedicated to the 

people of Saskatchewan and help keep the health care system 

focused where it needs to be focused — on the patients and 

families it serves. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, October 27th to 

November 3rd is being recognized as Health Care Providers 

Week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care providers play a vital role in our 

province. Anyone who has come into contact with the health 

system can attest to their compassion, caring, and professional 

nature. There are a wide range of health care providers such as 

dieticians providing medical nutrition therapy, nurses providing 

care to the sick, special care aids looking after elderly patients, 

and surgeons providing life-saving operations, to name just a 

few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is working to ensure that we have 

the right mix of health care providers to offer the best possible 

care for our province. We are grateful for the role they play in 

all areas of the health care sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

thanking our health care providers for their ongoing 

commitment to high-quality, patient-first care. They are making 

a real difference in the lives of Saskatchewan residents. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Prostate Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to recognize 

the month of November as Prostate Cancer Awareness Month 

and also to kick off the 7th annual Movember campaign. 

 

Since 2003 the global movement to raise funds and awareness 

for prostate and testicular cancer has involved millions of 

participants across 21 countries. Last year Canadians raised 

42.6 million for men’s health initiatives. 

 

The Movember campaign has also recently developed programs 

to address mental health issues. Men face high levels of suicide 

and depression, yet are often less inclined to seek the help they 

need. Mental health remains a challenge in Canada, and it’s 

encouraging to see effective campaigns like Movember branch 

out to address these issues. 

 

We’re proud to announce our participation in this year’s 

fundraising. All male staff and some of our braver MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], including myself and 

our leader, will be seeking donations for Team Jack in this 

year’s campaign. 

 

What makes this movement so effective is how it transforms 

our brothers, fathers, and friends into walking and talking 

billboards. For the month of November, we are surrounded by 

moustaches of all shapes and sizes. As we saw in the legislature 



3770 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

last fall, this can be both good and very, very bad. 

 

But outside of showing off people’s sprouting skills, these 

public displays are never detached from what they symbolize. 

Many participants have personal experiences with men who 

have struggled with cancer or mental health issues, and there is 

no advertisement as effective as the personal experience. I 

would like this Assembly to join with me in recognizing all the 

individuals organizing, participating in, and supporting such 

important initiatives and that are supporting Movember. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Wadena Student Wins Bronze in Cross-Country 

Competition 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Dr. George Sheehan, a runner, writer, philosopher, said, 

“Running makes you an athlete in all areas of life . . . trained in 

the basics, prepared for whatever comes, ready to fill each hour 

and deal with the decisive moment.” 

 

Today it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise in the House 

and recognize a cross-country runner from my constituency, 

James Lorenzen of Wadena Composite School. James won 

bronze at the high school cross-country meet held on 

Thanksgiving weekend. This is his third provincial high school 

cross-country win. 

 

Since his high school win, James also competed in the junior 

men’s category at the Saskatchewan Athletics provincial 

cross-country championship in Saskatoon and placed second 

overall. In this category he’s competing against athletes who 

are two years older, many of whom are second year university 

students. This gives him funding from the Saskatchewan 

Athletics to cover half of his travel costs to the nationals in 

Vancouver on November the 30th. 

 

His coach, Harvey Weber, said that this is an incredible feat 

because James does most of his training on his own most of the 

year. In the winter he trains once a week in the Tisdale Track 

Club. I’m sure we’ll be hearing much more about James as he 

pursues his passion for cross-country running. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating James and wishing him the best of luck as he 

represents Saskatchewan at the nationals. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Women’s History Month and International 

Day of the Girl 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to recognize both Women’s History Month and the 

second International Day of the Girl held on October 11th. 

 

Women’s History Month is celebrated each year and seeks to 

recognize the important contributions of women in Canada and 

across the globe. This year’s theme, Canadian Women 

Pioneers: Inspiring Change Through Ongoing Leadership, 

highlights women’s historical contributions to a number of 

growing fields. 

 

In December 2010 the United Nations passed a resolution to 

declare October 11th as the International Day of the Girl. The 

theme of the UN’s [United Nations] second observance of this 

day was Innovating Girls’ Education. Girls throughout the 

world face higher rates of violence, poverty, discrimination; 

and access to education is seen to be integral in ending this 

cycle. In Canada, girls have higher rates of depression, sexual 

harassment, and dating violence than their male counterparts. 

Days like International Day of the Girl help raise awareness of 

how support for girls and their basic human rights is key for 

healthy communities. 

 

I encourage all members in this House to join me in celebrating 

Women’s History Month and the second International Day of 

the Girl. Furthermore I call on all members to continue to fight 

for the rights of girls and women daily. It is these very girls, 

when given the opportunity, who will become women pioneers 

of the future. We need continued vigilance to ensure our 

daughters, sisters, mothers, and friends can live in peace and 

security. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Policing and 

Corrections. 

 

TV Series Stars Local Athletes 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

rise in the House today to speak about two extraordinary young 

men who grew up in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, Mark and 

Craig McMorris are world-class snowboarders, born and raised 

in the heart of the Saskatchewan prairies. 

 

These boys are brothers and best friends. They enjoy competing 

against each other in snowboarding, wakeboarding, 

skateboarding, boat racing, golf, hockey, and almost any type of 

athletic activity. The brothers have gained recognition in the 

last few years with victories at several international snowboard 

competitions such as the World X Games in Aspen, Colorado, 

where Mark took home two medals this past January. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, over the past year the brothers have begun a 

new endeavour. For the past several months, Mark and Craig 

have been busy filming their own activity-packed MTV 

documentary which follows them on their exciting adventures 

around the world. The series, titled McMorris & McMorris, is 

set to debut tomorrow night, 7 p.m., on MTV Canada. Staying 

true to their prairie roots, the first episode takes place in the 

beautiful Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan, where the boys first 

learned to snowboard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the McMorris brothers on their accomplishments 

and invite everyone to watch the premiere of McMorris & 

McMorris. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Happy Halloween 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3771 

Speaker, today is a big day for children across the province, and 

they’re probably already counting down the hours until school 

is finished for the day. They’re going to rush home and change 

into their costumes, quickly transforming into the likes of Iron 

Man and Disney princesses, witches and vampires, and of 

course, my favourite, zombies. 

 

Kids will be putting in a hard night of roaring their best trick or 

treat and carrying around heavy pillowcases and bags before 

they go home to search through their loot of chocolate bars and 

candy, gum and chips. After tonight, kids are going to have a 

supply of sweet treats to last for the next little while and, if 

we’re lucky, maybe the big kids will get some too. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not sure about that. 

 

What I am sure about, Mr. Speaker, is that it gets dark quite 

early these days, and I’d like to remind everybody to slow 

down and keep a watchful eye for kids while driving tonight. 

I’d also like to encourage all the parents, big brothers and 

sisters out there, to join their young trick-or-treaters to ensure 

that they cross the street safely while they’re having fun. 

 

Most of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to wish everybody a happy 

Halloween. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Building New Schools 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, well, well, the Education critic’s letter to the editor in 

today’s Leader-Post is just another example of the same old 

NDP [New Democratic Party] fearmongering tactics. This time 

they appear to be against building new schools. 

 

In addition to our current capital investments, the nine new 

joint-use P3 [public–private partnership] schools will be built 

on time and on budget, faster than we ever could through 

traditional procurement. P3s cost less. We can say that because 

we will be undertaking a value-for-money analysis as part of 

the process. We will hire a professional firm as an external 

financial adviser for P3s we undertake, and ultimately projects 

can be reviewed by the Provincial Auditor. 

 

The member from Rosemont also wrote about a project that 

took place in Nova Scotia in the late ’90s . . . I don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker, before Twitter, before Facebook, before best practices, 

before value-for-money, and before the P3 market had matured. 

Today’s P3s do not have these same issues. Mr. Speaker, he 

even suggests that we will be giving up control of our schools 

and that community access will be compromised. 

 

As we’ve said repeatedly, our government will be examining 

the best practices of successful P3 projects from across Canada. 

Why can’t the NDP get on board with the rest of Canada and 

support P3s? Their federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, does. 

Janice MacKinnon does. The Manitoba NDP does. And even 

they did when they ran their own P3 office between 2000 and 

2005 under Maynard Sonntag and Pat Atkinson. Mr. Speaker, 

they may have a new leader, but it’s the same old NDP. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care Conditions 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Health said he would look into the concerns raised 

by retired RN [registered nurse] Suzanne Stewart about hospital 

cleanliness and the standard of care. It’s good that her concerns 

are finally being looked into, but my question to the Premier is 

this: why was no follow-up done last year when Ms. Stewart 

raised these concerns directly to the Premier? 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, we do take concerns raised with the 

government very seriously. I can look into reasons why that a 

response may not have been provided with respect to the 

specific question by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

I think a pretty good indicator though of response from 

government is really the record of government in terms of 

funding in health care, in terms of a larger complement of staff 

in the province than we’ve ever had, including more doctors 

and more nurses. Mr. Speaker, I think you’ve heard members 

on this side of the House, the Minister of Health, make the 

commitment that we understand that the improvements will 

always be needed in the health care system. We’re committed 

to those improvements. That’s why we’ve increased health care 

funding since 2007 by 41 per cent. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Suzanne Stewart first wrote to the 

Premier on September 24th, 2012. Yet despite acknowledging 

he received a copy of this letter with reference to short-staffing 

with rather revolting details about filthy conditions in the 

hospital, the Minister of Health said to the media yesterday, 

“No, no, I didn’t follow up specifically.” So if the Premier 

wants to know why there wasn’t a follow-up, he can just call 

over two seats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he find it acceptable that the 

Minister of Health is not following up when he receives some 

pretty shocking letters? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we can check into the specific 

case, but I would say this about the current Minister of Health 

— and frankly the former minister of Health and the Minister 

now of Rural and Remote Health, and all members on this side 

of the House — when we hear concerns with respect to the 

health care system, but really with respect to government, we 

work hard to address those concerns. To the extent this one 

wasn’t, we’ll check into it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think you could accuse this Minister of 

Health of not responding to concerns, whether it’s long-term 



3772 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

care, whether it’s health care or specific health care cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s remember what this government has been 

dealing with over the last number of years. We’re dealing with 

taking over a health care system that was neglected by members 

opposite. They were unwilling to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well, the former minister of Health wants to enter the debate, 

the former minister of Health and other ministers of Health over 

there who refused even to set goals for the right numbers of 

health care staff in our systems, Mr. Speaker. The only health 

care goal they ever set over there was the number 52 — that’s 

the number of hospitals they closed on that side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a goal that this government 

could look at. How about ensuring our hospitals are clean? How 

about ensuring seniors receive the baths that they need in our 

care facilities throughout the province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the Minister of Health admitted that he 

ignored Suzanne Stewart’s shocking letter last year, he did 

acknowledge that the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Saskatoon Health Region reported in the summer that 

significant cleanliness problems exist at Royal University 

Hospital. But the Minister of Health said this to the media 

yesterday: “I wouldn’t want to speak to what processes are 

going to be put in place by the Saskatoon Health Region 

without talking to the CEO, so we’re making arrangements to 

do that.” 

 

It’s bad enough, Mr. Speaker, that the minister and the Premier 

ignored the shocking details in the letter from Suzanne. It’s 

even worse, Mr. Speaker, that the minister has been alerted to 

cleanliness problems by the CEO of the Saskatoon Health 

Region and doesn’t even know what processes are being put in 

place, Mr. Speaker. It’s now October 31st and she raised these 

earlier on. 

 

My question to the Premier: how is it that the Minister of 

Health still doesn’t know what processes are going to be put in 

place in order to ensure that our hospitals are cleaner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned with this 

Leader of the Opposition that we have to ensure we do a fact 

check in terms of his preamble. And so, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Health has just confirmed for me that there was a 

letter that went back to the person in question, Mr. Speaker, and 

moreover the Ministry of Health referred the matter to the 

Saskatoon Health District. The Saskatoon Health District 

looked at the concerns that were raised and worked to set up a 

plan to deal with it, to deal with it in terms of cleanliness. And 

so his facts are just fundamentally wrong, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

not to say that all the health regions, that the Ministry of Health, 

that everyone can’t ensure we’re doing an even better job to 

address these issues. We will do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the best way we can ensure we are providing the best 

quality care and the cleanest and most modern facilities is to 

have a government that will make an investment in those 

human resources, add more human resources, add huge 

numbers in terms of the capital budget. 

 

While recognizing we have more to do, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

happy to defend the record of the government over the woeful, 

the lacking record of members opposite when they formed the 

government in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the facts from the 

minister’s own words yesterday in a scrum: “I wouldn’t want to 

speak to what processes are going to be put in place by the 

Saskatoon Health Region without talking to the CEO, so we’re 

making arrangements to do that.” Hardly proper follow-up 

when shocking details are revealed. 

 

Let’s get this straight, Mr. Speaker. The Premier and the Health 

minister were alerted to rather revolting conditions in the 

hospital last September. There wasn’t the proper follow-up. 

They also learned over the summer, Mr. Speaker, that the health 

region admitted that there are significant cleanliness problems 

in hospitals and at RUH [Royal University Hospital]. Yet as of 

yesterday, the minister didn’t know what was going on. And the 

minister bragged yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that he had walked 

the gemba, which apparently is lean terminology that just 

means he’d walked the halls of RUH, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I don’t know Japanese, Mr. Speaker, so I don’t know the 

lean terminology for clean bathrooms, for clean floors, for 

patient safety, for patient dignity. But those, Mr. Speaker, are 

clearly the basics that this government needs to be focusing on. 

 

My question to the Premier: how is it possible, how’s it 

acceptable to him that the minister has walked the gemba but 

he’s not paying attention to the details that matter in health 

care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I assume NDP staff taped the 

entire scrum. And so I would then assume that this Leader of 

the Opposition knows he’s being very selective. He’s 

cherry-picking the minister’s comments. 

 

The minister said, the minister indicated in the scrum yesterday 

that as a result of this letter and as a result of the process, and as 

a result of the process under way now by the Saskatoon Health 

Region, that there’s a 90-day process that has been allotted by 

the health region to investigate the issue to determine how best 

to deal with it to ensure facilities are clean. These are the rest of 

the comments that the minister said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for a brand new leader of the 

NDP, leading apparently the same old NDP, to ensure that he is 

accurate, to ensure that what he reports to this Assembly is the 

full report, Mr. Speaker. We actually can get things done 

together — together — opposition and government. But not if, 

not if the Leader of the Opposition insists on every single day 

coming into this House and torquing serious situations in the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3773 

Mr. Broten: — Well here’s a serious situation, Mr. Speaker, a 

situation from the nurses here in our province. We haven’t yet 

heard from the Premier with regard to the fact that our 

province’s nurses are very afraid for patient safety in our 

hospitals, in our long-term care facilities. Tracy Zambory, 

president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, says staffing 

levels are “dangerously low” and that nurses are “very fearful 

for patient safety.” 

 

My question to the Premier because we haven’t heard from him 

on this issue: does he share the concerns raised by 

Saskatchewan’s nurses, or will he continue to stubbornly 

dismiss them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are working 

carefully with all the health care providers to ensure there’s a 

proper complement of health care workers in the province. In 

fact the member will know that this government has an 

unprecedented partnership with SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses] that has flown from the first contract that our 

government signed with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member will also know that we set a goal to 

hire 800 new nurses, to have 800 more nurses working in the 

province to deal not only with public safety but to help shorten 

up wait times for health care, Mr. Speaker. The Hon. Leader of 

the Opposition will know there are not 800 new nurses in the 

province today. There are 1,000 new nurses in the province 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that this government, this 

government has invested in unprecedented ways, not just in 

capital but in health care, in human resources, and specifically 

for nurses. This is after a government that was in place for 16 

years who refused even to set a goal. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they did some things with respect to nursing, 

15 July, 2000, here’s a StarPhoenix article that is headlined 

“Nurses axed: Saskatoon and Regina to bear the brunt of 

attrition cuts.” Two hundred and eighty jobs lost under their 

watch; 1.000 new nurses working today in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. More work to be done, but 

progress on this side and complete neglect on that side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a quote from today or from very 

recently from the president of the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses: “very fearful for patient safety.” The Premier would be 

served well to listen to what nurses are saying today. 

 

We also haven’t heard from the Premier, Mr. Speaker, with 

regard to the fact that patients’ families are actually having to 

pay for private care providers to go into hospitals in order to 

ensure that their hospitalized loved ones are receiving basic 

care. The Phillips family was spending about $1,000 per week 

so a private care aid could go into the hospital in order to ensure 

that their mom was fed, in order to ensure that their mom could 

get to a bathroom. This is appalling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: we haven’t heard from him on this 

issue. Does he believe that this is acceptable? Is this fairness for 

families? Does this amount to dignity? Does this amount to 

respect for Saskatchewan seniors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been making this issue 

a priority as well. There are 33 per cent less waiting times now 

for people in acute care who are needing to move to long-term 

care. We’ve cut that by fully one-third, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are the facts of the matter. My understanding is, 

thankfully, is the family in question has reported that there is 

now a long-term care bed, I think effective earlier this week, for 

their loved one, Mr. Speaker. And so again, again I think it’s 

important to reference the entire stories in these things, 

recognizing that progress is going to be made. 

 

But he began his question again with the preamble where he’s 

lecturing this side of the House on nurses. It’s pretty rich, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s so very rich that the NDP would sit over there, the 

NDP who neglected nurses in this province to the point where 

there was a pretty famous strike, who refused to set goals for 

hiring enough nurses. And then when the opposition asked for a 

goal, they accused us of being naive. Mr. Speaker, from a party 

in government that cut nursing positions in 2000 and in the ’90s 

reduced nursing training seats as they did doctor training seats 

in the province, Mr. Speaker, there are no lessons in health care, 

human resource policy to be learned from members on that side 

of the House. 

 

We’ll continue to step up. We’ll continue to hire with 1,000 

more nurses that are practising, 300 more doctors, Mr. Speaker. 

And case by case we’ll deal with issues as they arise in the 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, talk about being dismissive of the 

concerns that are raised by Saskatchewan people. The direct 

question, Mr. Speaker, was whether the Premier thinks it’s 

appalling that families have to pay $1,000 a week to have a 

private care aid come into a hospital to ensure that their mother 

receives the basics, Mr. Speaker. That was the question. 

 

We also haven’t heard from the Premier, Mr. Speaker, with 

regard to the fact that it was his government that changed the 

regulations to strip away minimum standards in seniors’ care 

homes. The excuse from the minister, Mr. Speaker, is that 

minimum care standards weren’t as up to date as they should 

be. Well I agree, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why the standards 

should be strengthened, not erased. Instead, Mr. Speaker, this 

government just does away with them. 

 

My question to the Premier because we haven’t heard from on 

this issue: what is his rationale for erasing, for eliminating 

minimum care standards here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the Leader of the Opposition has 

heard the answer to the question from the minister. When he 



3774 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

asked it, I was actually here a week ago today when he asked it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re looking to individualize care in the province 

of Saskatchewan. There was an updating of regulations that 

dated back to 1966. Mr. Speaker, it used to be in this province 

that long-term care meant level 1, 2, 3, 4. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that doesn’t happen anymore in Saskatchewan. Now level of 

long-term care doesn’t have sort of a number assigned to it, but 

it would all be, if you had to estimate, it would all be 3, 4, and 

frankly even more intense care than that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why would we want to even prescribe the 

same number of hours for those who simply don’t require, i.e., 

level 1 and 2 that used to be in those facilities when the 

regulations were written? Why would we want to limit the care 

to people in long-term care to that kind of a paradigm, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

I would also point this out. I’ve also been watching question 

period. I know the member’s been asking a lot of questions of 

me knowing that I wasn’t here, but that’s fair enough. I would 

just say this, Mr. Speaker: as he asks these questions, there’s 

going to come a day — maybe not now, maybe not soon — 

where he’s going to have to say to this Assembly and the 

people of the province, what would he do. What are his plans 

around the staffing complement? What are his plans around 

standards of care? He’ll have to cost them out. He’ll have to 

present them to the people of the province. How many nurses 

should we have in Saskatchewan? How many doctors would he 

have? And what would be the cost of that to the system, Mr. 

Speaker? We’re waiting for that. I’m hopeful. I’m an optimist. I 

think the Leader of the Opposition is going to come forward 

with some of those specifics soon and very soon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We also haven’t 

heard from the Premier, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the fact 

that health regions, Mr. Speaker, instead of addressing 

significant short-staffing are just throwing their hands up in the 

air, lowering the bar for the quality and level of care that 

seniors received. Talk about pursuing mediocrity, Mr. Speaker. 

So now bathing, changing bed sheets, basic cleaning, and hot 

meals are actually listed as discretionary. 

 

My question to the Premier because we haven’t heard from him 

on this issue: why is he lowering the bar instead of addressing 

the real problems in health care and in seniors’ care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it has been the 

practice in health care in this province for a very long time that 

health care management together with the front-line workers 

would consult on what would be contingency plans, what 

would be emergency plans in the event there was a labour 

shortage on any given day, Mr. Speaker, including the fact, 

including the fact that in rural long-term care the information 

would be sent out to front-care providers, priorities that needed 

to be done. Residents need to be fed and hydrated. Residents 

have to be keep comfortable. Residents need to be kept dry, 

skin care completed. Residents need to be safe. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, towards the end of the page, what can 

be left? Pull bed changes; bed-making can be left. Restocking 

rooms may be . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he’s helping 

us out, Mr. Speaker. These are guidelines from 2004. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier should be listening to 

what the Health minister is saying during his gembas, during 

his talks with people in the community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We hear from health care professionals that working 

short-staffed is very, very common, Mr. Speaker, and as a result 

the quality of care of our seniors is suffering. We also haven’t 

heard from the Premier, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the CEO of 

the province’s largest health region says the main problem is a 

lack of staff and that this government’s one-time program will 

do absolutely nothing to address that. She also says it will do 

nothing to address the conditions of facilities. That’s a damning 

assessment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government knows what the real problem is. The CEO of 

the largest health region, Mr. Speaker, says the government’s 

one-time program will not address the staffing issues, will not 

address the other issues facing the health care system and 

facing seniors. This government knows what the real problem is 

but is refusing to act, refusing to address.  

 

My question to the Premier because we have not heard from 

him on this issue: does he agree with the assessment from 

Maura Davies, CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region, or does 

he dismiss her comments? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what else the NDP 

government were telling front-line workers in terms of 

long-term care, in terms of contingency plans in the event that 

there was an emergency: developing a care plan at the 

beginning of the shift, all staff meet with supervisor and decide, 

can some bowel care be left? Can some baths be left? What else 

can be left? What will be left with that particular shift? Mr. 

Speaker, these are plans that I think every organization needs to 

have. You need to have a plan in the event that there’s staff 

shortages and work to prevent them, knowing that they’re going 

to happen under . . . It doesn’t matter who the government is, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

With respect to the hon. member’s question, we don’t dismiss 

the counsel and the advice of our CEOs or those that serve on 

boards or, even more importantly, front-line workers in health 

care. Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve responded to those 

concerns. That’s why we have historic investment in health 

care. That’s why we have wait times for surgeries, Mr. Speaker, 

falling dramatically in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 

why there are 1,000 more nurses than there ever were when 

they were the government. That’s why there are 300 more 

doctors. That’s why we’re pioneering CECs [collaborative 

emergency centres] for rural emergency service. That’s why 

there’s STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society], Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure people can get the health care they need, and 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3775 

I know there’s an important development coming from them 

today. 

 

This government has made a priority of health care, Mr. 

Speaker. I think the people in 2011 recognized the fact that we 

made a priority, and the configuration in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, is a manifestation of the health care priority of the 

government of the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Taxation on Credit Unions 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of confusion 

about this government’s intentions in various areas these days. 

One of those areas is with regard to taxes on credit unions. 

When the federal government hiked taxes on credit unions this 

past spring, it was a direct hit and certainly a shock. I’ve raised 

this repeatedly with the Minister of Finance. Surprisingly and 

unfortunately though, the minister hasn’t been able to rule out 

following suit and hiking provincial taxes on credit unions. 

Credit unions have made it clear that if the province follows 

suit the impact would be devastating. 

 

So my question to the Premier: can he commit today to 

maintain the current tax regime for Saskatchewan’s credit 

unions, yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to the 

member’s question, which I think is a good question, credit 

unions have served the province of Saskatchewan very well for 

a very, very long time. I think most if not all members have 

been spoken to by local credit union representatives — at least 

on this side, perhaps on the opposition side as well — about 

their concerns around this issue. 

 

We have had some discussion in cabinet and elsewhere about 

the issue that’s presented. There is a federal dimension to this 

whole question, and until we get clarification from the federal 

government on the steps that they’re going to be taking, we’ll 

be taking them under advisement at that point and making some 

decisions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, through my 

correspondence, my understanding is that the federal 

government made their choice. We think it’s the wrong choice, 

but there’s now a response that the provincial government 

needs to take, and they need to do so very timely. In fact I was 

told by the end of the month we’d have an answer, and here we 

are. 

 

We have 55 credit unions in the province. They serve over 

500,000 members in this province, serving communities large 

and small. They provide lending, 55 per cent of the lending to 

small- and medium-sized businesses, really an engine of the 

economy. And of course if the province were to follow suit and 

hike taxation on credit unions, it would be a direct impact on 

their members and the communities they serve as well. So, Mr. 

Speaker, with all due respect to the comments around the 

federal government, that doesn’t hold water. It’s past time for 

this government to make a commitment. Why can’t the Premier 

simply commit today not to hike taxes on our province’s credit 

unions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to increasing 

taxes, the member opposite would be pretty familiar with it. It’s 

something that the NDP [New Democratic Party] did on a 

regular basis, Mr. Speaker, and it’s something that we are 

loathe to do on this side of the House. 

 

I would advise the member opposite that this is something that 

is under consideration right now. We are taking a look at this 

very seriously. We are having discussions, for clarification, 

with the federal government on their position. We are also 

discussing with credit union officials about the impact that it 

may or may not have if anything were to come about here. And 

we’ll be letting the people know, the credit union executives 

know very soon with respect to the decision. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Expansion of the Canada Pension Plan  

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another issue that’s of 

importance to Saskatchewan people, that’s timely as well, is the 

Finance ministers’ meeting tomorrow. And an issue that’s 

important to Saskatchewan people and Canadians is that of the 

Canada Pension Plan. And we know that this is a place as well 

that this government’s been less than straightforward, less than 

clear, and their position has been confusing. 

 

So to the Premier: the Finance minister will be there tomorrow. 

Saskatchewan people deserve expanded Canada pension and 

the retirement security that it would provide, and they deserve 

an answer as to what position our Finance minister will be 

taking forward. 

 

So to the Premier: will his minister be pushing for expansion of 

the CPP [Canada Pension Plan] tomorrow at the Finance 

ministers’ meetings? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think the position of the 

province of Saskatchewan is well known, and I think the hon. 

member is familiar with our position. We have been offering up 

an innovation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, rather than simply 

sort of a blanket approval for an increase in CPP, and that of 

course is the Saskatchewan Pension Plan to which we’ve tried 

to make some improvements in Saskatchewan. And those 

improvements are being well received. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our message to the Finance ministers of the 

country and Canada’s Finance minister who will be here later 

this day for a meeting, our message has been let’s, in this very 

tentative, tenuous economic time in the world and in our 



3776 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

country — although our economy is quite strong — let’s be 

very, very careful about what we do in terms of the burden on 

those who create jobs. 

 

And I’m hearing from the NDP you’d like to see a broad 

expansion of the pension plan. We know what that would mean 

in terms of employer contributions. I guess that’s one choice, 

one that might have some serious effects on the economy 

frankly in terms of those job creators. We’ve chosen another 

route. We want to showcase and further develop local plans like 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, as we’ve done today. Thanks, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 103, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced 

and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 104, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I do have a loud voice, but I would 

like to be able to hear what the minister has to say as well. 

 

It has been moved by the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General that Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced 

and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that Bill 105, The Informal Public 

Appeals Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 105, The Informal Public 

Appeals Act be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3777 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 106, The 

Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed 

an honour for me to stand in this House today to speak to the 

Speech from the Throne, which is entitled “Meeting the 

Challenges of Growth.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking all of the 

constituents from the Humboldt constituency, not only for their 

confidence in me in several elections now, but also for their 

contribution to the growth of our province because indeed the 

Humboldt constituency is a very vibrant and growing 

constituency. So my thank you goes to all of those constituents. 

 

I’d like to thank my constituency assistant who mans the 

Humboldt office and does a fabulous job. That is Susan Dunne. 

And I need to say that the office would not run nearly as 

smoothly without her. So I want to say thank you to Susan. 

I want to say thank you to my staff here in the building, and that 

would be Raynelle, Chantelle, Megan, and Alicia. I do 

undoubtedly believe, and I think many others do too, that I have 

the best staff in the entire building. They do a great job and 

definitely keep me on track. 

 

[10:45] 

 

On the home front, I have three daughters that I’ve spoken 

about numerous times in this Assembly — they are truly my 

reason for doing much of what I do — that is Crystal, Shannon, 

and Lindsay. They have been a team with me for obviously 

their entire lives, but we’ve been a team. And those girls, 

they’ve done me proud. They truly are remarkable women. 

Through them I also have acquired two remarkable boys as well 

— that’s Rusty and Carter — and three amazing little 

grandchildren, James, MaKenna, and just recently, within the 

beginning of this month, Emryk. So I am indeed a blessed 

mother. 

 

And last just in the thank yous, although there’s so many people 

I should thank, I want to thank my father who is now 93 years 

of age. He still lives on the farm where I was raised, in the area 

of Guernsey. And he told me that, you know, when he gets old, 

he might move into an assisted living facility, but he’s not sure 

when that’s going to be yet. So it’s quite amazing. He has been 

an inspiration to me, obviously, for many years. 

 

As I mentioned when I first began, the Throne Speech is 

entitled “Meeting the Challenges of Growth.” And it’s a 

follow-up to our government’s plan that was revealed last fall, I 

believe it was, entitled The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: 

Vision 2020 and Beyond. 

 

It was a plan that our Premier laid out that had a number of 

initiatives within it to deal with the fact that we have a growing 

province, we have a growing economy, and we want to, as 

government, help facilitate that. We’re not the driver. We’re not 

the engine. The people of the province are that. But we think 

we can help facilitate and give an environment that will 

encourage growth, both in people and in industry. 

 

It’s something that the NDP have never thought possible. I was 

elected in this Assembly when we had the NDP member 

Doreen Hamilton say that it was statistically impossible to grow 

the province at the rate that this party had predicted it would be. 

I was elected in this Assembly when the NDP, Eldon 

Lautermilch, said that, you know, just not a big deal that people 

are leaving our province by the groves because that just means 

there’ll be more for the rest of us. And I was elected in this 

Assembly when the NDP, Harry Van Mulligen, said that . . . I 

forget. What did he call it? Whimsical? He just had a number of 

names of how this simply wasn’t possible and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Farcical. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Farcical. Farcical was the word. And 

this just wasn’t possible for the province to grow. And sadly the 

NDP hasn’t changed from those days one bit. Because quite 

frankly, when our government did put out the growth plan, 

vision 2020 and beyond, this is what the then acting leader of 

the NDP had to say. The member from Regina Lakeview, he 

said, and I quote, “A document like this distracts everybody, 



3778 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

and I think his [meaning the Premier’s] popularity will stay up 

there as long as there’s sort of a myth of a booming economy.” 

 

That was October 17th, 2012. That was this NDP, the same old 

NDP. They haven’t changed one bit. And I will just repeat that 

— as long as there’s sort of a myth of a booming economy, 

meaning that those men and women do not believe that growth 

in the economy and the people of Saskatchewan is entirely 

possible. 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, maybe they don’t believe that 

we’ve now grown by over 100,000 people in just six years. 

Maybe they don’t believe that the population has surpassed 1.1 

million and can do even more. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, on 

this side of the House, we do believe it. We believe that we can 

grow the economy. We believe the population can continue to 

grow. We believe that Saskatchewan is an extremely promising 

province, and we’re going to help support the people and the 

industry that come here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a man — I didn’t necessarily believe or 

support all of his ideology, but I did respect a great deal — and 

he had this to say, and I quote: the acid test of any government: 

is the population growing, or is it decreasing in its population? 

Are we getting people to come here because there are jobs and 

hope and opportunity for the future? Or have we faced massive 

jobs, massive outflow and exodus of people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the gentleman who said that was Roy Romanow, 

and that was April 19th, 1989. And I will repeat that yet again. 

The acid test of any government: is the population growing, or 

is it decreasing in its population? Are we getting people to 

come here because there are jobs and hope and opportunity for 

the future? Or have we faced massive jobs lost, massive 

outflow, and exodus of people of Saskatchewan? Roy 

Romanow. 

 

And what was, you know, the NDP record? Well quite frankly, 

from 1991 to 2007, in 16 years the NDP government . . . 

Saskatchewan’s population dropped by 2,500 people. Mr. 

Speaker, that is the record of the NDP government. That is the 

record that people of Saskatchewan should never forget because 

that is the government that drove people out. That is the 

government that quite frankly is why many of our children left 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the exciting thing about the growth we’re 

experiencing is it is both urban and rural. 

 

In the Humboldt constituency, going to Stats Canada from 2006 

to 2011, Humboldt, the city of Humboldt, grew by 680 people 

and even more now in the last two years since those stats were 

taken. Aberdeen, a small community just outside of Saskatoon, 

72 people. Allan, again another small town but it’s not on a 

major highway, grew by 17 people. Bruno, a small town not on 

a major highway, grew by 79 people. Colonsay grew by 50 

people. Lanigan grew by 157 people. That’s the small towns, 

but what about the rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker? Well the 

RM [rural municipality] of Aberdeen grew by 251 people. The 

RM of Grant grew by 19 people. And the RM of Humboldt 

grew by 43 people. The list goes on and on and on. Both urban 

and rural Saskatchewan are growing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that important? Is growth important? And I say, 

yes it is. And this government believes that, yes it is. Growth in 

industry and small businesses means more jobs. More jobs are 

critical for our province. And looking at the stats again, using 

Stats Canada, I will quote, “Unemployment in Saskatchewan 

was 4.3 per cent in September 2013, tied with Alberta for the 

lowest in Canada, and well below the 6.9 per cent record 

nationally. Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate 

among the provinces for nine consecutive months.” Mr. 

Speaker, those jobs are important for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Growth means better quality of jobs. It means better lifestyles 

for the people within our province. And again looking to Stats 

Canada for the month of July, average weekly earnings in the 

province were $939.58 — the second highest in the nation and 

well above the Canadian average of $914.25. Mr. Speaker, that 

means that people are getting jobs and they aren’t just part-time 

jobs, Mr. Speaker. They’re full-time jobs and they are 

high-paying jobs. 

 

Are there still people that need our help and need our 

assistance? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. But the more and more 

jobs that become available, the more opportunity will be for 

people right here in our province, and they will be meaningful 

jobs. 

 

Growth means that we as a government will have more money 

for education, Mr. Speaker. And education is one of the 

priorities of this government. Mr. Speaker, we have invested 

now $600 million for 43 major school projects. Twenty of those 

are brand new schools. One of those brand new schools is right 

in the city of Humboldt and one of those major projects is right 

in the city of Humboldt. So Humboldt is quite excited about the 

investment we’ve made in the new schools within the province. 

Mr. Speaker, that is unprecedented spending in school capital 

projects in the history of our province. 

 

And now we’ve announced nine more schools — nine more 

schools that the members opposite are conflicted on whether or 

not they can even support, even though one of those schools, 

Mr. Speaker, a joint-use school, is going to be right in the 

leader’s own riding. One that he read many, many petitions in 

this Assembly and wanted us to do something, but now he’s not 

. . . He’s silent. He has said very little to nothing on whether he 

supports the fact that Hampton Village will be getting a new 

school or not. 

 

Having money, Mr. Speaker, and having a growing economy 

and more population means that this government was able to 

increase the operating funding for school divisions by over 23 

per cent. It means that we have increased the number of child 

care spaces within this province from the days of the NDP by 

48 per cent. It means that we’ve increased the funding for the 

CBOs [community-based organization] that manage those child 

care spaces from when the NDP were government by 19.1 per 

cent. It means that we have increased pre-K [pre-kindergarten] 

programs within our province since the NDP were in 

government by 94 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we are investing in 

education. We will continue to do so. We will continue to 

consider that a priority in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a growing economy and growing population 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3779 

means that we’ll have more money for health care. We have 

significantly reduced the surgical wait-lists. We have more 

hospitals. Again I speak to Humboldt. Humboldt has a brand 

new hospital. In the days of the NDP, it was an announcement 

and it became a brand new announcement because they kept 

reannouncing it. So we had many brand new announcements. 

We even got a brand new sign because the original sign had 

weathered waiting for some construction, so it became a brand 

new sign with another brand new announcement. And now in 

Humboldt, under this government, there is a hospital that takes 

patients. It actually exists. It’s real. It’s not just a sign. 

 

We have a hospital in Swift Current. We’re working on a 

hospital in Moose Jaw. Of course the children’s hospital in 

Saskatoon, and we’ll be moving forward with the hospital in 

North Battleford. 

 

We have more nurses and doctors in our province since the 

NDP. They say that there’s a shortage and that it’s critical. And 

we will always be listening to those front-line workers to see 

where there are stress factors within the system, but quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, there are over 1,000 more nurses than 

when the NDP were in power. So I don’t think anyone wants to 

go back to those days. I don’t think anyone wants to go back to 

those shortages. I know no one in this side of the House wants 

to see that happen. 

 

A growing economy and a growing population means that we 

have more money for highways, Mr. Speaker. In rural 

Saskatchewan, of course that’s quite critical, although it isn’t 

just for rural Saskatchewan. We all need our highways to 

conduct business and travel within our province. And this 

government has invested, just in our first mandate, $2.2 billion, 

which is unprecedented spending on highways. 

 

It means we have, Mr. Speaker, more money for the vulnerable 

people. And as I mentioned before, there will always be those 

that we need to help and we need to support. We need to be 

there as a government. But we’ve increased the income for 

people with disabilities. We gave them the dignity of their own 

income plan. We’ve increased housing allowances and we’ve 

indexed it and we were the first province in our entire country 

to do so. We’ve increased the low-income tax credit to help 

those of the lowest income within our province. And we 

increased, Mr. Speaker, the seniors’ income plan which is 

something . . . Again, the NDP when they are in government, 

they may talk the talk now, but when they had the chance to 

actually walk the walk, they did nothing for the seniors’ income 

plan. 

 

We increased the number of social housing units that are 

available and we’ve increased many programs for those most 

vulnerable. And we know that there’s more that needs to be 

done. We’ll be continuing to listen to those stakeholder groups 

and the people of Saskatchewan and we will see what can be 

done to move forward to make this a great province and an 

even greater province to live. And that’s what this Throne 

Speech is about, Mr. Speaker. It’s about the challenges of 

growth because growth does have challenges and they are real. 

 

It was kind of humorous. A challenge I don’t think anyone on 

this side of the House or that side of the House anticipated 

happened in Humboldt. And there was an article on June 12th, 

2013, and it was entitled, “Postman won’t be ringing twice in 

Humboldt.” 

 

As of June 3, there were 16 people on the post office box 

wait list at the Humboldt Canada Post outlet, a statistic 

Lucy Unrau, an employee of the facility, never expected 

to see. 

 

Unrau explained that about five years ago, an additional 

one thousand post office boxes were put in at the outlet, 

bringing the number to its current total of 3,460. 

 

“At that time I thought “Why are we doing this? They’re 

never going to fill . . . all those extra boxes,” Unrau 

recalled. 

 

Now there’s been a wait list for the past two months. 

 

“If I had a crystal ball, I’d say the list is only going to get 

longer,” she added. 

 

With Saskatchewan’s population growing at its fastest 

pace in 90 years, the shortage of post office boxes will 

likely be an issue that the Humboldt Regional Newcomer 

Centre will be hearing (about) from immigrants to the area 

for the foreseeable future. 

 

So yes, that’s not a challenge I don’t think we anticipated, but 

it’s an exciting challenge to growth. 

 

And we do acknowledge there are challenges. That is what this 

Throne Speech is about. That is what this Throne Speech 

identifies, and it gives the outline of where this government 

wants to move forward in health care, in education, in 

highways, in housing, and in agriculture. And the list goes on 

throughout the Throne Speech, recognizing that all must be 

within fiscal responsibility because this government has 

brought the debt down by 44 per cent, and we’re not going back 

to the NDP days. We are not going back. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And so what did the Leader of the Opposition say? What did 

the Leader of the NDP say about the Throne Speech? And quite 

frankly he said he was disappointed. Now keep in mind, the 

Leader of the Opposition is the author of the tree book, the tree 

book that then became the policy for the last election in the 

province, the one that was where the NDP were resoundingly 

defeated. That is the NDP leader who’s now disappointed with 

the Throne Speech. 

 

This is the NDP leader who, on his website states, and I will 

just quote, “Cam Broten and his team believe that 

Saskatchewan needs a smart- growth plan.” Well at, you know, 

first glance, that’s not a bad thing to say, except where is it? In 

every single situation where we have looked to the NDP and 

said, what’s your plan; what’s your solution; what’s your 

suggestion; what’s the alternative — nothing. They’re 

absolutely silent on anything that they would suggest that they 

would improve, that they would do better. They’re absolutely 

silent. 

 

The NDP leader says that we need to do more in health. This is 



3780 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

the NDP that never once increased the senior income plan when 

they were in government. This is the same NDP that closed 

1,200 long-term care beds. This is the same NDP that set no 

targets in trying to hire and recruit nurses to our province. This 

is the same NDP that closed 52 hospitals, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 

not forget. Nothing has changed. There is no new plan. There is 

no new direction. This is the NDP that . . . That’s what they did 

to our health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, the NDP leader said 

that, you know, he’d like to see more for education. This is the 

same NDP that closed 176 schools in our province. It’s the 

same old NDP that planned for a reduction in students, that 

didn’t believe for one minute that we could have growth in our 

student numbers. They were totally flat-footed. They had . . . 

And I remember it well because I was elected at a time they 

struck what they called the ACRE [action committee on the 

rural economy] committee to take a look at the decline in 

Saskatchewan. The whole purpose of the ACRE committee was 

to identify the winning and losing communities in 

Saskatchewan, and plan the decline of the losing communities. 

It was directed. It was going to be orchestrated under the NDP, 

and we should never forget that is what their vision of this 

province was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP Leader of the Opposition also said that 

he was disappointed that there isn’t more diversity in the 

revenue for the province, that we’re too reliant on 

non-renewable resources, and that we need more eggs, more 

baskets. He has no idea what the eggs or the baskets would be. 

He doesn’t give any suggestions on what eggs or baskets they 

would be. But we just need more eggs and more baskets. 

 

And you know, when you think about that for even two 

seconds, you can totally understand why the NDP are shut out 

of rural Saskatchewan. Because yes, our non-renewable 

resources are extremely critical to our province. There’s gas, 

oil, potash, uranium. I am the one that has often said how 

important potash in particular is to the constituency of 

Humboldt. Within the boundaries of the Humboldt constituency 

there’s four potash mines. They are very good employers on the 

very edge . . . I know the member from Melfort likes to claim it, 

but on the very edge of the Humboldt constituency is the new 

development with BHP. But largely the Humboldt constituency 

is agriculture. And Saskatchewan is the top agriculture 

exporting of province in our country. That’s a renewable 

resource. 

 

And I’ll tell you, in agriculture it is so diverse. There’s so many 

eggs in so many baskets. And it is so exciting what’s happening 

in agriculture today. And it seems like the NDP have no clue 

that this is such an important driver for our province — more 

than $11 billion dollars in agriculture exports in 2012. That’s 

incredible, and it’s so critical to the economy of this province. 

 

We are, Mr. Speaker, the provider of 53 per cent of the world’s 

lentils, 38 per cent of the world’s peas, 21 per cent of the 

world’s canola oil. Mr. Speaker, the 11.2 billion in agri-food 

exports in 2012 is a 32 per cent increase over the five-year 

average of 8.5. Two years ago, in 2011, Saskatchewan overtook 

Ontario as the top agri-food exporting province. 

 

So perhaps the NDP need to recognize that yes, the 

non-renewable resources are important, but we do have 

renewable resources that are extremely important to this 

province, to the province’s economy, and to the province’s 

growth. 

 

So this government will welcome, always, we’ll welcome more 

industry. We’ll welcome more people. We’ll welcome more 

innovation. But what we won’t welcome is the negative attitude 

of the NDP and how they have no faith or belief in the potential 

of this great province. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I support the Speech from the 

Throne, and I will not be supporting the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy and 

honoured to stand and give my reply to the Speech from the 

Throne. And in part of doing that I don’t get up here and have 

the opportunity to speak a lot. So I want to take a little bit of 

time to thank my family. 

 

And I want to start off with my wife. We’ve been married for 

what seems like, for her, probably a really long time, but for me 

it’s like yesterday. So my wife, Marjorie I give the biggest 

thank you and shout-out to you because without her — and as 

our other members speak up on both sides of the House we 

agree on this — without our spouses and our support back 

home we wouldn’t be able to do the job that we do here today. 

 

I also want to say a thanks to my kids. I have three boys that 

were my own and then we had lots of foster kids come through 

the house, and all my kids helped me get to this place. They’re 

some of my strongest critics. They are some of the voices from 

young people that I get to listen to on a, if not daily basis, a 

weekly basis for sure, so I’ve got feedback from young people. 

And luckily my youngest has moved home to start a job out at 

the airport in Moose Jaw, where he’s apprentice mechanicking, 

working on planes. He’s already a pilot at 20 and he is looking 

at furthering his career in that field, right here at home, right 

here in this province. And I’m going to thank a few other 

people but then I’m going to go back to my kids. 

 

I also want to thank Laurie Koslor who is my constituency 

assistant. She’s the one that helps me with the day-to-day 

business of running the office, listening to the concerns of the 

constituents of Moose Jaw Wakamow, and keeps me in touch 

when I’m here at home. I really respect the job that some of the 

people that have been here longer than I have because I really 

admire the job that they could do before, before we had texting 

and instant messaging and how they kept up on things. Because 

right now, something’s going on at home and it needs to be 

taken care of that’s . . . It’s right there. They’re able to contact 

us almost immediately and we’re able to take care of those 

issues going on back at home. So you know, thanks, Laurie. 

You do a great job. 

 

So I want to take it back to my kids again. I’m very lucky. My 

children are part of the growth plan for this province. My 

middle son actually made me a grandfather this summer and so 

of that 100,000, one of them’s another Lawrence. So that makes 

me very happy that I’m a grandfather, and it gives me a whole 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3781 

new outlook on what I have to do to keep this province moving 

forward. 

 

My kids, it was all about, how are we going to make sure that 

they have jobs and the education that they need so they can 

continue building their life here in the province? Now I have a 

brand new addition to my family and that gives me a whole 

new drive to keep this province moving forward. So on top of 

that, this tells you how much we bleed green and how my son 

takes it to a whole new level. My grandson’s name is Jordison 

Rider. So it’s not R-y-d-e-r; it is R-i-d-e-r. So my son and my 

daughter-in-law Kayleigh have named their son after our 

famous football team. And that just shows you how much they 

love our province, love our football team, and you know, we’ve 

got the home game in the playoffs. 

 

And just to bring the Riders into this a bit, I’m trying to think of 

how many times the Riders won a Grey Cup when the 

opposition was in? What was the number? Zero? Just pointing 

that out to all the Rider fans out there. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Same as the amount of MLAs [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] they have in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Oh, that’s a good point. You know, 

listening to the other side speak is sometimes very interesting, 

and I’ve had them ask me why I’m laughing. And sometimes 

it’s because I really wonder what colour the sky is in the world 

that they live in, besides the grey, gloomy world is coming to 

an end and there’s no light in sight. It’s really, it’s almost sad 

how they have such a dim outlook for our province, to the point 

where their plan for decline scares me if we . . . Oh it’s just, it’s 

not good. 

 

The last 16 years, this is their plan for growth — in quotation 

marks, their plan for growth. The last 16 years the NDP closed 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . not the last 16, the last 16 they 

were in — not ours. The last 16 years they were in, they closed 

176 schools, 176 schools. Yes, thank you for pointing out that I 

need to get the details correct. So that’s 11 schools a year that 

they closed, 11 a year on average they closed. So over the last 

seven years our government has opened 20 new schools, 20 

new schools. 

 

On top of that we’ve announced that we are going to build nine 

joint-use schools. Now some people say those nine joint-use 

schools are actually 18. I’m not . . . That’s nine new schools 

we’re going to go forward with. What do they want to do? 

Probably close more schools because that’s what they do. They 

plan for decline. They don’t plan for growth. 

 

A couple of other things they said, there’s a couple of members 

over there that like to talk about Métis and Métis youth quite a 

bit. I’m Métis, proud to be Métis. I’ve worked with the Métis 

youth in my community, and they said, how come they keep 

talking about the Métis youth and they never, ever come and 

talk to us? Never, not once. So I don’t how they can say they 

speak for the Métis youth, but they don’t talk to Métis youth. I 

don’t pretend to say I speak for all the Métis youth. I just pass it 

on what the Métis youth tell me. 

 

[11:15] 

 

They have no plan. Zero plan. They even took their old plan — 

the tree book we talk about quite a bit that the Leader of the 

Opposition authored, signed his name to — they took it off 

their website. So what is their plan? We have a plan for growth. 

It came out last year. We did an update to the plan for growth, 

and with that update this is where we’re at. 

 

Population growth. Okay, we said we wanted 100,000 new 

people in the province. We’ve got 100,000 new people in this 

province in 7 years, not 10 years. Job growth through the first 

nine months of 2013, the number of working people in 

Saskatchewan is up by nearly 20,000 on average. Now I grew 

up in Estevan and it’s a great town to be from, a great little city 

to be from, but 20,000 new people . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Great MLA too. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Yes, awesome MLA. That’s two new 

Estevans or two new Weyburns or one new Yorkton working in 

this province, working in this . . . We’re not talking about the 

100,000 growth any more. We’re talking about 20,000 more 

people working. 

 

What does that help us do? We talk about growth, not for 

growth’s sakes, but what it can do in the end. So what do we do 

with that? A thousand new training seats. They say we have no 

plan for the future. There’s no outlook for the future. Well we 

have a great plan for the future. We’ve even put a book out 

what this plan for growth is. And I think they need to really 

pick it up, take a look at it, read through it, and then go, okay 

maybe we can do a little better on this. Maybe we can do a little 

better on that. 

 

We actually make targets, and guess what? Targets are scary. 

You know why targets are scary? Because if you don’t make 

them, that makes you accountable. And there’s absolutely . . . 

This side has no problem being accountable to the taxpayers 

and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We talk about closing 52 hospitals, but we’re not closing 

hospitals here anymore. We’re building new ones and guess 

what? Our member from Moose Jaw North and our Health 

minister have announced, two years ago, a brand new hospital 

in Moose Jaw. It’s going to be built for the entire Five Hills 

Health District. And guess what? If you follow me on 

Facebook, you can go there, and I try and go every week and 

take pictures, and you see this new, brand new hospital being 

built. How many new hospitals did the other guys build? Well, 

I’m sure they might have worked on one or two, but they closed 

52. In fact they closed the hospital I was born in. So you know, 

that says their plan for growth. 

 

Along with these 20,000 new jobs over last year, we have new 

companies coming to Saskatchewan. One of them is in Moose 

Jaw. It’s called Agrocorp, a direct result of the work that our 

Premier does reaching out to new places across the world to 

bring growth, jobs, and growth to this province. 

 

Exports, our province surpassed BC [British Columbia]. We’re 

a landlocked province. We don’t have a port. We’ve got 

railways that go both directions. We’ve got highways. And 

what do we do? We surpass BC in exports. Would have that 

happened under the other side? Likely not. Why? Because they 



3782 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

like to close things down. They don’t like to open things up. 

They close schools. They close health care facilities. They close 

long-term care beds. Hospitals? Hospitals, yes well. We do the 

. . . 

 

Because I have a new child in my family, a grandchild, I care 

about schools. Granted, yes I have three, but a brand new child 

in my family, my grandchild. And you know, everybody says 

that when you have a grandchild your life will change. And 

they’re right; it does. It gives you a whole new vigour and a 

whole new outlook. It’s not just your kids and your family any 

more. You now have an extended family. And you have these 

little wonderful bundles of joy that we want to care for. 

 

And we want to make sure that they can build their lives right 

here in this province. There’s absolutely nothing wrong with 

travelling the world, going, seeing things, but they don’t have 

to stay away. They don’t have to live in BC. They don’t have to 

live in Alberta. They don’t have to move to Toronto. They can 

do it all right here at home. They can build that future here in 

our province. 

 

You know, it’s sad that our greatest export for years was our 

young people. There’s a reason there’s a sea of green across 

Canada. It is because for years the people left, year after year 

after year. And they knew Saskatchewan was their home and 

they knew that the Roughriders were their team. So that it 

doesn’t matter where you see them play, there’s green in that 

crowd. If you go to the Calgary game, it’s like a Christmas tree 

— red and green, red and green. Go to Edmonton, well it’s all 

green, but mostly our shade not theirs. 

 

Innovation, we look at innovation. And I’m going to talk a little 

bit about Estevan again because in the Boundary dam power 

station, we’re building the first new clean coal facility in the 

world — in the world — right here. I’ve spent a lot of time in 

my younger years working in that coal plant. I did some of the 

fly ash years ago where we’d take the fly ash, we’d capture it, 

and we’d sell it to some of the cement companies to mix with 

their cement. I’ve been inside the boilers, cleaned the boilers, 

knocked this stuff out. And now we’re trying to woo the world 

in another way to come back to Saskatchewan and take a look 

at what this little province of now 1.1 million people, 1.1 

million people can do. Innovation — brand new coal, clean coal 

facility at Boundary dam power plant. 

 

Again and again and again we ask them, what’s your plan? 

What’s your plan? Their job is, as the opposition, to oppose 

what we do, criticize what we do, and take a good, hard look at 

it. And that’s all they’re doing, is they criticize. Because we ask 

again and again and again, what would you do instead of that? 

What is the fix? What are we doing wrong besides it’s just 

wrong? And they don’t have an answer because they don’t have 

a plan. They don’t have a vision. They have an old vision, new 

leader, old vision. Same old NDP. 

 

I had to look up this quote to get this point across. If the best 

predictor of future behaviour is past behaviour, I’ll go with 

what we do any day over what they do. We open long-term care 

facilities. They close long-term care facilities. We open new 

schools. They close schools. We open new hospitals. They 

close hospitals. So if past behaviour is what they’re going to 

base their future on, it is completely worrisome. And if, if I was 

out there and wasn’t decided, I’d be going, holy cow. They 

have no plan. All they want to do is close facilities, not open 

facilities. 

 

We talk about it a lot, the challenges of growth. And the 

Premier has said it over and over and over again. We are way 

happier to deal with the challenges of growth than the 

challenges of decline. Because with the challenges of decline 

there is no future. It’s decline, you know? People don’t say, the 

last one leaving from Alberta shut off the light anymore. They 

don’t say that. That was well-known across the country. 

Everybody’s leaving Saskatchewan in droves. Why? Because 

there was no plan. We have a plan. We talk about the plan. The 

plan’s out there. There’s nothing to hide. It’s there in black and 

white and green. Where’s theirs? Well it’s . . . it can’t be found 

anymore. They even took it off the website. And I’m thinking 

the reason they took it off the website is probably because it 

wasn’t a real good plan. 

 

So we need to be very aware of what the other side says we’re 

going to do. We’ve been right out in the forefront taking it 

forward. We have a plan for growth. We do an update on that 

plan for growth. We do a follow-up. We have a vision. Our 

Speech from the Throne is called “Meeting the Challenges of 

Growth.” 

 

They make fun of us because we say there’s more work to be 

done. They sit over there and they laugh about that. So it’s not 

funny. You know, if we didn’t close 176 schools, if we didn’t 

close 52 rural hospitals, if we didn’t close all those long-term 

beds — 1,200, 1,200 long-term care beds — would we be in the 

situation we are now? We’re meeting the challenges of growth. 

We know there’s more work to be done. 

 

And we’re not afraid of that work. That’s what makes us up 49 

to 9. We’re not afraid of that work. We’re ready to do that 

work. We go on and do that work every day. We have people 

on this side of the House that have been teachers, police 

officers, farmers, people that worked in unions, people that 

worked for a Crown corporation, business owners, lawyers. We 

have a wealth of knowledge on this side of the House that the 

Premier draws from daily and talks to us and tells us, go talk to 

the people in your constituencies. Go listen to what they have to 

say. And I think that’s the biggest difference between us and 

the other side, is we actually listen. On top of that listening, we 

actually care. On top of actually caring, we actually put forward 

the work to meet the challenges of growth. We’re going to 

continue that growth. 

 

We’re going to continue working in the health care field. Why? 

Because there’s more work to be done. So what is the other 

option? There’s no work to be done? We’re finished? Does that 

go with the last person leaving the province shut off the light? 

Is that when their work is done? When everybody else is gone? 

 

Post-secondary education. Got a son in university, got another 

son waiting to go to apprenticeship school. So what are we 

doing for them? Well we have the plans to keep our students 

here afterwards because we have the jobs for them, so they 

don’t have to go to Alberta or Manitoba or BC when they’re 

done. 

 

Highways. We have a former minister of Highways from the 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3783 

North complaining about the roads in the North just about 

daily. And you know, what did he do when he was minister of 

Highways? Nothing. You know, barely filled the potholes on 

No. 1. Nothing. 

 

Housing. Housing. Our housing demand’s growing. So last 

week, as our member from Moose Jaw North spoke, we had the 

Premier in the city for a supper. We had a young entrepreneur, 

under 30 years old, come and talk to me, and actually has 

partnered with the Ministry of Social Services, not to create 

low-income housing but to create affordable housing. That gap 

that was missed. And what’s he doing? He’s looking forward to 

building more. As soon as our city has the land and lets him 

build more, he’ll build more. He needs to work with the city a 

little bit more to get all the paperwork in place so he can move 

forward, but as soon as that city paperwork gets forward, we’re 

going to partner with him and build some more. And he’s very 

happy about that. Under 30. Building houses. Been doing it 

since he’s 16. That is awesome. 

 

Competitiveness. You know, it’s nice when I get to get up here 

and speak because if you talk to my family, I go on rants and I 

go hard, and oh yes . . . 

 

[11:30] 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who knew? 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Who knew? Yes. This is where my friends 

from back home in Estevan go, yes, that’s the Greg we know, 

not that guy that’s sitting in the back being all quiet and nice. 

And it’s this guy that’s standing up here right now going, 

competitiveness. It’s what we do. You take a look. We have 

former football players on this side. You don’t get, you don’t 

get much more competitive than a professional . . . somebody in 

professional sports . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, well he 

is a big boy, yes. Not as big as he was. I don’t know. He’s 

slimmed down. 

 

So to keep with that competitiveness, some of the things we’re 

doing . . . They say we ignore First Nations and Métis. So SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] has committed . . . Oh, 

and it’s right here, right here in green — not black and white — 

green. SGI has committed to fund driver education programs 

for on-reserve high school students in the province. It is 

anticipated that 2,600 First Nations students will take advantage 

of this program in its first year, its first year. So you know, it’s 

just a small step, but it is a step in the right direction. It’s 

making sure that we meet those challenges of growth. 

 

International engagement. I spoke about that a bit already with 

the new facility in Moose Jaw. The parent company is out of 

Malaysia, and it’s 20 new jobs for my city, 20 new jobs in 

what’s going to be my new riding. And you know what else 

they did? They built it so it could be expanded. They didn’t go, 

we only need this much because we’re not going to grow. 

Because when I got there, the first question I asked them, is it 

big enough? And they said, well it’s big enough for this year, 

but these are our plans for expansion. So they’re not even fired 

up, running on all cylinders, and they’ve already got plans for 

expansion. So what does that mean? They have plans for 

growth, just like we do. 

 

Agriculture. We tend to talk a lot about oil and gas. We tend to 

talk a lot about potash. And it’s not that we forget about 

agriculture, but agriculture is a huge part of this province. In 

2012, in 2012 Saskatchewan’s agriculture exports climbed to a 

record, again, a record, $11.2 billion, highest among all the 

provinces and one-third of all of Saskatchewan’s exports. 

Agriculture makes up a third of what we do. We feed the world. 

 

There used to be a sign at Rouleau when you drove in. And last 

couple of times I’ve been through, it said and it was, 

breadbasket to the world. Well with our growth in agricultural 

exports, it’s more than the breadbasket of the world now. We 

export lentils. We export peas. We export wheat. We export 

barley. One-third of all the beers, one-third or one-fifth of all 

the beer in Japan — Japan — comes from Saskatchewan barley. 

One-third of all the barley for malting barley in beer in Japan 

comes from our province. Amazing. And that just opens up 

more doors for us to grow. 

 

On top of that, we have fiscal responsibility. On top of them not 

having a plan for growth but a plan for decline, I don’t even . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We’ve got a smart plan. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Well smart, I don’t even want to go there. 

But their fiscal responsibility I think could be called fiscal 

irresponsibility when you take a look at what was their plan, a 

$5 billion spending spree, $5 billion. Now to me that seems like 

an awful lot of money and a deficit budget. 

 

We want to make sure that this province keeps growing but 

does it in a intelligent manner. And doing that within a 

balanced budget is a lot of hard work. When you talk to our 

Health minister, our Social Services minister, our Education 

minister, trying to do what’s best for this province within a 

balanced budget is hard and a lot of hard work. And they’re 

doing a great job at it. You know, when you talk about those 

three ministries, they take up the bulk of what we do. 

 

And what do we do to help that? We grow the province. We 

grow industry. We grow the people that are here. Twenty . . . 

And again I got to go back to 20,000 new jobs. Twenty . . . 

That’s, again, two Estevans, two Weyburns, you know, and half 

a Moose Jaw. So we’ve grown 100,000 people, 100,000 people. 

So that used to be, when I was a kid, the population of our 

capital city. We did that in seven years, seven years. They 

couldn’t do it in 77, you know. So it’s worrisome when I think 

about what they’ll do. 

 

We want to be more accountable as a government. So we will 

be introducing a new lobbyist Act that’s to make sure that we 

can tell the people of Saskatchewan what other corporations 

and lobbyists are trying to get us to do. How do I know we’re 

going to do that? Well because it’s in here, and we do what we 

say we’re going to do. That’s one of the biggest differences 

between us and them — we follow through. 

 

So I want to take a quote right out of this because I don’t want 

to get it wrong: 

 

We are mindful the growth we seek is not an end in itself 

but a means to build a better province for all 

Saskatchewan people. 



3784 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

We move forward more confident than ever that our 

resilient, determined, optimistic citizens can meet any 

challenge as they work to fulfill the enormous potential of 

this great province. 

 

We as government, we’re not sitting back here patting 

ourselves on the back going, good job. We’re sitting back here 

going, how can we help the people of this province build a 

better province? Take it forward, move it forward, make it a 

better place for our kids, our grandkids, our great-grandkids, 

and everybody else’s in this province. It’s not just for us. It’s 

for everybody. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be speaking against the 

amendment and speaking for the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And it’s my pleasure to join in on this debate of the 

Throne Speech that was delivered by Her Honour in this very 

Chamber last Wednesday. And I ask you to bear with me, Mr. 

Speaker, as I have a bit of a cold, so I’m not going to be here 

for a long time. 

 

But before I get into my comments on the Throne Speech, there 

are a few remarks that I would like to make and a few thank 

yous. First of all I would like to thank my family, my son, 

Terry, and my daughter, Trisha, for all that they do for me, Mr. 

Speaker. I absolutely could not do my job without them. And 

like the families of all MLAs on both sides of the House, they 

have made huge sacrifices for me, as have my grandchildren — 

my grandson Beau who will be 19, my grandson Shelby who is 

15, my granddaughter Bailee who will be 15, and my grandson 

Tristan who just turned 13. 

 

And it just seems odd that I have grandchildren that age when 

other members are getting up in the House and talking about the 

ones that have just arrived, but I would like to congratulate 

them on their new grandchildren. And also we have a couple of 

colleagues over here that have new children — the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres and the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview — and so congratulations on them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s also other members of my family and a 

host of friends that have supported me tirelessly throughout this 

journey, and I would like to really thank them. And I also have 

to make a special mention of my mother who lives in Estevan, 

and she watches this faithfully every day. And so I’d like to say 

hello to my mom and just to let her know that I love her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my executive that is very constant, thank you to 

them, as well as my CAs [constituency assistant]. My full-time 

girl is Rosalie. My casual girl is Wilma. And I just appreciate 

so much the way they treat my constituents, their promptness 

into answering calls, the courtesy and professionalism they 

have towards the constituents. And of course these girls are the 

first people that the constituents talk to. So you know what? 

First impressions mean an awful lot. And I really want to thank 

these girls for being there and caring for the constituents when I 

can’t be there. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, the people of the Estevan 

constituency, of whom I have had the pleasure of serving for 

the last 14 years. Time sure flies, but it’s been, it’s just been an 

absolute privilege to have their support and truly an honour to 

be here on their behalf. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not thank the 

Premier for his leadership and as well as all my colleagues for 

just being the greatest bunch of colleagues I could ask for, the 

men and the women on this side. I couldn’t choose better 

colleagues if I had that choice, and I really enjoy working with 

them and also their friendship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Estevan is booming like never 

before, and I almost feel like I’m being repetitive here because 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow did a pretty good job 

of mentioning what’s happening in the constituency of Estevan 

with the carbon capture sequestration, the aquastore, and also 

throw in the Energy Training Institute. But it is a very . . . It is 

booming like it never has before. 

 

The energy sector, the agriculture sector, small businesses are 

enjoying a great 2013. The city has seen five or six new hotels 

in as many years. And new businesses are starting up, existing 

ones are expanding, and we even have two Tim Hortons now, 

which is kind of awesome. 

 

Crops in the area have been very good this year. The majority 

of farmers are finished their harvest, but there are a few that 

aren’t. We’ve had some wet weather down there. And hopefully 

the weather we’re having now will hold until they get finished 

and that the quality of the grain hasn’t declined too much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, my constituency is diverse and booming, 

but we are not immune to the challenges that come with 

growth. However we are working diligently to address these 

challenges and overcome these challenges, not only in Estevan 

but in all of this great province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when speaking of growth, I can clearly 

remember when the members opposite were in government. 

Actually it’s pretty hard to forget. But I can remember the 

comments made by members opposite when we said we would 

like to grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 years. And 

Doreen Hamilton who was the NDP MLA for Regina Wascana 

Plains that it was . . . and she said it in this very Chamber that it 

was statistically impossible. In fact, there is a quote that she 

had. And let me find it here. 

 

Yes, this is from the Whitewood Herald, February 11th, 2003. 

And this is what Doreen Hamilton had to say, quote, “The 

Saskatchewan Party’s plan to increase our population by 

100,000 people in ten years is more wishful thinking than 

statistically attainable.” You know, talk about attitude, a 

negative attitude. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And then I’m going to go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to quote 

NDP MLA Harry Van Mulligen, and this is taken from 

Hansard in March 24th of 2003. And here’s the quote: 

 

. . . they propose to increase the population of 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3785 

Saskatchewan by 100,000 over . . . I forget what number 

of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it’s so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that 

it flies in the face of reality. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can say their plan flies in the face of 

reality, Mr. Speaker. Now it may be . . . an admirable 

goal, but it’s not very realistic, Mr. Speaker. It’s also . . . I 

might say, if this is the basis . . . for their whole approach 

to government, that this is a shaky . . . [basis] for an 

economic plan, Mr. Speaker. Because these plans, Mr. 

Speaker, if you’re not right, you will in effect take 

hundreds of millions, billions of . . . dollars to put into a 

plan that is doomed to fail because the reality says that 

plan will fail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is from Harry Van Mulligen. 

 

A couple of other . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, and that’s 

right. That attitude still exists on that side today. And, Mr. 

Speaker, also a couple of other comments, and this one is from 

Eric Howe, a leading U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

economist in the province: 

 

[He didn’t] . . . believe the Saskatchewan Party’s plan 

would provide the promised population growth of 100,000 

people in 10 years. From his perspective, the province has 

hovered around a million people for 70 years and that may 

well be the natural population level. 

 

And that was taken from CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] Saskatchewan Votes feature October 31st, 2003. 

 

And another quote from a policy paper by U of S agriculture 

economist Murray Fulton, Rose Olfert, and Mark Partridge, 

September 8th, 2005: “Large increases in population for a 

region such as Saskatchewan are clearly not possible and 

should not form the basis for public policy.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I mean there’s still the negative nine over 

there. That’s still what they really believe. But our population 

has increased by over 100,000 people in the last six years. In 

fact in the most recent quarter we grew by 6,895 people. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the largest increase ever recorded in one 

quarter. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t image how Eldon 

Lautermilch must be feeling about now. It was Mr. Lautermilch 

that said, “As people left this province, there would be more left 

for the rest of us.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of days ago the Premier and the 

Minister of Education announced that nine new joint-use 

schools would be built in Saskatchewan using the P3 bundling 

approach. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has 

stood in his place 51 times lobbying for a new school to be built 

in his constituency in Hampton Village. And he has stood either 

through petitions or questions, and now he is against having 

that school built in his constituency because the P3 model 

doesn’t conform to his ideology. 

 

And I can’t imagine how his constituents . . . they just 

absolutely must be shaking their heads in disappointment over 

the Leader of the Opposition’s comments. And I mean, I guess 

it’s understandable why he doesn’t get up and ask those 

questions in question period. He defers to his seatmate because 

it would put him in an awkward position because he wants a 

school. But he just doesn’t agree with the P3 bundling whereas 

his constituents, I’m sure, are very happy to be on the receiving 

end of the new school. And those comments that he makes, Mr. 

Speaker, are just reassurance again that this NDP may have a 

new leader but it’s still the same old NDP. 

 

And I find it ironic when they ask him to comment on any 

question on . . . whether it’s the economy, regardless of what 

area it is in, all he talks about is having more eggs in more 

baskets. And I wish he would . . . I don’t even know what that 

means. I don’t know if he knows what it means, but that seems 

to be their smart growth plan — more eggs, more baskets, and 

that’s the details. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we must all remember that it was that 

leader, that leader was the author of the tree book — the 2011 

NDP election platform, the $5 billion in promises that the 

people of this province, thank goodness and rightfully so, said 

no thanks to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture continues to be a very important driver 

of our economy and last year in 2012, our ag exports climbed to 

a record 11.2 billion, and that’s the highest among the 

provinces and a third of all Saskatchewan exports. And the ag 

sector is on pace. Just set a new record this year with exports up 

13 per cent in the first six months of 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since we formed government in 2007, we’ve had 

two Agriculture ministers. The first was the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats who used to be a farmer and understands 

agriculture, just the ins and outs and the minutiae of agriculture, 

and he understands the people that he was serving as 

Agriculture minister. And the present minister, the member 

from Thunder Creek who currently farms and ranches in his 

constituency. And that is so important as both of these 

gentlemen know and understand agriculture and the 

implications of changes to any programs. 

 

And I can’t tell you how many times constituents have 

approached me and they said just how important it is and what 

it means to them to have an Agriculture minister that 

understands what they’re talking about, that lives and breaths 

agriculture. Not someone who, oh maybe went out to his 

grandfather’s farm when he was a kid or maybe drove by a 

farm on the way to town or something like that, but they know. 

They understand it. They breath agriculture. 

 

And I still live on my farm, Mr. Speaker, and I enjoy helping 

out with the farming operation. Although I’m pretty much 

limited to making lunches and being the gofer, because it keeps 

me in. It’s something to do with clutches and I’m kind of hard 

on them or something, so they don’t let me into stuff like that. 

But it’s a life that I enjoy and I do, I do try my best. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we also have to keep in mind, speaking of Ag 

ministers, I can’t remember the last time an Ag minister on the 

NDP side was re-elected. I can’t remember. I mean, I can 

remember Bernie Wiens. I can remember Eric Upshall. I can 



3786 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

remember Darrel Cunningham, Mark Wartman, and none of 

them were re-elected because they just didn’t understand 

agriculture. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to move on to make some 

remarks in seniors’ care. And you know, we hear the members 

opposite saying how seniors are scared and people of the 

province are scared. And I just think, you know what? If they’re 

scared with this government, imagine the terror they felt when 

they were in power. And I mean that was the party that closed 

52 hospitals, shut down 1,200 long-term care beds, and didn’t 

build one long-term care home. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there have been issues identified that need to 

be and are being addressed. Money has been targeted to issues 

such as better nutrition, more baths, improved responsiveness to 

call bells, better training to deal with patients with dementia. 

Steps are also being taken to reduce the pressure on the 

long-term care system by launching new home care pilot 

programs in Saskatoon and Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think we owe a great deal of thanks to all those who work in the 

long-term care and the whole health care profession. They are 

angels and they work very hard. 

 

And just last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had a call from a 

nurse in my constituency who works in long-term care, and she 

had concerns over what the opposition was saying regarding 

time allocation. And she went on to say that the opposition 

wants to dedicate a specific amount of time to these people. 

And she said, you know what, there is no cookie-cutter method. 

She said some patients require more care than others. And then 

she also had concerns what the Leader of the Opposition was 

saying about lack of tub baths. And she said to me, she says, 

you know what, lots of times the patient will wake up in the 

morning, and she says they don’t want, they’re insistent that 

today they just do not feel like having a tub bath. And she says, 

rather than upset them, she says we give them a sponge bath. 

 

So you know, some of the workers out there are starting to take 

offence at what the members opposite are saying. And again, I 

mean I know there’s pressures. But they would lead you to 

believe that this is happening to every senior in this province 

and it’s not, Mr. Speaker. And I know if, you know . . . all 

seniors, we have to respect them and we have to do our best in 

dealing with the issues that pertain to them. 

 

But the staff is doing a great job. And she said that, you know, 

lots of the times what the opposition is saying is neglect is 

actually listening to the patients and compromising with the 

patients so that they don’t get upset. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my daughter works in dietary in a long-term care 

facility. It’s at Mainprize Manor in Midale actually. And last 

Thursday she had a day off, and her and a bunch of other of the 

staff that had a day off, they took a Smile van. They took 

patients to Estevan, took them out for lunch, and just let them, 

you know, get out and get some fresh air. And these workers all 

volunteered their time. And the next day I was in Estevan, and I 

saw another group of long-term care residents. I believe it was 

some from the facility at St. Joseph’s Hospital, and the 

volunteers had taken those residents out for lunch that day. 

 

So again, I realize that there are pressures in this area, but the 

way the Leader of the Opposition talks, one would think that 

the issues he raises are the normal in every long-term care home 

in Saskatchewan, and that simply isn’t the way it is. And he is 

trying to claim ownership of seniors’ issues. And you know, he 

stands in this Chamber, and he grandstands, and he acts pretty 

righteous actually. 

 

And many remember, when the NDP were in power, it was they 

that closed 1,200 long-term care beds. And they wanted to 

increase the fees in the homes, the rental fees by 90 per cent, 

literally kicking seniors out of their beds. And I’m sure the 

member from Regina Lakeview remembers this well, as he was 

the Health minister at that time. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just happen to 

have Hansard here from April 2nd, 2002. And in it the member 

from Kelvington-Wadena is questioning the minister of Health, 

the NDP minister of Health, on the increase in long-term care 

fees. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m quoting now: 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, under the new fee structure, 

under the new fee structure the NDP . . . will be taking 

$828 a month, plus 90 per cent of a long-term care 

resident’s income that’s over $828 a month. 

 

And it goes on, Mr. Speaker. She continues. And then at the 

end of it, I will quote the member from Kelvington-Wadena 

again as saying, “Why is the NDP betraying these people?” 

 

[12:00] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the interesting part was before the minister of 

Health of the day, who was the member from Regina Lakeview, 

got up to answer, another minister chimed in. Mark Wartman 

was the minister of Highways, and he chimed in. And I bet you 

everyone over here knows what he said: because it’s the right 

thing to do. That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely 

unbelievable. 

 

But you know what? Mr. Wartman, he probably holds the 

record for having the costliest heckle in this legislature. 

Because I also happen to have the 2003, or pardon me, 

2002-2003 quarter final financial report. And keep in mind, Mr. 

Speaker, that Mr. Wartman was minister of Highways. And at 

the bottom of page 6 on this it says, 

 

The amounts in The Appropriation Act, 2002 (No. 4) 

differed from the 2002-03 Estimates for Health and 

Highways and Transportation. 

 

The Appropriation Act, 2002 (No. 4) reduced the Estimate 

for Highways and Transportation by $7.4 million and 

increased the Estimate for Health by $7.4 million. 

 

So that heckle cost him a few gravel piles back in 2002, Mr. 

Speaker. And I hope it was a lesson learned from them, but they 

all seem to have a short if not selective memory. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s almost amnesia. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Yes. But, Mr. Speaker, I know time is passing, 

and there’s other members that would like to speak. But just 

before, just before I move on to highways, I also have to 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3787 

mention another quote, and this one is from The StarPhoenix, 

April 20th, 2004. And this quote is from Judy Junor, former 

NDP MLA, former associate minister of Health, and she was 

talking about the long-term care concerns in the province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is what she had to say: 

 

“I often say to them that if you make different choices 

even after 60, which the literature supports, that you will 

live healthier longer and die quicker. That means you will 

not [have to] linger,” . . . 

 

Now how unbelievable is that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And they get up here and, so sanctimonious and righteous, and 

ridicule what this government has done. And all they have to do 

is . . . And I’m sure the member from Lakeview could refresh 

their memory just a little bit. I’m sure he remembers what 

happened. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Speaker, time is passing, and there are others 

that would like to speak. But I do have to mention highways. 

And I was extremely pleased when the Premier and Highways 

minister recently announced the twinning of Highway 39 from 

Bienfait to Estevan, and further to that, in the Throne Speech, 

that the Ministry of Highways will begin to plan the twinning 

of Highway 6 and 39 between Regina and Saskatoon . . . or 

pardon me, Regina and Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the increased traffic and I guess the type of traffic 

really warrant this. And I can remember, when I was first 

elected in 1999 and driving into Regina, I would meet 40 to 50 

semis. And we have to remember that that highway runs north 

and south, and probably the busiest highways of all were the 

ones heading west, you know, because there was an exodus of 

people. But now that number, Mr. Speaker, is — oh goodness 

— 125. And this is just like in an hour-and-a-half time span. 

And that isn’t including the 20 or 30 semis that are parked at 

the truck stop at Weyburn that will be catching 39 at some point 

of their journey. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, there are other highways in my 

constituency that do need attention, and we’ll talk just 

specifically on Highway 18. And I know the ministry has been 

and continues to work with the local officials, the RM out there, 

to find a resolution that is acceptable to all the people that are 

involved, and hopefully this will come in the very near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is so much more that I could say, but there 

are others who do want to speak here. And I just think that our 

balanced growth approach is so very important to this province, 

and we are seeing the results of it. 

 

And just before I offer my support for the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, I would just like to say that November is Movember. 

And I know we have a team in the legislature here that will be 

growing their moustaches in support of prostate cancer 

awareness and research. And I hope everyone in this province 

will support this cause. I don’t think there’s one family in this 

legislature whose life hasn’t been touched by this. I know mine 

has been. My life changed because of it. And I also know the 

member from Martensville, you know, is very serious about 

this cause as well. But I encourage everyone just to dig in and 

support this cause. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you. And I will be 

supporting the Throne Speech, and I will not be supporting the 

amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 

Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As 

always it’s a delight to stand in this House and participate in the 

Throne Speech debate. I was just thinking back to 1999 when I 

participated in the first debate of my political career. I 

remember coming here with such enthusiasm and optimism and 

even a little aggression because I was not going to let the 

government of the day ignore us any longer. And I think, after 

elaborating on a whole series of issues that I had enunciated 

that were problematic for the people for Cypress Hills, I said, 

we just are not going to take this kind of treatment anymore. 

We’re here to make our voices heard. We aren’t going to be 

ignored anymore. 

 

And I think back to those days because that sort of set the tone 

for the way I approached the representation of the people of 

Cypress Hills. Whether I could affect change or not was 

actually in somebody else’s hands many times in those early 

years, but I wasn’t going to let the issue or the situation or the 

topic just be ignored and swept under the carpet. I was going to 

raise it as often and as frequently as I could. And we did have 

some successes. I am quite pleased with the opportunities we 

had to impact the government of the day and some of their 

decision making, which had long-term benefit for the people of 

Cypress Hills. 

 

But today we’re doing our 14th edition of the reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, and it’s a pleasure to participate again. 

I notice that I’ve been scheduled to speak just after 12 o’clock. 

I’m assuming they put me in this spot because they know when 

the clock strikes 1, the House shuts down, and I won’t be able 

to speak any longer than that. So we’re going to take full 

advantage of the time I’ve been given. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is normally a time when we also take 

the opportunity to recognize the people who work with us, who 

support us both politically and personally, and I want to do the 

same this morning because I’m going to have some changes in 

my staff in my constituency office in the community of 

Eastend. 

 

Beth Humphrey has been with me for 12 years now, 12 of the 

14. She’s provided yeoman service over that time as a very 

dedicated employee, and I want to thank her for contributing to 

the strength and the character of our office. We’ve got pretty 

stringent guidelines about how quickly we respond to people 

when they phone, and Beth has lived up to that standard and 

overseen the, sort of the delivery of services from my 

constituency office for most of the last 12 years. And I’m very 

grateful for her on my behalf. 

 

Glenna Gordon has been with me for about nine years I think. 

I’ve lost track of the exact time, but it’s about nine years. And 

she’s about to step down. She’ll be leaving our office at the end 

of November. And she has other things she’d like to pursue and 

thinks that this would be a good time to leave our employment. 

So we’re going to miss Glenna because she’s been one of those 



3788 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

people who’s so fastidious and detail oriented that you just 

couldn’t get out of line because she was there to make sure that 

everything was done precisely. And we’re going to miss that 

skill and that conscientiousness on the part of Glenna. 

 

Carol Miller has been with us now for about 5 years. And she’s 

the kind of person who brings a lot energy to the office. You 

know, she’s pretty, bright, and perky most of the time, and 

looking for fun and looking for opportunities to brighten the 

day and a bit of a practical joker. But she takes her job very 

seriously and looks after as much of the office details as she 

can, and has been very helpful over the last few years because 

she took a more leadership role in the office. And we 

appreciated her taking on that added responsibility. 

 

Joining our team is a lady by the name of Linda Wig, who just 

started a month ago I guess, and she’s answering the phones 

now. She’s taking responsibility for the office on her own 

already from time to time. And we’re glad to have Linda as part 

of our team, and we’re looking forward to working with her. 

 

These four ladies — it’s usually three, but I’ve identified four 

now — they job-share. They work on one job and they keep in 

constant communication with each other to make sure nothing, 

sort of, falls off the table. And when one can’t be there, another 

one is ready to step into the gap. And it’s really been a good 

and worry-free situation for me because they work out the 

schedule amongst themselves, and I don’t have to be there to 

manage those minute details. 

 

And I just am really grateful for the willingness that these ladies 

have shown to co-operate and make sure the office is open. I’m 

pretty fussy about how often and how long my office is 

available to the public, and I don’t like closing the door and 

walking down the street because we haven’t got anybody to 

cover. And I think that having people like this available is very 

important to our success in the service of the constituents of 

Cypress Hills. 

 

I want to say a special word of appreciation of course to my 

family again: my wife, Marilyn; my son, Jonathan, and his 

wife, Denise, and their two children; and our daughter, 

Brooklyn, who is going to school in Ontario. These people have 

not only provided me a tremendous amount of encouragement 

and support; it’s their encouragement that has allowed me to 

work on behalf of the people of Cypress Hills in sometimes 

very long hours and sometimes in difficult circumstances. 

 

This was an unusual summer and I have to say that in terms of 

family life it was probably a disaster. But we had 14 separate 

100th anniversaries being celebrated by towns and RMs in the 

constituency of Cypress Hills. And just about every one of 

those celebrations entailed a full-blown weekend, a time when 

homecomings and big events were part of the celebration, and 

as the MLA for the area I was often invited to attend. So for 

about 12 out of the 14 weeks of this summer I was in a 

community someplace celebrating with the local individuals, 

the local citizens. That meant I wasn’t at home. That meant I 

wasn’t with my family. And so my family didn’t complain 

about that. They just said, what we’ll do is we’ll take our family 

time at a different day of the week. And so we had that 

opportunity to share with our children who were around 

Eastend quite a bit this summer, as a matter of fact, enjoying 

time together. 

 

And so we had a very unusual summer, but you know, when 

you’re in this particular job you have to be prepared to sort of 

roll with the schedule of others, the expectations of others, and 

my family was willing to support me as I travelled around the 

constituency on just about every weekend this summer, helping 

them to celebrate their 100th anniversaries. So I want to 

identify again how important the support of our family 

members really is to the success of individual elected people 

from around the province. 

 

You know, as I’ve alluded to already, I’ve served the people of 

Cypress Hills now for just over 14 years, almost fourteen and a 

half years. And I can’t imagine frankly a better constituency 

that one could be elected to represent because the people there 

are so encouraging and supportive. I’ve had very good electoral 

success in the five elections that I’ve run in so far. Numbers 

have been better each time, but what it really comes down to is 

the contact I’m able to achieve with those constituents who 

have been so, so supportive. And it’s made my job that much 

easier because of it. And I want to thank publicly again the 

people of Cypress Hills for their generosity toward me, frankly 

both personally and politically. And I have been blessed to 

represent that area of the province for these many years. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I picked up the Speech from the Throne 

and read it word for word, sat through the presentation by the 

Lieutenant Governor. I’ve gone through the speech a couple of 

times since. And I want to say that I am, having heard other 

speeches from the throne, I’m particularly impressed with this 

speech. And I think it’s not because it’s particularly dramatic or 

well written, or those kinds of things, but it addresses honestly 

and straightforward, in a straightforward manner, the issues that 

our province is facing today. 

 

I noticed the title of this is “Meeting the Challenges of 

Growth.” Now I said earlier that we came here 14 years ago and 

made a speech in response to the Speech from the Throne, at 

which time we were talking about all the failures of the 

government to address the problems of my large rural 

constituency. You know, what this speech does is identify the 

fact that there are still challenges, there are still issues that need 

to be dealt with, but they’re not issues of decay, they’re not 

issues of falling numbers, they’re not issues of failure of policy. 

These are issues of growth. And if I had my druthers, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’d rather deal with the issues of a growing 

province, a growing population, a growing prosperity, a 

growing economic opportunity than I would ever want to deal 

with problems of decay and decline and falling numbers. 

 

You know, I remember very clearly the issues of roads falling 

apart. I remember the concern about elevators being closed and 

rail tracks being torn up and schools being closed. You know, 

we had more schools in these remote areas of rural 

Saskatchewan being shut down by school boards because of 

falling student numbers. And I remember Jim Melenchuk 

standing in this House and presenting a plan for educational 

spending that had a number attached to it. They were planning 

for a loss of 30,000 students over the next 10 years. 

 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3789 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can you possibly think that that 

is a sign of success? How can you possibly think that is a sign 

of growth and prosperity and good public policy, to stand in the 

House and admit that you were planning for decline in student 

numbers, a total of 30,000 lost students over the next 10 years? 

It’s no wonder that the previous government didn’t worry about 

building new schools. They were going to have more space than 

they could use in the schools that existed at the time. And so, 

you know, it wasn’t a real big or burning issue as far as the 

members opposite were concerned when they served on this 

side of the House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the benefits of growth, as challenging and 

maybe difficult as they are, are far superior for everybody than 

the challenges of decay and decline. And so this particular 

document admits clearly that there are challenges. It 

acknowledges where they are and it lays out a plan for how this 

government will address the challenges of growth — not 

denying, of course, the reality whatsoever. There are real 

benefits with growth. 

 

One of the differences I think between the members of the 

opposition and the members of the government when you talk 

about growth is the half-full or half-empty cup syndrome. We 

believe that the challenges of growth represent a half-full cup. 

The members on the opposite side of the House believe that the 

challenges of growth represent a half-empty cup. And if you 

listen to question period, you listen to their comments, you see 

their quotations in the newspaper, all they ever talk about are 

the problems and the difficulties that growth is presenting. Well 

growth also happens to pay for a lot of the benefits that this 

province is experiencing right now. Growth has paid for a 

significant increase in our status as a province. We are now an 

economically have province as opposed to traditionally being a 

have-not province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I prefer being in the 

have camp as opposed to languishing in the have-not camp. 

 

The benefits of growth are what pay for increased health care 

budgets, and we’ve seen growth there over the last number of 

years. For a while it was at a record pace. But even today the 

growth in health care may not be quite as dramatic 

percentage-wise, but in hard dollars it’s a very significant part 

of our provincial budget. Growth in the economy pays for that 

health care expenditure. 

 

Growth pays for the 8000 kilometres of highways that our 

government has either rebuilt or repaired in the first six years of 

our experience here. Without growth, you couldn’t afford to fix 

highways. You let them decay; you let potholes develop. In fact 

you turned a bunch of them back to gravel. You just didn’t 

think it was important. And even if you did think it was 

important, you didn’t have the money to do it. You couldn’t fix 

those roads. 

 

You know, we’ve seen the benefits of growth in terms of 

schools. Now we’re spending literally hundreds of millions of 

dollars of repair money to restore schools that were in such a 

dilapidated condition that there was mould in a number of them. 

There was leaky roofs. There was ventilation and heating 

systems that weren’t working properly. There was 

overcrowding in some areas and no crowd at all in other areas. 

So now we’ve had money and opportunity to repair some of 

those schools that were in such desperate need of attention. 

Not only have we been able to fix some of the existing schools. 

We’ve been able to make significant inroads in replacing 

schools in communities where the growth and the school-age 

population has been so dramatic that new schools are required. 

And as everybody’s familiar with now, we just recently 

announced a P3 package of bundled schools where we’re going 

to build nine new facilities that will accommodate 18 schools in 

rapidly growing communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

That would never have happened under the previous 

government, never would have happened, but it’s happening 

here because there’s growth. 

 

You know, growth has not just allowed us to experience sort of 

better economic conditions at the provincial level. Growth has 

allowed us to experience better employment conditions. I mean 

growth impacts people positively. There is some downside 

sometimes. But with growth you’ve got better employment 

statistics — among the lowest unemployment numbers in the 

entire province, more people working year over year than ever 

before. I stand to be corrected, but I think the number is about 

20,000 people more working in the province of Saskatchewan 

this year than a year ago. That’s about growth. Those people are 

contributing to our communities, our societies, our churches, all 

the social clubs. That growth has revitalized all kinds of 

communities in this province, and that’s why it’s important. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen the benefits of growth in 

some of our small rural communities, and I’m going to talk 

about one in particular today. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the town of 

Shaunavon at one time had as many as 2,300 people in the last 

30 years that I’ve lived there. In a very disheartening timeframe 

from the mid-1990s to the early 2000s, we lost 600 people — 

600 mostly young families with children — from the 

community of Shaunavon. That happened in a very short period 

of time, and the community was desperate to stem the bleeding, 

to stop the hemorrhaging of people, young families from their 

community. And so they undertook a very aggressive project to 

build a very large new public skating arena and curling arena. It 

was a dramatic and bold initiative, and only a few people really 

believed it could work. But nevertheless those committed 

people started raising money, and they did everything they 

possibly could that a small community will undertake to raise 

the funds to try and get this new facility built because they 

thought if they had this new facility, it would at least maybe 

hold some of the young people there as opposed to seeing them 

flee. It might even, it might even bring some new people to the 

community. 

 

Well as we all know, inflation is a pretty ugly beast and they 

couldn’t raise the money fast enough to keep up with the 

construction cost of this facility. And so what was originally 

going to be, you know, a 4 or $5 million facility, turned out to 

be much, much more than that. But with some assistance from 

corporations — and there was quite a bit of money from oil 

companies that came into the community — some support from 

the provincial government, a little money from the federal 

government, they finally got the place built. And it is a very, 

very attractive event . . . or I’m sorry, a facility in the 

community named after Hayley Wickenheiser, by the way, who 

is a proud product of Shaunavon. 

 

But they got that up and it symbolized a whole new attitude in 

the community because what else has happened in the 



3790 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

meantime is there’s been a lot more oil and gas activity in the 

immediate area of Shaunavon, and incredibly we have seen 

some of that lost population restored. And so I just asked the 

town manager yesterday in a phone conversation what their 

stats are, what their numbers are. And he said well, census 

figures say we’ve got about 2,100 people in Shaunavon now. 

But if you look at the health care numbers . . . health card 

numbers, it’s closer to 2,400. So that’s a community that has 

come back from the precipice at 1,700 people and falling back 

up now in the last eight, nine years, they’ve moved back up to 

anywhere between 21 and 2,400, depending on what source you 

want to utilize. And that is growth that is stimulating a whole 

variety of things in the community of Shaunavon. 

 

I’m going to recite some of them because it’s a classic example 

of what can happen when you have this kind of activity in a 

small community. Now I’ve just told you about the 

Wickenheiser Centre. Crescent Point was a financial partner 

and so their name is on the building as well. But that particular 

edifice has been used by the community for such a wide variety 

of activities and entertainment opportunities that it’s taken on a 

whole sort of new importance in the community as a source of 

community pride. 

 

But what we’ve seen also is a brand new hotel set up in the 

town of Shaunavon. Canalta Hotels came to Shaunavon and 

built a beautiful hotel there — a multi-million dollar facility. 

They don’t build hotels in communities that they don’t think 

have a future. 

 

We’ve also seen a brand new building downtown sponsored by 

an environmental company that needed a facility. They do work 

in the Shaunavon area but also all around the province. And 

they invested in a brand new office structure in the downtown 

area. We’ve seen a brand new tire business established in the 

town of Shaunavon with a new building. We are seeing a new 

cardlock being developed within the commercial confines of 

the town of Shaunavon. We have seen new businesses open up, 

new meat processing and retailing plants. 

 

We have seen a whole new subdivision opened up because the 

existing lots have all been sold out. And right now under 

construction is a, I think it’s a 28-unit new apartment building. 

Not designed for the faint of heart, it’s designed for folks my 

age who are looking for a quasi-retirement facility and it’s a 

very beautiful building, well-designed and very well finished, 

and it’s an impressive addition to the town of Shaunavon. 

 

I saw a new facility go up under the name of Fauser oil that has, 

oh, let me see, probably about eight or nine doors going into the 

shop. It’s situated along the highway. I don’t know how long it 

would be, maybe 300 feet long and a hundred and some feet 

wide. Brand new shop to help that one company service the oil 

industry. And it’s just one of several new oil servicing 

businesses that are located in Shaunavon. 

 

You know, this is all within the last year and a half that this 

new construction has taken place. We’re seeing new businesses 

spring up, maybe of a little smaller scope and size, but this is a 

community on the grow, and this is because there is an oil 

presence down there, and the industry is very active in the 

immediate Shaunavon area. 

 

I use that as an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s 

indicative of the positive things that can happen to a community 

when there is a growth-minded agenda in place. What about all 

the other communities in the constituency of Cypress Hills? We 

have about 25 distinct communities and not all of them are 

growing at the same pace. But what has happened in many of 

the smaller communities is, at least their population has been 

stabilized. They may be not experiencing the kind of dramatic 

change that Shaunavon is undergoing now, but they are seeing 

stability brought back to their communities, and that stability is 

very important. You know, when there’s no hope for the future, 

those communities started dying, and we saw the impact of that 

on the psyche and on the aspirations of many of these smaller 

communities. And now they know that there is a potential for 

them to, if not grow dramatically, at least hold their ground. 

They don’t have to worry about their school closing tomorrow. 

They don’t have to worry about some other event, very negative 

event, happening in their community because they know that 

there is enough people there to stabilize the services that they 

enjoy. 

 

[12:30] 

 

We are pretty optimistic in the Cypress Hills about our future. I 

know I just had an individual come up to me the other day and 

say, you know, we’ve had a long, tough time in the cattle 

industry, but this year we sold our calves for more money than 

we’ve ever seen — ever — more money, far more money in 

fact in some cases. 

 

I just . . . when I hear the prices, being a former cattleman, I 

know how important this once-a-year paycheque is. And when 

you hear about some of the prices that the cattle industry are 

achieving this year, that’s very encouraging. And it might make 

up for some of the losses over the last 10 years since BSE 

[bovine spongiform encephalopathy]. 

 

But do you know the other good news for the cattle industry? In 

spite of COOL, the country of origin labelling in the United 

States, in spite of the Tyson Foods decision not to buy 

Canadian fat cattle, there is a 10-year horizon here for the cattle 

industry that I believe will be among the most prosperous the 

industry has ever seen. 

 

And I’m thinking about this as a result of some of the 

conversations that I personally have had in my role as 

Provincial Secretary with the diplomatic corps. People who 

have come to Saskatchewan and have told us about the 

increasingly prosperous economies that they represent. 

Countries like Singapore and Indonesia and of course China 

and India, which are the big players, but Malaysia — these 

countries in Southeast Asia are experiencing a growing 

economy. And with the growing economy their people are 

looking for more and new sources of protein, and Canadian 

beef is going to be one of those sources that those countries are 

going to depend on. And with the population growth in those 

areas, the demand for our beef product I believe will grow at a 

significant pace over the next number of years. And so I’m 

optimistic about that. 

 

And of course, you can’t help but be optimistic about 

agriculture given the growth in the commodities, the variety of 

commodities we’re producing here, commodities we never 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3791 

heard of 10 years ago that are being grown here, the prices that 

are being paid for those commodities, the interest that that wide 

scope of commodity production is creating in the international 

communities. We have reason to be optimistic. This glass is at 

least half full and may be about to overflow. And I think that 

we have every reason to be preparing ourselves for the good of 

that expanding economy and preparing ourselves in a more 

specific way and a more deliberate way for the challenges that 

that growth is going to bring our economy. 

 

I want to talk about the benefits of growth in a couple of other 

specific ways in the constituency of Cypress Hills. We’ve got 

better highways in our constituency right now than we have 

seen ever. We have had more work done in the Cypress Hills 

constituency. The Premier knows one in particular, Highway 

32, which was rebuilt virtually in its entirety a few years ago 

 

An Hon. Member: — No more naked calendars. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — No more naked calendars. That’s right. 

No more naked pothole calendars out of the people up there. 

 

But we rebuilt most of that highway and early in our mandate. 

And just recently, just this past summer, we went and did some 

of the pieces that still needed to be done. So the stretch of road 

from Prelate into the town of Leader was all rebuilt this 

summer. From Leader north to the river and across the river 

into the constituency for the member from Kindersley, that was 

done a year or so ago. And so the people of Leader are driving 

on better roads than they’ve ever driven on. And they are very 

grateful. 

 

There’s people in the immediate Shaunavon area. We rebuilt 

the road from Shaunavon to Eastend. We just rebuilt the road 

south of Shaunavon into the Frenchman River Valley which 

was badly in need of doing, but we’ve done it. We rebuilt the 

highway from south of the Frenchman River Valley to the town 

of Climax. The people down there never, ever thought they’d 

see that road fixed. The previous government went out and 

staked it every couple of years to make them think it would be 

fixed, but it would never happen. And under our watch, it 

happened. 

 

We’ve repaved a number of roads in the constituency. There’s 

more work to do. But people can see the progress and they 

know that the progress is the result of growth and increasing 

prosperity in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Health care, have we solved all the problems with our growing 

economy? No we haven’t. But there are serious and appropriate 

initiatives being undertaken in many of the communities of 

Cypress Hills to address the most urgent health care needs. And 

as you heard in the Speech from the Throne, the town of 

Shaunavon is going to be one of the next communities to roll 

out a CEC, a collaborative emergency care model. We’ve got 

one up in the northern part of the province. The Shaunavon 

model will be the second roll out we’re hoping, and it’s just a 

matter of time until that becomes a reality. And that new 

approach to health care delivery is going to be very welcome in 

the community of Shaunavon and the communities around 

Shaunavon that that health facility will serve. 

 

You know, we’re right in the middle of construction of a $40 

million health care facility, brand new, in the town of Maple 

Creek. And there aren’t many towns the size of Maple Creek 

that get that kind of investment. But our government has made 

a commitment to the community of Maple Creek and the whole 

southwest corner there for a brand new facility, and we’re going 

to be excited to see it open sometime in the latter part of 2014. 

That’s a huge commitment to health care in the constituency of 

Cypress Hills. That was paid for by the benefits of growth. It 

isn’t something that just happened. And if the economy had 

been going sideways or downhill, that project would never have 

happened. 

 

We’re hoping for a new facility in Leader sometime in the next 

year or two, if that’s a possibility. We don’t know what’s going 

to happen there, but we’re looking forward to a creative health 

care solution for the community of Leader where we’re going 

to eventually combine four or five different facilities under one 

roof. And maybe that can become a reality as prosperity 

continues in the province of Saskatchewan. But that will be 

paid for by growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have so much to be thankful for in this 

province. And I know that I could probably go on indefinitely 

and talk about other elements that I personally have an interest 

in, but I want to just identify a couple more, quickly. I want to 

talk about the international engagement that I have been 

involved with as Provincial Secretary. The Premier gave me 

this challenge a year and a half ago and said we needed more 

direct involvement with the diplomatic community. So over the 

last 18 months I have visited diplomatic missions in Ottawa and 

in Toronto. We’ve been to Calgary and we’ve been to 

Vancouver. But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, we have 

brought representatives from those missions to Saskatchewan. 

We’ve brought them here to show them first-hand what this 

province is all about. You know, for far too long, Saskatchewan 

has flown under the radar in terms of international awareness. 

 

And so Alberta might have been fairly well-known 

internationally. Ontario might have been well-known, but 

Saskatchewan was an unknown quantity. And we have worked 

very actively to expand the diplomatic representation here in 

the province with the appointment of several honorary consuls 

just recently. Our numbers are growing and the awareness of 

Saskatchewan is growing in the international community. 

 

Last Wednesday on the occasion of the Throne Speech we had 

18 different countries represented in the gallery. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you in visiting with them later that night and 

hosting them at a dinner, they were absolutely thrilled with the 

way they were treated here, with the way they were informed 

about the great things that are happening here, and the potential 

for increased business and economic and social interaction and 

engagement with their respective countries. 

 

Just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in the gallery we had the 

ambassador from Finland with his spouse and the new honorary 

consul and we introduced them to the legislature. Over lunch 

with that delegation yesterday, I learned much to my surprise 

that they were here not just to find out what we’re doing from a 

technical and academic perspective, but what we’re doing from 

a business perspective that is so appealing. And I said, so give 

me an example. And the ambassador said, well there are two 

Finnish-based companies actually located here in Saskatchewan 



3792 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

that have expanded their operations from other parts of the 

country because they wanted to be part of the Saskatchewan 

experience. They are creating products that have application 

here, and they think that there is a tremendous potential here. 

One of them builds pipes, a flexible pipe that has an 

application, and SaskEnergy is utilizing a lot of their product 

for their expanded gas distribution business. 

 

But here is the other example they gave, and that was a 

company from Finland that builds high-capacity, high-lift 

cranes — very large pieces of equipment. They are in 

Saskatchewan doing business here with an order for 50 

additional cranes that companies around the province doing 

development work, expanding their mining operations, 

undertaking new construction or new mine development — 50 

cranes that are being sold to companies that are operating in 

Saskatchewan. And that is a magnificent order of significant 

financial and economic value. And these were companies I’d 

never heard of, but they’re here in Saskatchewan doing 

business. 

 

What the ambassador saw, he’s going to report back to his 

business community and his government and he, I can almost 

assure you, will recommend Saskatchewan as a great place to 

do business based on the experience of those two companies 

from Finland and what the ambassador saw himself. 

 

That’s how we’re going to grow this economy. That’s how 

we’re going to expand this economy, outside of the very 

aggressive plans that we have in place to ship more agricultural 

products around the world and sell more uranium and more 

potash. We have to look at all the elements of a diversified 

economy, and having that manufacturing sector with an 

international connection and reputation present in the province 

is going to only do us a whole lot of good in terms of growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you a little story about one of my 

trips down east. I went to visit the ambassador from Algeria as 

part of our outreach program last spring. We visited about eight 

or nine different ambassadorial missions, and every one of them 

were interesting. We got a very warm welcome everywhere. 

But the ambassador from Algeria sat us down in this very 

opulent living room, fed us coffee and figs, and was just as 

warm as he could be. 

 

And as we exchanged pleasantries and kind of got to the 

substance of our visit there, he said to me, why are you here? I 

mean, why are you here? We deal with Canada, but what about 

you as a representative of the province of Saskatchewan? And I 

said, well we are here to tell you our story. You don’t know our 

story very well, and I want to tell you about the opportunities in 

Saskatchewan and how we are anxious to do more business 

with your country. 

 

And I outlined all the growth statistics that we’ve talked about 

many times and how, you know, we are an economy on the 

move. We’re a province on the move. We’re punching above 

our weight class, although our weight class is getting bigger. 

And you know what that ambassador said to me? He looked at 

me dead serious and said, Algeria has been buying wheat from 

the province of Saskatchewan for 40 years, and you are the first 

person who ever came to say thank you. Forty years of sales to 

that country, and we’d never been there to say thank you. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a salesman most of my life, 

and I think ultimately we’re all salesmen at some level, but one 

of the first things a good salesman comes to understand is that 

if you have a customer that puts their trust in you and your 

product, you say thank you. There’s no sale you’ll ever make 

that’s easier than the last person you sold to. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, this government is taking its international 

responsibility seriously by going to them and saying thank you 

for your past business. We hope we can do more business with 

you in the future. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have one other little anecdote I want to close on. 

I was in the Winnipeg airport just about a week ago and just 

waiting for a plane to come back to Regina. And there was a 

fellow I’d met at the hotel. We’d said hello, and then we re-met 

at the airport. And we’re waiting for the plane and I said, tell 

me about what you do in Regina. And he said, well I’m a 

motivational speaker. And I thought, well that’s interesting. 

You know, how do you make a living doing that? And he said, 

well I do quite well at that. But he said, you know, I’ve lived in 

Regina for a long time and I was never really enthused about 

the message. But he said, my attitude has changed dramatically 

over the last few years. 

 

Now I’m going to quote here, Mr. Speaker. He said, I like Brad 

Wall. I like him. You know, I’m sure the Premier won’t take 

that to his head. I’m sure he won’t. But you know what he was 

saying? He’s never met the Premier. It’s an impression that he 

has developed because of the views the Premier’s expressed, 

the confidence he has expressed in the province, the 

salesmanship the Premier has provided, the leadership he has 

provided. He has brought an optimism to this province that that 

motivational speaker recognized and has apportioned to his 

own message. And so when he tells me that he likes this 

gentleman, he’s saying in broader terms, I have real hope and 

optimism for the future of the province. 

 

And I think that that is really what I want to celebrate today as 

we look at this Throne Speech. It’s the changed mentality in the 

province. It’s the changed attitude. It is the hope for the future, 

the pride in what’s been accomplished already and the 

expectations for the days to come. And so, Mr. Speaker, I recite 

that story as just an anecdotal example of what’s happening in 

the province of Saskatchewan. We haven’t solved all the 

problems, but we’ve got a plan. And we’re working toward 

completing that plan for the sake of the future of this province 

and for the sake of the future of our children. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an 

honour to rise in the Assembly and a pleasure to offer some 

comments with respect to the Throne Speech debate. I’d like to 

begin by saying it’s a great day. It’s a great day in 

Saskatchewan for a number of reasons; we’ll get to some of 

those later. But for Boston Red Sox fans, it’s a great day 

because they won the World Series and, if I’m correct, for the 

first time at their home field, Fenway Park, since 1918 — 1918. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that’s just one-third of my dream sports 



October 31, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3793 

trifecta. The second part will be when the Roughriders win the 

Grey Cup here in Regina. And the third part, when the Stanley 

Cup is won by the fantastic Montreal Canadiens, the mighty 

Habs. See, politics isn’t the only divisive subject we discuss 

here in the legislature. More on that later. I had the great 

misfortune of growing up as a Habs fan in a Toronto Maple 

Leaf household, and that explains a lot I’m sure. 

 

In keeping with tradition, Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin 

with a few well-deserved thank yous. More on that later too, 

I’m getting sure. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin by thanking my 

fantastic constituency assistant, Kyle Leonard, for his 

organizational wizardry and his attention to detail and his 

enormous patience. 

 

Congratulations as well to Kyle and his lovely wife, Michelle, 

on the birth of their beautiful daughter Emily, a wonderful little 

girl who was born a few weeks prematurely. Scared the heck 

out of us, but she’s on track, Mr. Speaker. She’s gaining in size 

and weight, and she’s a lovely creature, one of the reasons that 

Saskatchewan’s population has now reached 1.1 million, the 

highest ever in the history of this great province. 

 

Regina South executive and membership also is much 

deserving of thanks and praise for their vision and their energy. 

Staff in the government caucus office for their hard work and 

unfailing enthusiasm: John Saltasuk, Sean Osmar, Kim Gillies, 

Lee Guse, Enyinnah Okere, Ellen Glaze, Shawn Parchoma, and 

Terry Lynn Carefoot. They all do a fantastic job for us. I think 

they deserve a round of applause. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, our fellow MLAs whose passion 

for the issues of the day, a lively sense of humour — we’ve 

seen a little bit of it already today — are essential parts of 

working in this great building. We thank everybody for their 

participation. 

 

Even more importantly, I want to thank the residents of Regina 

South, the constituency that I have the great honour to 

represent. Certainly I appreciate their ongoing support, and 

recognize that it is indeed a privilege to represent them here 

each and every day. But I’m particularly grateful for their 

insight, along with the time that they take at the constituency 

office or on the telephone, through letters or emails, at dinners 

and ribbon cuttings, barbeques and community events, in shops, 

and on street corners to share in their own words the three 

things that elected representatives need to hear most: where are 

we as a province? Where should we go and how to get there? 

This is the most important advice anyone in this Chamber could 

ever receive.  

 

And it never fails to amaze me, Mr. Speaker, so many times 

when I approach constituents they say, you’re doing me a 

favour by listening to me. And I listen politely and whenever I 

can I offer the following reply: with respect, I disagree. You, 

sir, you, ma’am are doing me a great favour by sharing your 

wisdom. That’s how we become better informed. Through 

better information comes better debate and, no question about 

it, better decisions. So I thank them. 

 

Finally and most important of all, Mr. Speaker, I must thank my 

wonderful wife, Jocelyn, whose constant love and support 

makes it possible for me, as it does with every member in this 

Assembly, to serve the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, 

darling. You’re simply the best. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, last year when talking about thank yous and 

words of introduction, I finished my remarks by mentioning our 

dogs, Katcha and Krissy, and mentioning how much they look 

forward every year to listening to the debate on the Throne 

Speech on television, and how much they like being mentioned 

individually in Hansard as well. Once again, they’re sitting in 

front of the TV and no doubt being good girls. It’s the new 

dogs, Jessie and Josie, Mr. Speaker, that we have to worry 

about. Being pups, you see, they have a lot to learn. So first 

thing when I get home after this afternoon’s proceedings, I’m 

going to be checking the kitchen floor to see how it all turned 

out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few remarks a little bit more germane to today’s 

discussion, I want to simply mention one word, growth. 

Growth, Mr. Speaker, meeting the challenges of growth and 

ensuring that all Saskatchewan residents benefit from growth, 

this is what the 2013 Speech from the Throne is all about. 

 

Now we know that it’s not what the NDP want to hear, Lord 

knows. Whether we’re talking about growth in our province’s 

economy, whether we’re talking about growth in our province’s 

population, all the facts, all the figures, Mr. Speaker, just serve 

to remind the NDP — and everybody in Saskatchewan of 

course — about the growth in population, about the growth in 

our economy that didn’t occur when the NDP formed the 

Government of Saskatchewan. They don’t want to hear about it. 

It’s probably a great reason to do it again, don’t you think? 

 

The statistics remind them of a dark era in Saskatchewan’s 

history when the economy was stagnant. A time when people 

left this province in the hundreds of thousands when we used to 

sadly joke that our prime export was our young people. A time 

when those who were moving to Calgary to get a job said to 

those who were still left, last one out, turn out the lights. A time 

when Saskatchewan had the longest surgical wait times in the 

entire country, in the entire country, Mr. Speaker. And as we 

were reminded in debate earlier this week, there were so few 

nurses that the president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

at that time was quoted as saying — and I have it in front of me 

— “There is no light at the end of this tunnel unless it’s a train. 

These staffing levels are dangerous.” Dangerous, Mr. Speaker. 

Well that’s the way we used to be — an economy going 

nowhere, people leaving in droves, a dysfunctional health care 

system, an infrastructure that was sadly neglected and decaying. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the way it used to be. Fortunately 

things are a lot better now. Welcome, everybody, to the new 

Saskatchewan, a place where the population is growing day by 

day and, as I mentioned, has reached an all-time high of 1.1 

million people and is growing at a rate we haven’t actually seen 

in close to 100 years. A place where thousands of our young 

people are staying, more than ever before, where thousands of 

Canadians are moving from other provinces and returning as 

expats and, once again I’m thankful to say, coming to 

Saskatchewan from countries all over the world to live, work, 

and raise their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of this is outlined in an article that I have in 

front of me. Now this comes from the Canadian Press, 



3794 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2013 

September 26th of this year. 

 

According to Statistics Canada, [it says] the number of 

people living in the province has passed the 1.1 million 

mark for the first time — growing over the past year by 

more than 20,000 people to 1,108,303. 

 

Premier Brad Wall said the rapid growth shows the 

strength of Saskatchewan’s economy. When the 

Saskatchewan Party took government in 2007, it set a goal 

of increasing the population by 100,000 [people] within 

10 years. After reaching that target in six years, Wall says 

the government is now hoping to reach 1.2 million by 

2020.  

 

I think we’re going to do it. We’re on track. 

 

He says the economy is drawing people to Saskatchewan 

for jobs and helping to keep new graduates in the 

province. 

 

The premier also says better immigration policies helped. 

 

“We’ve got to keep our eyes focused on that because we 

need newcomers as well, [he says] not just for the 

economy and the labour shortage, but because it makes us 

better . . .”  

 

Because it makes us better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

“I love all the accents [he concludes].” 

 

Amol Cheema is one of those newcomers who has settled 

in Saskatchewan [the article goes on to say]. 

 

Cheema, who is originally from India, was in university in 

Toronto when a couple of his friends moved to 

Saskatchewan. He followed in 2011. 

 

“They said it was a good province, lots of opportunities, 

so I came here,” Cheema said at a gathering for 

newcomers Thursday at the legislature. 

 

He said it’s been great, except for the “really harsh” 

winter, which Cheema jokes that he’s getting used to. 

 

Thank goodness for that. Cheema . . . Yes, one winter and he’s 

starting to get used to it. He’s tough. 

 

Cheema, 27, is working as a civilian with the Regina 

Police [Department]. He hopes to become an officer when 

his permanent residency paperwork is complete. 

 

We all wish him well in that. 

 

Cheema said he “absolutely” sees himself staying in 

Saskatchewan for the long-term. 

 

“I love it here,” he said. 

 

“. . . life is kind of relaxed [he continues], you’re not 

rushing to your job. It takes five minutes to go to work. 

And then I got this opportunity [he said], and I think as an 

immigrant it’s my responsibility to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan and the people of Canada.” 

 

Noble sentiments, indeed. We agree 100 per cent. 

 

Wall boasted about the rapid growth over the past six 

years.  

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

From 1905 to 1930, the province grew from 236,000 to 

900,000. In 1983, the province finally hit one million 

residents before dropping below that number in 2001. In 

2007, Saskatchewan reached one million again and has 

been growing [ever] since. 

 

“So from 1930 to 2007 — 77 years [in total] — 

Saskatchewan grew by 100,000 people,” said Wall. 

 

“Because of that, some thought 100,000 people in 10 

years was impossible. [More on that later.] Now, we’ve 

grown by 100,000 in just six years. It really shows the 

economic strength of this new Saskatchewan, and it shows 

the naysayers who believed this kind of growth was 

impossible were dead wrong.” 

 

Dead wrong, Mr. Speaker. I think everybody on this side of the 

House agrees with that sentiment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how about growth in the economy? By 

almost every measure, we are number one or number two coast 

to coast to coast in this great country — GDP [gross domestic 

product] growth, retail sales, wholesale sales, export sales, 

capital investment, job creation, increases in average weekly 

wages all across the board. Almost every kind of measurement 

you want to think about, the growth has been impressive. We 

are Canada’s leading economy. 

 

And it’s the same in construction. Historic investments in road 

infrastructure totalling, we know, is $3.7 billion — that’s 

impressive — including highways and bridges, like the 

twinning of Highway No. 11 from Prince Albert to Saskatoon, 

and the new bridge, and ring road completion project in 

Saskatoon as well. 

 

I’m from Regina. Let’s talk about what’s been going on here 

for a moment. Here in Regina, we have the new Lewvan 

overpass, the new Pinkie Road overpass, and the new roads 

serving the Global Transportation Hub.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the great pleasure just a couple of years ago 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 1 o’clock, this 

House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. Monday and not later. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3769 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Health Care Providers Week 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 

 Prostate Cancer Awareness Month 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 

 Wadena Student Wins Bronze in Cross-Country Competition 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3770 

 Women’s History Month and International Day of the Girl 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3770 

 TV Series Stars Local Athletes 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3770 

 Happy Halloween 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3770 

 Building New Schools 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3771 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care Conditions 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3771 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3771 

 Taxation on Credit Unions 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 

 Expansion of the Canada Pension Plan  

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3776 

 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3776 

 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3776 

 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3776 

 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3777 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3777 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3780 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3784 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3787 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3792 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


