




















































Hansard: November 27, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 20A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4265 

 November 27, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce 18 grade 11 and 12 students from the law 30 class at 

Sheldon-Williams Collegiate. They’re sitting in the east gallery, 

and they’re accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Lindsay 

Vindevoghel, and Ms. Jeanie Dunbar. So I ask all members to 

welcome them here today to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 

pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of this honourable Assembly, four people who are 

very important to me. My daughter Alison Sargent from 

Ottawa. Alison is executive director Rx&D Health Research 

Foundation and in the province to present a $100,000 

fellowship, a research fellowship at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan]. And her husband, Sean Sargent, manager IT 

[information technology] operations in Shared Services Canada. 

And their daughter, Liberty, who is the apple of grandpa’s eye, 

18 months old. And they’re accompanied by my wife, Linda, 

who is well known to many members of this honourable 

Assembly. And I hope all members will accord them a warm 

welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce three people in the west gallery. Two are fixtures of 

this Assembly, I believe, Rich and Joanne Lepp from the 

Saskatchewan House of Prayer. It’s always great to see them in 

the gallery. With them is Mike Schouten of WeNeedaLaw.ca. 

Mike comes from Surrey, BC [British Columbia]. He is a Lions 

fan. He did admit that to me today, although in the past events 

he says he has seen a bit of a light with a bit of a green tint to it. 

So great to see him here today. 

 

Mike describes WeNeedaLaw.ca as an organization that 

advocates for the human rights of children before birth. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome Rich and Joanne to 

their Assembly, and welcome Mike to this Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater support for 

anti-bullying initiatives. And we know bullying can cause 

serious harm, and the consequences of bullying are devastating, 

including depression, self-harm, addictions, and suicide. And 

we know that bullying can occur within schools but also 

through social media, cellphones, or through the Internet, also 

known as cyberbullying. It’s a human rights issue, Mr. Speaker, 

one of safety and inclusion. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives of 

young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to present petitions on behalf of very concerned residents 

from across southern Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unacceptable closure of the emergency room at Regina’s Pasqua 

Hospital. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

ensure our capital city has two 24-hour emergency rooms. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents from Regina 

and Lumsden. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of residents of Far Reserve Road. This road is used as 

the main road into the regional landfill which is operated by a 

tripartite agreement between the communities of La Ronge, Air 

Ronge, and Lac La Ronge Indian Band. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave Far Reserve Road, which has not 

been given proper resources by this government. The dust 

on this road is causing respiratory problems for elders and 

community members. It also creates poor visibility for 

drivers. This is a safety issue, in that we have students 

walking alongside of a very dusty road to school. This road 

has a high volume of traffic in that this is the only road to 

the regional dump. 

 

It is signed by many northern residents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 



4266 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School. The petitioners point out that the gym at 

Sacred Heart Community School in north central Regina is now 

quite literally falling apart, has been closed indefinitely, and is 

no longer safe for students or staff. Certainly the petitioners are 

aware that a temporary solution has been provided in terms of 

the refurbishment of the old sanctuary at the old Sacred Heart 

Church, but they are calling for a permanent solution. 

 

They also point out that Sacred Heart Community School is the 

largest school in North Central with 450-plus students, 75 per 

cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. They point out that 

enrolment has increased by 100-plus students over the past four 

years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 

improving. And they point out, as a matter of basic fairness and 

common sense, Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym. 

In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause the Sask Party provincial government to immediately 

commit to the replacement of the gymnasium of Sacred 

Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Celebration of Hanukkah  

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

the sun goes down over Saskatchewan tonight, our province 

will be made a little brighter with the lighting of the year’s first 

menorah candle. Jewish families begin the celebration of 

Hanukkah this evening, commemorating the rededication of the 

second temple in Jerusalem and the miraculous longevity of the 

oil which brought determination to a people much in need of 

encouragement. 

 

At this time we extend our best wishes to the Saskatchewan 

families celebrating the festival of lights. Here at the legislature, 

the Premier will bring greetings tonight at 6 p.m. in the 

Saskatchewan Gallery followed by a lighting of the menorah. In 

Saskatoon, I will be joining the Minister of Advanced 

Education and the Chabad Saskatoon at the third annual 

menorah lighting ceremony to be held at the Mendel Art 

Gallery. 

 

As Rabbi Kats is quick to point out, Hanukkah’s universal 

message of freedom makes it more than a Jewish holiday. It is 

truly a community celebration, a time for all of us to reflect on 

the freedoms we enjoy as Canadians, and the providential 

circumstances have brought us such fortune. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tapestry of our province is made stronger by 

its diversity. As we move into the holiday season, we recognize 

that our religious and cultural pluralism is a source of strength. 

Today we celebrate with Saskatchewan’s Jewish community 

and thank them for their contributions to our province’s 

character, economy, and public service. Just as the miracle of 

the oil brought courage to the Maccabees in 165 BC [before 

Christ], we hope that the light of the menorah will inspire us to 

seek out a fairer and freer world. 

 

I invite all members to join me as we send our best wishes to 

those celebrating tonight. Happy Hanukkah. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Remembering Guy Bouvier 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will 

ask all members of the Assembly to recognize the life of a very 

important Métis figure. Guy Bouvier was born in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse in 1946 and died on November 7, 2013 in 

Meadow Lake. Guy worked hard in his lifetime as a social 

worker, apprentice electrician, and a shop steward. 

 

Guy’s involvement in Métis politics started in Meadow Lake 

when, as a fieldworker for the Métis Society, he initiated the 

establishment of the Native Urban Housing in Meadow. He was 

also very instrumental in forming the North West Métis 

Friendship Centre and helped bring legal aid to Meadow Lake. 

In 2010 Guy received the Order of Gabriel Dumont Gold 

Medal, which is a lifetime achievement award for his work on 

education and training of Métis people and for enhancing the 

employment opportunities for Métis people overall. 

 

I want to extend my condolences to Guy’s wife, Linda, who has 

remained on the acreage where at one time they raised and 

trained 20 horses for chuckwagon races. He will be missed by 

his daughters, Erin and Renee, and his grandchildren: Jackson, 

Madden, and Leyton. 

 

For all of his life, he enjoyed playing the guitar and singing, and 

plans have been made to organize a fiddle festival in Meadow 

Lake next summer to recognize Guy Bouvier’s life. 

 

Guy was my cousin and a friend, and I ask all members to join 

me in recognizing the lifetime of Guy Bouvier and his very 

important contributions to improving the lives of Métis people. 

His work on earth was indeed well done. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Artist Wins Governor General’s History Award 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to speak about a Prince Albert artist who recently won a 

Governor General’s History Award. Catherine Blackburn was 

the winner in the senior arts category of Historical Canada’s 

Aboriginal Arts and Stories contest for her painting titled 

Grandma. 

 

The award encourages Aboriginal youth to express their history 

through artistic mediums by producing either a piece of writing 

or art about their culture and their heritage. Catherine, of Dene 

ancestry, is one of four recipients of the national contest that 

has been recognizing Aboriginal youth for the past 10 years. 

Catherine wanted to start a body of work that honoured her 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4267 

family and culture and made the piece a couple of years ago 

when she was travelling. The award-winning acrylic painting 

pays tribute to Catherine’s own mother, who is a proud Dene 

woman that calls Saskatchewan’s North home. 

 

Catherine hopes this award and her artwork will show 

Aboriginal youth that there are a lot of opportunities in the 

world if you seek them out. She also highlights the importance 

of honouring Aboriginal history and encourages youth to 

always remember where they came from and what made them 

who they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Ms. 

Catherine Blackburn on this prestigious Governor General’s 

History Award. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Albert Library Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Imagine 

Saskatchewan’s capital city 100 years ago with a population of 

30,000 people, citizens travelling by foot, by bicycle, by 

streetcar. And in 1913, the Albert library branch was 

established in a modest wooden structure at a cost of $2,200. 

Earlier this fall, Albert library celebrated its 100th anniversary. 

Wendy Sinclair, the branch head of Albert library, has been 

with this community hub for a tremendous 22 years. 

 

The demographics in our community boast a very high 

Aboriginal population, and the Albert library reflects the needs 

of the community it serves. When Albert library began offering 

Aboriginal-based programming, their circulation doubled 

within the year. It has changed the dynamics of this branch and 

increased the pride in the neighbourhood. Programming offers 

everything from creating powwow outfits, to Cree and 

Saulteaux language circles, to making hand drums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the branch has a bit of an international reputation 

as well, and members of the library committee have presented 

papers in Norway, New Zealand, Australia, the United States, 

and Sweden. In addition, the library committee has hosted 

delegations from New Zealand and Australia. There are adults 

in North Central who have grown up with the Albert library. 

These men and women are now bringing their children in for 

storytime. They recognize how much Albert library has meant 

to them as a constant over all these years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Albert library branch on their 

centennial, and here’s wishing them continued success for the 

next 100 years. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw to Host Scotties Tournament of Hearts  

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few hours 

ago, I attended the announcement that Moose Jaw has been 

awarded the 2015 Scotties Tournament of Hearts. Our great 

city, Moose Jaw, will host the annual women’s curling 

tournament which will decide which team will go on to 

represent Canada at the World Curling Championship. There is 

no doubt in my mind that Moose Jaw will be a great host for 

this event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when our government released the Saskatchewan 

plan for growth last fall, it gave a strong mandate to 

aggressively promote Saskatchewan as a tourist destination. 

Hosting events like the Scotties Tournament of Hearts will raise 

Saskatchewan’s profile across the country as a first-class tourist 

destination. 

 

It will be the first time that Moose Jaw has hosted the 

Tournament of Hearts, but definitely not the first time the city 

has hosted a successful curling event at Mosaic Place. The 2012 

Capital One Canada Cup of Curling held in Moose Jaw broke 

attendance records and the 4,465-seat Mosaic Place is ideally 

suited to hosting the crown jewel of Canadian women’s curling, 

the Scotties Tournament of Hearts. 

 

Ticket announcements for the 2015 Scotties will be made in the 

coming weeks, and I know Saskatchewan’s devoted curling 

fans will be eagerly awaiting. Mr. Speaker, I would like all 

members to join me in congratulating Moose Jaw on being 

named the host for this great sporting event. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Big River Saw Mill Reopens 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The buzzing of blades 

and smells of sawdust are once again present at the Big River 

saw mill. The plant, closed in 2006, began operation earlier this 

fall under the new owner, Carrier Lumber. This is great news 

for Big River, Mr. Speaker. The reopened mill will create 100 

new jobs in the community. This doesn’t including contractors, 

chip and log haulers, and all the other jobs that will be 

connected to the mill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reopening will create a boost to the local economy and 

allow those who formerly worked at the mill and since went on 

to other industries to come home and work near their families 

again. The news of the reopening has created a resurgence in 

the community, according to Big River town councillor, Carla 

Chadwick: 

 

I think everybody’s very excited about it. Carrier Lumber 

is a very well-respected company, and I believe people are 

happy that they are trying to keep things local and trying to 

hire some of the people that originally left the old mill. 

 

Some advantages have no monetary impact at all but will 

simply help Big River require an identity that was lost when the 

mill was shut down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the town of Big River and Carrier Lumber on the 

exciting reopening of the Big River saw mill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 



4268 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

Affordable Housing Project in Regina 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 

House to inform all members that construction is beginning on 

another new social housing project in our province. I was 

pleased to participate in a sod-turning event that was held last 

Friday for a 48-unit rental housing project right here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, communities across our province are experiencing 

unprecedented growth. With that growth comes challenges in 

meeting the needs for safe and affordable housing. That’s why 

our government committed in our plan for growth to address the 

needs for new housing options. We’re doing that in part by 

selling close to 300 single-family housing units in Regina, 

Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw and reinvesting the proceeds in 

new housing for those communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that access to good, affordable 

housing helps maintain a strong economy and a high quality of 

life. That’s why I’m pleased to report that our government was 

able to help by investing $9.9 million in this project. As a result, 

we’re making housing less expensive for the tenants and the 

taxpayers by creating more affordable, modern, energy-efficient 

multi-unit housing as well as creating hundreds of entry-level 

home ownership opportunities. 

 

This project and others like it support our government’s goal of 

improving housing availability and affordability across our 

whole province. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard a 

fair bit over the last few weeks about nurses who are afraid for 

patient safety because of overcrowding and understaffing. And 

now, Mr. Speaker, our province’s nurses are afraid for patient 

safety with news of the closure of the Pasqua ER [emergency 

room]. SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] president, Tracy 

Zambory, says, “The south part of the province cannot function 

with only one ER in the capital city. You can’t do it. Patient 

safety is going to be put at risk, and we can’t have that.” 

 

The president of the nurses’ union says that it’s not workable, 

and the president says that patient safety will be put at risk. My 

question to the Premier: does he agree with the president of the 

nurses’ union, or does he dismiss her concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Far from it, Mr. Speaker. We share her 

concerns about the loss of, the temporary loss of ER services at 

the Pasqua for certain hours of the day. Mr. Speaker, that’s why 

we’re working very hard on contingency plans even as we 

speak here, even as we meet in the legislature. It’s why we’ve 

been pleased with the announcement that the Meadow Clinic 

just across the street — or it’s certainly in the neighbourhood — 

is going to be open until midnight, Mr. Speaker. It’s why we’re 

also pretty hopeful, frankly, about the process of contract 

negotiations with respect to emergency room doctors who are 

obviously so important to this particular issue, but health care in 

general in the province. 

 

We have a good partnership with the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses, as evidenced by the relationship we’ve been able to 

have over the last six years, as evidenced by the fact that there 

are 1,000 more nurses today working in Saskatchewan, 

something the NDP [New Democratic Party] said was 

impossible to achieve or at least would refuse to set a goal. So 

we take the concerns of SUN seriously. We share them, frankly, 

and this is the number one priority right now within the Health 

ministry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nurses say that it is 

completely unacceptable for our capital city to have just one 

24-hour emergency room. Nurses say that southern 

Saskatchewan cannot function with just one 24-hour emergency 

room in Regina, and nurses say that this decision will put 

patient safety at risk. So my question to the Premier: what 

specifically is being done at Regina General Hospital for them 

to cope with the closure of the Pasqua ER? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the region has put in place a contingency to manage 

through this situation, Mr. Speaker. We hope certainly that this 

is a short time contingency that needs to be put in place, Mr. 

Speaker, knowing that for the limited numbers of individuals 

who on a typical evening would show up at the Pasqua 

Hospital, Mr. Speaker, are . . . Mr. Speaker, the more serious 

cases are already being referred to the General Hospital. 

 

It may not have as much of an impact as one may think, Mr. 

Speaker, but knowing that it will have an impact, the region is 

proposing to staff the General Hospital with additional staff, 

including additional emergency room nurse 24 hours a day, Mr. 

Speaker, at the General Hospital, and they will evaluate going 

forward, based on what they see in terms of the numbers of 

people that do still find their way at the Pasqua Hospital. But as 

I’ve indicated before, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be evaluating this 

situation as we move through it daily. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In an earlier response, 

the Premier made reference to the fact that a nearby walk-in 

clinic will be open for a few more hours at least for a few 

weeks. And that’s good, Mr. Speaker, but that doesn’t address 

the problem. According to the health region, about 85 per cent 

of the people who show up at the emergency room require the 

services that are available in a hospital emergency department. 

And I would imagine, Mr. Speaker, for those that show up at 

the ER at nighttime, that percentage is even higher. So we know 

that the closure of the Pasqua ER is going to add a lot of 

pressure to the General Hospital ER. 

 

Yesterday the minister said no additional resources would be 

added. Today we find out that they’ve changed the plan once 

again and there might be a nurse added. This is evolving, and 

really the government is scrambling here, day by day, as the 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4269 

story changes with what they are doing. My question to the 

Premier: when will a finalized plan be in place? When will 

some assurance be given to people that there is a concrete plan 

and that actual decisions are going to be made that will ensure 

patient safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I certainly hope the Leader of the Opposition isn’t 

recommending that the health region set a plan today or 

yesterday or the day before and then not deviate from that plan 

based on the numbers that they see actually coming to the 

emergency room, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think it is wholly 

responsible for the region to make adjustments to the plan as 

they’re dealing with this short-term contingency. 

 

I do want to correct the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition indicates the roughly 

15 to 20 per cent of individuals who typically are not in an 

emergency situation. Mr. Speaker, that’s a number from the last 

year in Regina when you look at the coverage over a course of a 

year. So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what takes place 

already in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, the traumatic 

incidences that come through, whether it be 911 or other ways, 

Mr. Speaker, those that would be a CTAS [Canadian triage and 

acuity scale] 1 or 2, those are typically already bypassed to the 

General Hospital which is set up more for a traumatic incident, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the 15 to 20 per cent is an average across an entire year, not 

specific to the evening hours at one particular hospital. And I 

think he should know that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister can look to 

page A3 of today’s Leader-Post where it says, “. . . 

approximately 85 per cent of patients who go to Regina’s ERs 

require emergency care.” Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 85, whether 

it’s 90, whether it’s 80, the fact of the matter is there are 

emergencies that occur around the clock and they require the 

best possible care available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as of tomorrow, Regina’s capital city . . . the 

capital city here in Regina will have just one 24-hour 

emergency room. The government has known for months that 

the crisis could reach this point, Mr. Speaker. But now that the 

Grey Cup festivities are over, they’re scrambling to come up 

with a plan to actually handle this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Regina General Hospital has already been struggling with 

overcapacity challenges for months. There are often more 

patients than available beds. And this decision, Mr. Speaker, 

will mean that even more patients are showing up at the Regina 

General Hospital and requiring admission. My question to the 

Premier: where will these extra patients go? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, from time to time the hospitals, whether it be in 

Regina and Saskatoon, do face pressures in terms of the 

capacity, Mr. Speaker. I want to be clear though that the issue 

that we’re dealing with today at the Pasqua Hospital with the 

nighttime emergency coverage is not an issue that deals with 

capacity. Currently the hospitals are not over capacity as they 

have been in the past, Mr. Speaker. This is specific to the lack 

of emergency room physicians in Saskatchewan as it is across 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re coming to the close of negotiations and 

hope to have a contract ratified soon that will put us in a 

competitive place with other provinces across Western Canada, 

that will help to fill some of the gaps in terms of the coverage, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are also increasing, as it’s been 

mentioned before, the number of training seats in this province, 

the number of residencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would not I think be in this position today had 

we had more than just 60 residency positions when the 

government changed in 2007. We have to make priorities 

within a limited number of residency seats, and when you only 

have 60 seats, Mr. Speaker, that means you can only have two 

emergency room seats. We’ve increased that to 120, which 

means that we have now eight residency seats for emergency 

room physicians, Mr. Speaker, and two Royal College 

physicians. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if members opposite were so 

concerned about medical training here in the province, you’d 

think they’d be paying closer attention with respect to the fact 

that the College of Medicine is under probation under their 

watch. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that over the past few days everyone in 

the province has been paying attention to the Grey Cup, and 

rightfully so. But not everyone, Mr. Speaker, may have heard 

the news of this closure as our attention has been focused so 

much on the good news that we’ve been following over the last 

week. And we know, Mr. Speaker, there are many people who 

don’t tune in to question period every day, and people who 

don’t follow the news. But it is absolutely important, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s essential that people know that if they have a 

medical emergency between the hours of 7:30 at night to 8 in 

the morning that they should not show up at the Pasqua ER. 

 

So my question to the Premier: what is his government doing in 

order to ensure the people in Regina and southern 

Saskatchewan know about the closure of the Pasqua ER? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Leader of the 

Opposition would clarify for the House and for anybody 

watching why he would think the Grey Cup would have 

anything to do with this particular issue. 

 

In his earlier question he said, after the Grey Cup festivities are 

done . . . What’s his implication? That the doctors involved, that 

the people at RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region] were 

too distracted? Is that what his suggestion is? Mr. Speaker, this 

was made clear a week . . . Well members are . . . Now 

members are chirping from their seats, Mr. Speaker. A week 



4270 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

prior to any of the festivities, this information was known. 

 

To the member’s question: there will be a comprehensive 

communications strategy undertaken by the health region, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s something that government is certainly involved 

with as well. It’ll include, among other things, a mailout to 

everybody within a 50-kilometre radius of the Pasqua. It’ll 

include, Mr. Speaker, the appropriate signage and posters and 

communications with respect to social media, with respect to 

every media that’s certainly available to the health region to 

communicate the message. I think significantly is a direct 

mailer to everybody within a 50-kilometre radius. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re working very hard to make sure that 

whatever is needed in communications is needed for a very, 

very short, temporary period of time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Health Care Staffing in Wolseley and Area 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, reduced health care services are 

becoming a trademark of this government, not just here in our 

capital city but in rural communities as well. This government 

has converted the Wolseley Memorial Hospital to a health 

centre. It no longer offers acute care or emergency services. 

 

I’ve visited this community and met with residents. They’re 

frustrated because the Minister of Rural Health said this 

government was going to work to keep their hospital open. But 

internal documents show that the government actually planned 

to offer only acute care and emergency services in Indian Head 

and Broadview, not Wolseley. To the Minister of Rural Health: 

why did he tell the community he was working to keep their 

hospital open when the government’s internal documents show 

otherwise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are aware 

of the challenges that Wolseley has been facing, caused by the 

physician leaving, and we’re certainly not closing the hospital 

in Wolseley or converting it. I’ve met with the community 

officials on two occasions, and the Minister of Health and I will 

be meeting with the community leaders next week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also met with the CEO [chief executive officer] 

of RQHR and other senior officials of the health region, and the 

good news is we have a plan, and I support it. What the health 

region is doing is bolstering the physician complement in 

Broadview and Indian Head, and would be followed by an 

emphasis on Wolseley. As the international grads go through 

their made-in-Saskatchewan assessment, they will be going into 

those communities and working towards opening Wolseley 

emergency centre in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, that answer will not satisfy the 

people of the Wolseley area. The Minister of Rural Health told 

local residents on June 17th that this was just a temporary 

service disruption. But five months have gone by, and it’s still 

closed. A local resident wrote to the Wolseley newspaper 

saying: 

 

There is absolutely no doubt in my mind that the sign on 

the hospital door which states “temporary” is nothing more 

than a part of the agenda to deconstruct a fully functional 

acute care facility. 

 

To the Minister of Rural Health: is that Wolseley resident right 

or does this government actually intend to reopen the Wolseley 

Memorial Hospital? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 

Wolseley Hospital is under a service disruption. And we are not 

closing the hospital and will not be converting it. As I said, 

there’s a plan in place to bolster the whole area and we are 

actively working to fill the vacancies in the entire area. Job 

postings online at Saskdocs include Wolseley in that service, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can only point to the good news that we have right now in Fort 

Qu’Appelle where there’s six full-time doctors, a seventh on its 

way. And that is the reason that there’s doctors coming into 

rural Saskatchewan is because of the good work that Saskdocs 

has been doing through the Saskatchewan international 

physician practice assessment, the made-in-Saskatchewan 

assessment. International grads are coming into Saskatchewan 

and most of them are working in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re also training more physicians at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] by increasing the numbers by 40. And also, Mr. 

Speaker, we increased the locum pool, a regional locum pool as 

well to bolster services in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Rural Health 

received a letter dated September 20th, 2013 from two 

physicians and a nurse practitioner that want to work at the 

Wolseley Hospital on a permanent basis. Two doctors and a 

nurse practitioner are asking to work at Wolseley Hospital, but 

this government is ignoring them and it’s leaving the closed 

sign up. To the Minister of Rural Health: how does that make 

any sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the 

health region has a plan in place to recruit physicians into the 

area, and that includes Wolseley. And as new doctors come 

through the SIPPA [Saskatchewan international physician 

practice assessment], the made-in-Saskatchewan assessment, 

which are coming to this province through Saskdocs, these 

communities will be getting physicians and the emergency 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4271 

centres will be open. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all I have to do is look at the record of the NDP 

where they closed 52 hospitals, Mr. Speaker, when they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker, let alone the 1,200 long-term care 

beds that they closed and the 16 long-term care facilities. So, 

Mr. Speaker, we really have nothing to learn from the 

opposition. 

 

We have a plan in place for this area and we have a plan in 

place for the whole province in rural and remote Saskatchewan 

to attract and retain physicians in this province. And that plan is 

working and will continue to work in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, that isn’t being ready for 

growth. Once again this government is instead always ready for 

excuses. They shut down the Wolseley Hospital. There’s no 

acute and no emergency care in the community and this 

government is ignoring two doctors and a nurse practitioner that 

are ready and willing to work in this hospital. 

 

This is not an issue of recruitment challenges. Health 

professionals are practically begging to work here, yet this 

government is keeping the Wolseley Hospital closed. This is a 

failure of leadership on the part of this government. It’s no 

wonder that Councillor Gerry Hill is quoted in The Wolseley 

Bulletin as saying, “The powers that be are just waiting for us to 

give up so they can move ahead with their plans.” 

 

To the minister: when will this government acknowledge what 

its real plans are for health care in the Wolseley area? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

plan. The health region has a plan in place and it’s going to 

include Wolseley, but the whole area as well, attracting 

physicians, as I mentioned, through Saskdocs and going 

through the assessment process. And most of those doctors do 

come to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As I had mentioned, we’ve increased the number of training 

seats at the U of S at the college by 40 — now it’s up to 100 

training seats — and doubled the number of residencies in the 

province by 60. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing a number of 

innovative things in health care. Also distributive education, 

where residents go out and to work in smaller urbans, and they 

work in the smaller rural areas. And we’re having a good 

success of those residents staying in those communities and 

practising medicine in those communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to point to the NDP’s record in the last five full years in 

office. The province lost 1,160 total health workers, 450 

registered nurses. They lost 173 physicians in the last five 

years. We have over 300 more physicians working in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Health Care and Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, budgets are about people, 

not simply numbers on a page. When it comes to this 

government providing services to people and families in critical 

areas like health care, they’ve got their priorities wrong. 

 

We have a current crisis with the closure of an emergency room 

here in Regina at the Pasqua Hospital. And under this 

government, that’s also coupled with staffing shortages and 

neglect in seniors’ care. In the wake of these crises, the 

mid-term report makes clear that this government is forcing 

health regions to slash tens of millions of dollars between now 

and the end of the fiscal year. To the Minister of Finance: what 

will be the impacts of these cuts to front-line health care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the efficiencies that we’ve been able to find and 

identify in the first half of this fiscal year are related to the 

budgets of the health regions, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been able to 

find savings and efficiencies in terms of how we purchase 

prescription drugs, for example, through the generic initiative 

that the Premier worked on as the Co-Chair of the health 

innovation working group with the Co-Chair of Prince Edward 

Island. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also been able to identify savings through 

how we purchase blood through Canadian Blood Services, how 

we inventory blood. Mr. Speaker, we’re being seen, 

Saskatchewan is being seen as the jurisdiction to watch and 

follow as an example in terms of how we purchase and 

inventory blood, Mr. Speaker. For example, since 2010, since 

this initiative was put in place, we’ve saved $35 million just in 

how we inventory the blood system in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government responded 

to the seniors’ care crisis with an inadequate drop-in-the-bucket 

fund of $10 million, pretending they were new dollars. But now 

it’s clear in this report that those aren’t new dollars for urgent 

action. Insufficient as those dollars are, they’re now being 

clawed out of previously budgeted health care funding. 

 

Health regions were already asked to make huge cuts in the 

spring, and now they’re being asked, forced to make many 

more cuts as they move forward, before the end of the fiscal 

year. At a time when there’s a closed ER at the Pasqua Hospital 

in our capital city and a crisis in long-term care, this 

government isn’t getting the job done for Saskatchewan 

families. Mr. Speaker, rather than stepping up to the plate to 

address these crises, how could this government force tens of 

millions of dollars of further cuts in front-line health care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

mentioned before and as I’ve indicated both today and in 

committee and other places, Mr. Speaker, the health system in 

this province is undergoing significant work to find efficiencies 

within health spending, Mr. Speaker. 



4272 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

As I’ve mentioned, in terms of the prescription drug plan, in 

terms of how we purchase blood from Canadian Blood 

Services, Mr. Speaker, the pan-Canadian approach to 

purchasing vaccines, we’re saving, for example, $4 million just 

in the way that we purchase immunizations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it odd that the members opposite would 

have a problem with finding efficiencies within the health care 

system. The Leader of the Opposition ran on a campaign 

platform for the leadership of the NDP, and he said, “. . . more 

efficiency built into our public health care system. Our focus 

needs to be on establishing a more efficient system that is 

centred on patients and their families,” Mr. Speaker. I don’t 

know what explains efficiencies more than purchasing blood 

and finding efficiencies in the way that we stock and inventory 

the blood system in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s get this straight. We 

have a closed down emergency room in the capital city of our 

province. We have a crisis in long-term care. And that 

government is forcing cuts by the millions in health care? And 

that minister chooses to offer that sort of spin and just sort of 

brush it off? That’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The cuts don’t stop in health care. We also know that 

government has failed in education. We hear from 

communities, teachers, students, parents, school boards that 

they’re facing cut resources, cut supports, with larger and more 

complex classrooms. Given this scenario and that government’s 

failure in education, how could they choose to cut in education 

instead of responding to their failures with real action? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. I can advise the members that there are no cuts in 

education. There are no cuts to education infrastructure. All of 

the capital projects are proceeding. 

 

Our budget funds capital projects on a percentage completed 

basis. If there’s delays or a project is ahead or behind schedule, 

it affects our budget. Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 

opposite there are some projects that are proceeding slightly 

slower than anticipated so it is merely a timing issue that it 

shows that there is less expenditure. 

 

We are always willing to look for efficiencies and save money, 

but we will not cut funding or do anything that’s going to 

impact our students anywhere. The students are our priority. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the facts speak for 

themselves. There’s a $3 million reduction in education and 

there’s urgent priorities in the classroom that affect student 

learning. 

 

The education numbers are also a bit of a budgetary charade. It 

seemed from the technical briefing that there was no allocation, 

no allotment for the settlement of the teachers’ contract, a 

contract that ended in September. Mr. Speaker, how is it 

responsible to table a budget that doesn’t even have a provision 

for a fair settlement of an expired teachers’ contract that the 

government knows they’re going to have to pay for? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it was a privilege on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and 

the Government of Saskatchewan to present something very 

unique that the NDP wouldn’t understand and that is a balanced 

budget in both the General Revenue Fund and the summary 

financial statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for our entire time in government we have been 

very careful about ensuring that we live within our means. And 

that means, Mr. Speaker, that revenues have to exceed 

expenditures. I listen to the members opposite every day — 

spend, spend, spend. Mr. Speaker, they proposed a platform that 

was going to cost $5 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know better. They 

want to ensure that we move forward. We lead the nation. We 

lead the nation in having the lowest unemployment rate. We 

lead the nation in retail sales. We lead the nation in so many 

things, Mr. Speaker. That is why this province is rated AAA, 

and it’ll stay there. 

 

[14:15] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la 

Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 122, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 122, 

The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 

(No. 2) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4273 

Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 

(No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved Bill No. 

123, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 

now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 

(Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 124, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) 

Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved that Bill 

No. 124, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential 

Amendment) Act, 2013 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

before orders of the day, it is my pleasure to submit 

supplementary estimates accompanied by a message from Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Would you all please rise for a message from 

the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits Supplementary 

Estimates — November of certain sums required for the 

service of the province for the 12 months ending March 

31st, 2014, and recommends the same to the Legislative 

Assembly. The Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, 

Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 109 — The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

my pleasure to rise today to speak to the proposed amendments 

on The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act. 

This is Bill No. 109. It’s been tabled by the Minister for the 

Economy. 

 

We have some indicating remarks from him. It was introduced 

just yesterday in the House, Mr. Speaker, and what he’s 

indicating here is that there’s a need to amend this Act to allow 

that some of the . . . A percentage of the pool funds annual net 

capital has to be invested into innovation type investments. And 

obviously the minister will be setting the form by which these 

tax credits would be issued to investors in the future. And 

there’s a few other housekeeping amendments to be found in 

the bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He went on to talk about how labour-sponsored venture capital 

corporations have been prudently supporting provincial 

businesses. Certainly we know that the incentive to invest in 

these quite often is backed up by a tax credit of some sort. And 

if I understand what’s being presented in the annual report for 

the SaskWorks Venture Fund, for example, that the federal 

government is now backing off on some of the tax incentives 

that have been in place for a number of years for these funds. 

So I think that’s something that definitely the shareholders will 

be tracking and certainly the ability of these corporations and 

these funds to attract new investment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we are looking to keep an eye on that and ensure that the 

investments are properly managed and that the funds are 

carefully invested in local businesses, and certainly as much as 

possible, local businesses, and in traditional businesses in 

Saskatchewan in addition to the new intent which is to increase 

investment in what the minister referred to as innovation type 

investments. The expectation on the part of the government is to 



4274 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

stimulate the innovation sector more. 

 

We know that a lot of work is going, and the good people of 

Saskatchewan and businesses in Saskatchewan are certainly 

doing their part to develop the innovation sector. And certainly 

we see ample evidence of that, Mr. Speaker, in the world of 

agricultural technology and the good work that’s being done 

both at the university level and also at the applied sciences 

level. We know that the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan 

has evolved very quickly over the last many years and that the 

type of innovation that we see taking place all the time both in 

plant technology and mechanical technology and all across the 

board in terms of value added for some of our products and 

some of the crops and beef industry, there’s all kinds of 

wonderful things going on in the province right now. 

 

And so encouraging investment in the local companies is 

something that’s very important. And it looks like the Ministry 

of the Economy is now wanting investors in these types of 

companies to extend their investments beyond the traditional 

type of businesses in Saskatchewan. For example in 

SaskWorks’s annual report from 2013, some of the types of 

traditional investments that we see right now are certainly in the 

oil and gas sector. And we know that they’ve invested $7.7 

million in a company called Avalon Oil and Gas in the 

Lloydminster area. They’ve invested $3.7 million in Fire Sky 

Energy Inc., which is an oil and gas company headquartered in 

Estevan. We see Steel Reef Infrastructure Corp. got over 15 

million, $15.7 million, and they’re described as a midstream 

infrastructure company with operations in Saskatchewan and 

Alberta. And this is a new oil and gas services subsector, so in 

some sense, Mr. Speaker, this is an innovative type of 

development. 

 

We also see a couple of traditional investments like Centre 

Square Place here in Regina, with an investment of $3.3 million 

for a new mixed-use tower in Regina’s downtown area, and also 

the Poplar Grove development, which is a Saskatoon 

development for 88 units using cost-effective modular 

techniques. And this is going to be made accessible to 

homebuyers through Innovative’s proprietary financial 

assistance programs. This is a development . . . The company is 

called Innovative Residential, which has become a leader in 

Saskatchewan’s entry-level housing market. 

 

So those are some of the examples of the types of investments 

that are being made in one of these labour venture capital 

companies, SaskWorks. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we want to 

see that kind of investment and what’s going on here in 

Saskatchewan continue. We know that there’s always more and 

more competition. The more trade agreements that are entered 

into, the barriers to trade are coming down, and so 

Saskatchewan companies have to be very flexible and very 

adaptive to respond to those types of concerns. 

 

And when we see the ability for these types of labour-sponsored 

venture capital corporations to make investments in innovation, 

the challenge I think the Ministry of the Economy is suggesting 

is they want to see the various funds increase the amount of 

innovation investments in the portfolio by up to 25 per cent in 

the next three years, or two years actually, seeing that 2013 is 

almost finished. And they’re looking at that increase by 2016. 

 

So there’s the main bulk of the amendments. There’s a number 

of housekeeping items that are being introduced through the 

Bill No. 109. Basically there’s ones that hang over from a few 

years ago when this government changed the name of 

government entities. They used to be departments. Now they’re 

ministries and apparently that was missed in this bill. So those 

are being cleaned up. 

 

And there’s a couple of substantive sections, Mr. Speaker. One 

is the new subsection 9(5). This is the main meat of the new 

bill, Mr. Speaker. And in this one, 9(5) is going to establish 

innovation type requirements for type A corporations. So type 

A corporations are defined in the bill. It’s “a labour-sponsored 

venture capital corporation to which a Type A certificate of 

registration is issued pursuant to this Act.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see that this new clause is dealing with 

type A corporations. They’re a fairly technical description. But 

what the new subsection (5) will say is that an investment . . . 

This is (5), sorry, subsection 9(5). It’s a new subsection and it 

says: 

 

On or after January 1, 2014, an investment instrument 

issued by a business that would otherwise be an eligible 

business is not to be taken into account . . . unless: 

 

And then I’ll skip to sub (b): 

 

the Type A corporation has already invested and 

maintained not less than the portion of its equity capital 

that is prescribed in the regulations in investment 

instruments issued by eligible businesses engaged in an 

innovation activity . . . 

 

And once again there’s the emphasis on innovation. So as I’ve 

said in the past, you know, it used to be innovation, small I, was 

just a good idea that somebody would have. But now it really 

drives I think what we would see as the applied sciences and 

institutes where we have applied technology, and those sorts of 

commercially ready sort of innovations that are easy to get, 

easily made into the market, Mr. Speaker. So obviously the 

government wants to ensure that the labour-sponsored venture 

capital corporations also encourage that type of investment and 

not just focus on the type B corporations. 

 

The other amendments, there’s a few others that are being 

proposed. In section 10 of the existing Act we see a 

rearrangement basically of the way the section was worded. It’s 

indicated in the explanatory notes as a housekeeping 

amendment. And this is speaking to the investment requirement 

of the original capital raised by a type B corporation, so there’s 

some requirements there. And it’s just really a rearrangement of 

the clause and some of the timing periods that are required for 

additional capital being issued by that type B corporation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, by and large we see this as a number of 

basically housekeeping items that are being proposed, a few 

renumberings. There’s a new clause, 28(1)(m.1) that’s being 

proposed which allows some amendments to the regulations 

and as indicated in the explanatory notes, it’s “. . . necessary to 

establish innovation type requirements as per the proposed 

amendments to section 9.” 

 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4275 

So the new clause reads as follows, 28(1)(m.1): 

 

“prescribing innovation activities and requirements related 

to investments made in businesses engaged in innovation 

activities for the purposes of section 9 and authorizing the 

minister to set additional terms and conditions for 

innovation activities”. 

 

So once again we see a deference to the executive arm of 

government where we have more power being placed in the 

executive government to pass regulations which, as I’ve 

indicated before, are not subject to scrutiny by this legislature. 

They’re not subject to public scrutiny, and indeed often happen 

behind the scenes in many ways. We know the orders in 

councils are published but with little fanfare and little uptake in 

terms of public engagement for those types of laws, basically. I 

mean regulations carry the force of law. And whenever we see 

this government furthering its powers through the executive 

arm of government, where powers are given to the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, I think it’s another little chink in the 

armour of an open and democratic society, Mr. Speaker. And 

those are things that we’re concerned about and certainly want 

to bring to the attention of the public. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So in terms of this Bill, it’s just been introduced yesterday. 

We’re just taking a look at it now. It’s a complex type of 

investment scheme, and we know labour-sponsored venture 

capital corporations are an important part of the investment 

world here in Saskatchewan, and certainly having the tax 

opportunities to add on top of that has provided . . . been a good 

incentive over the years, Mr. Speaker. I’ve taken advantage of 

some of them myself. And it’s a good way to ensure that our 

entrepreneurs and our people on the ground here in 

Saskatchewan have access to capital that will help them do 

what they need to to bring those good ideas and that hard work 

to fruition and benefit their families and the communities they 

live in as well as our province. 

 

At this point I think other of my colleagues are going to want to 

have an opportunity to participate in the debate, and so then I 

would move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 109, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 112 — The 

Accounting Profession Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon, after question period, to have the opportunity to enter 

into the discussion on Bill No. 112, An Act respecting the 

Accounting Profession and the Institute of Chartered 

Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts. 

 

So this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, of course has to do 

with the authority and the regulations and the rules that involve 

the accounting profession, and is in response, Mr. Speaker, as I 

understand it in having had some discussions with the different 

professional associations and with others, that this is a request 

that’s largely driven by the sector and by the accountants, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But before I just get into a few of the details related to the 

changes that are proposed in this legislation, I do want to make 

a few general comments about the importance of such 

designations and why we need to take this seriously. Of course, 

Mr. Speaker, when we are dealing with any self-regulating 

profession and when designations are awarded to certain 

professions, it’s important that the rules that we have in place 

do a number of things. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, is that they need to provide the professionals 

working in an industry to have a recognition, to have a 

designation that is well respected and that means something — 

yes, in our own jurisdiction, but in other jurisdictions as well. 

And that’s a very important component. It’s also, Mr. Speaker, 

important to ensure that the standards to which one would meet, 

be required to meet in order to receive the designation, that they 

are strong, that they are of a high level, and that they in fact 

bring the results that are needed for the trust that the 

Saskatchewan public needs and wants when it relates to a 

particular industry. 

 

Essentially if someone in a profession is claiming to be 

something such as an accountant and has the appropriate 

designation, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for the general public 

to know that they have in fact met a standard, that they are held 

accountable for their actions and how they meet the needs of 

their clients or customers, and that there is a mechanism in 

place, Mr. Speaker, so that if someone is falling short, if 

someone is not meeting the standard, that there is a means for 

accountability for the profession to take someone who may be 

not meeting the standard, take them to task for what is 

occurring. 

 

So in this instance, Mr. Speaker, what we have is a piece of 

legislation that would be bringing in one designation for 

accountants here in the province. So currently there are a 

number of designations that individuals may have, and what 

this bill is proposing to do is to merge the different designations 

together. So at present, Mr. Speaker, we have chartered 

accountants, referred to as CAs; we have certified management 

accountants, referred to as CMAs; and we have certified general 

accountants, referred to as CGAs. 

 

And so this piece of legislation is suggesting that these three 

designations be merged into one, and it would be a CPA 

[chartered professional accountant] designation. So that’s an 

important step. And as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is actually . . . The discussion that’s occurred in 



4276 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

this province among the profession and among the three 

existing designations is one that actually is a bit of a trailblazer 

within the Canadian context for what are the best steps. 

 

And when we’re looking at changes to any sort of profession or 

any sort of legislation, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to know 

where the impetus is coming from. And in this instance, Mr. 

Speaker, it appears that the industry has decided that this is the 

best approach forward, the best thing for their profession, and 

then also in turn the best thing for customers or clients who may 

be accessing the services of an accountant. 

 

I can see the merit in this approach, Mr. Speaker, for a few 

reasons. One benefit or potential benefit could be the fact that 

with one single designation of CPA, there could be less 

confusion. I mean for those who love accounting and have gone 

into that career path, the distinctions between the chartered 

accountants and certified management accountants and CGAs, 

Mr. Speaker, would be well known. But I would imagine for the 

average person on the street, understanding the nuances of the 

different categories and the different professional designations 

might be a bit confusing at times. 

 

And so by going to one designation, Mr. Speaker, in a sense 

there would be one gold standard that would have to be met by 

individuals wishing to go into that profession. And that would 

decrease confusion for people wanting to access a professional 

who has this designation, knowing that if they’re accessing a 

CPA, as this legislation would suggest we should do, Mr. 

Speaker, then they would know that they have someone who 

has met the standards and that the proper regulation is in place. 

 

Another benefit I can see to this, Mr. Speaker, is with respect to 

the interaction that accountants may have here in the province 

with other jurisdictions, other international jurisdictions. So if 

someone is working in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and having 

interaction with a client or another company, Mr. Speaker, in 

another country, by having this designation which can be used 

in other jurisdictions as well, there’s greater transferability and 

greater recognition for what is being required. 

 

With this of course, Mr. Speaker, there would have to be, as the 

industry has explained, a new certification program so that the 

right standards are in place. And I want to compliment the 

industry for the steps they have taken. When there are different 

bodies involved in any sector, at times, Mr. Speaker, there can 

be some turf battles or some territorialism that can arise. So to 

see a sector working together between the different branches 

that currently exist and finding the best way forward for their 

own profession and for the province and beyond, I think that’s a 

positive thing and can serve as a good example of a way to push 

new legislation within a jurisdiction. And I think that’s a 

positive thing. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, an important component to think of is what 

this means for university grads and for people who would 

pursue post-secondary training in accounting and for 

designation. This puts, Mr. Speaker, all those grads into one 

stream, and so there’s some good sense I can see in that as well 

for consistency for grads within the accounting profession. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re generally supportive of this approach 

because it seems like it’s legislation that has been requested 

from the industry. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also speaking and 

listening with other individuals to ensure that yes, we hope the 

intended consequences of this legislation would be positive and 

would be realized, but also doing consultation to ensure that if 

there are any unintended consequences that we may not be 

aware of as legislators, that those would be brought to our 

attention and that they would be addressed. So that’s of course 

the due diligence that occurs with any piece of legislation that 

we are discussing here in the House and through the committee 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at face value, this seems like a common sense approach and 

something that is constructive and good for accountants and 

thereby for the province. But of course, we do want to ask the 

appropriate questions and ensure that all the i’s are dotted and 

t’s are crossed and bases are covered, Mr. Speaker. So we may 

have some further discussions, some further questions in 

discussion at the committee stage. But in general, we’re 

supportive of this piece of legislation, but wanting to take the 

right steps in order to ensure that any unintended consequences 

are being properly addressed. 

 

So I know there may be yet some on our side who wish to speak 

to this legislation, so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 112. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 99 — The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill No. 99, An Act to 

amend The Public Employees Pension Plan Act.  

 

And it is an important piece of legislation that we have before 

us today. Clearly whenever we have discussions around 

pensions, it’s one of those things that people really want to 

know as much about as possible. You know, it’s one of those 

things that when we talk about our senior years, we want to 

make sure we have adequate resources in place to make sure we 

can live in a lifestyle that we think we should be able to. 

 

And that means that we shouldn’t have fear in terms of housing, 

in terms of groceries, in terms of health care. And that could 

mean particularly in terms of whether it’s ambulances or 

pharmaceuticals or drugs, supports — whatever they may be, 

that type of thing. And we want to have that little extra too so 

that we can enjoy life. Now when a person is retired, they 

always hope they could do a little travelling, visit with families, 

share some of the good times, enjoy a movie, do those kind of 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4277 

things. 

 

So when we talk about pensions, they’re critically, critically 

important. And as I know my colleagues have said earlier that 

some 11 million Canadians do not have a retirement plan. And 

this is really unfortunate because it is something that really 

concerns me because we do so much work, and in fact we know 

that there are many seniors who try to do the right thing, try to 

put away money, but unfortunately they don’t put enough away. 

In fact they may even be penalizing themselves. 

 

And we’ve seen the different government initiatives. We know 

in the 1970s, and this is one of the governments that the New 

Democrats put together, the Saskatchewan Income Plan to 

support the old age security and the guaranteed income plan as 

well. But what happened was that the one group that was not 

really supported well enough are those workers, particularly the 

low-income workers who may make just a little bit too much to 

qualify for the Saskatchewan Income Plan or the guaranteed 

annual income allowance, and that there’s a void. 

 

So we have to make sure we do the right thing here when we 

talked about pensions. And I do have to say — and I hope the 

Finance minister continues on this way — we were delighted to 

see that the ministers of Finance in their meeting in Prince 

Edward Island decided to do another look at the Canadian 

pension plan because we need that to work well for all of us. 

And we’ve argued in this House many times about the 

efficiency and effectiveness of that plan. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I know that when you talk about the public employees 

pension plan, the PEPP as many people might call it or the 

PEPP plan, that the CPP [Canada Pension Plan] is a strong 

partner to that in terms of providing for our old age. But I think 

that when we take the time to reflect on this, we want to make 

sure that there are no unintended consequences or intended 

consequences. That’s our job, as we do the second reading 

debates and as we go to committee and the time we connect 

with the people who are behind the amendments, that have they 

done their due diligence? Have they taken a look at all the 

impacts of this? 

 

Now some of these seem relatively straightforward, and I just 

want to review for a minute what the minister said. You know 

we entered into this debate on November 12th, 2013. He 

doesn’t really talk about who brought forward the suggestions 

for the amendments. I would hope that it was the people with 

the plan. And I’m always curious, and I think it is a good thing 

to think, have people had an impact? Have people had a chance 

to talk about this? Have the members had a chance to put their 

two cents into this discussion? 

 

Now he does talk about how the plan is a defined contribution 

pension plan, and it’s administered by the Public Employees 

Pension Board. And it’s a means of saving for retirement, true 

enough, and that this includes employees of executive 

government, members of the Legislative Assembly — and so 

all of us in here are members — Crown corporations, and a 

variety of other government agencies. 

 

And in fact the minister goes on to say that there’s close to 

53,000 plan holders of the public employees pension plan. And 

they have $5.6 billion in plan assets and they cover 79 different 

employers. And then he talks about how the contributions are 

made and how the process is through a payroll deduction. And 

this is set out accordingly to maximums set by the Income Tax 

Act of Canada. They don’t pay taxes on contributions or the 

accumulated investments income until they withdraw that 

amount from the plan, and hopefully at that time they’ll be 

having some ways to save some income tax as well. It’s a bit of 

a deferral, isn’t it? Contributions are forwarded to the plan and 

then used to purchase units in the investment option of the 

member’s choice. 

 

He goes on, the Finance minister goes on and talks about the six 

asset allocation funds and lists them. They include the 

Accelerated Growth Fund, the Growth Fund, the Balanced 

Fund, the Moderate Fund, the Conservative Fund, and the PEPP 

Steps Fund. So they’re all about investing in, that they may 

invest in a short-term bond fund, either in addition or instead of 

having to invest in one of the six allocation funds. 

 

So that’s pretty well straightforward. Now he gets into the meat 

of the legislation. So what he says is we’ll do the following: 

clarify that a simple majority of the board is required of the 

board members for all decisions made by the board. Now that’s 

just a few words, simple majority of the board members is 

required for all decisions of the board. But as I understand it 

from the notes, that the decision making changes the basis for 

decision making of the Public Employees Pension Board, 

known as the board, from unanimous decision making to a 

requirement for a majority, for all decisions by the board. 

 

So that’s an interesting change, going from the unanimous to a 

simple majority. There’s many variations in between: 

two-thirds majority, three-quarters majority, a simple majority. 

Now it would be interesting to know what the quorum 

regulations are. Is it a simple majority, and is it a simple 

majority of the board members to have a quorum for the 

meeting? Then you could get less than half the board members 

involved making a decision, and quite a significant decision. So 

I’d like to have questions more about that. 

 

And we’ll have questions around, what does this mean in terms 

of simple majority? What does it mean in terms of quorum? 

What’s the impact on the two? How do the two connect 

together? It’s not I think the . . . And it’s also the kind of 

decision making. You know, I’m surprised that it had to be 

unanimous for all decisions. Maybe that’s wrong. Maybe it’s 

only part . . . some of the decisions because it does seem 

extreme that you have to have unanimity for all, all decisions. 

So I’m not sure if that’s accurate as well. But it’s interesting. 

 

It allows the board to undertake short-term borrowing for the 

purposes of administration of the employment pension plan Act. 

That’s straightforward. It allows the Lieutenant Governor, by 

order in council, to designate the default fund in which all 

member contributions shall be deposited unless otherwise 

directed. And that makes sense. That makes sense. You’ve got 

to do something with the money, so there’s got to be a default 

investment process. And that makes sense. And authorize the 

Lieutenant Governor by regulation to permit the plan to receive 

members and funds from a registered plan wanting to become 

part of PEPP and to state which specialty funds the members 



4278 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

transferring into PEPP are eligible for. 

 

So just a few lines about what he says but six main goals. But 

this is a fund that, as he says, invests over 5.6 billion in plan 

assets. So it’s not a small organization. This is not something to 

sneeze at. This is a significant, significant fund. And it’s one 

that we should be careful about because, as we’ve known that it, 

sometimes these things can have issues, problems. And we want 

to make sure that all of this is done in a way that is appropriate, 

that people who’ve given their lives to public service can rest 

assured that in their retirement years that they will be well 

looked after. 

 

We’ve seen situations in the States where pensions or savings 

have not been well looked after, particularly in terms of, and 

we’ll talk about this later, in terms of the fees that some 

investment fund operators have. So when you can have a 

publicly operated and maintained fund that has a high standard 

— and I’m a member, so I get my monthly statements, and I 

think they’re quarterly, actually, statements — that it does have 

a high level of transparency, extremely high level of 

accountability. And we need to maintain that. We need to 

maintain the confidence in the plan. 

 

You know, it really becomes a challenge when people say, you 

know, I would rather invest my own money, I’d rather take all 

of my income and put it into an investment myself, and that 

they feel they could do better on their own. And that is a 

problem. We get away from these pension plans, especially 

when you’re going to have so many members and, in this case, 

53,000 members is a significant number of people. And when 

you can do that, you can pool the resources to have significant 

returns, get significant returns on your investments. 

 

But as I say, if for some reason the wheels start to come off, 

people start to lose confidence in the plan because they feel like 

the market is hot, investments are strong. And we know that 

that can appear to be attractive. The unfortunate thing with 

pension funds, pension plans, they’re in it for the long haul, the 

long haul. And this is why it’s so important to have a strong, 

strong pension plan. 

 

And this is also the reason — and I’ll come back to it and keep 

coming back to it — how important the Canadian Pension Plan 

is, because for all of us, we all contribute. It’s in our best 

interest to make sure it’s strong, but also that it’s there for those 

who may not work for an employer that has a pension plan or 

belongs to a large enough pool of people that can make 

significant earnings. 

 

You know as I said earlier, 11 per cent, it’s 11 per cent . . . Not 

11 per cent, over 11 million Canadians are without a workplace 

pension plan. And nearly half of Canadians born in the 1960s 

will end up with a retirement income below 80 per cent of what 

they earned while working. And this is from a recent report 

from CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce]. And I 

think this is really important that we think about this. 

 

And you know, the wonderful thing about the Canadian Pension 

Plan, it’s well run, fully portable, and fully paid for by the 

employees and employers. And it has funds that will mean it 

will operate sufficiently for the next 70 years. So now obviously 

the Canadian Pension Plan has significantly more, multiple 

times more members than the public employees plan of 

Saskatchewan. But still these two act hand in glove, and it’s 

really critical that we take the time and do the due diligence 

here to make sure that the pensions are solid. 

 

Because, as I said earlier, seniors, particularly those who’ve 

worked and saved money, feel that they have done the job to 

have a secure retirement. And whether that means our housing 

will be paid for and . . . You know, we’ve argued and we’ve 

raised this issue many times: the cost of housing for seniors is 

unstable. And at times in the last 5 years we’ve seen rent 

gouging here in this province, and the government refusing to 

do anything about that — just saying, don’t worry, we’ll try to 

get you in a different place. But there’s this lack of stability and 

lack of predictability when it comes to the cost of housing. 

 

So seniors at least want to have confidence that their pensions 

will be there and that they’ll be adequate to pay for housing, 

food, the essentials of life. And so it’s really important that we 

take the time to think about this. We see too many times and 

we’ve heard it so many times in the past few weeks here in 

question period. We have brought concerns for seniors around 

long-term care, what’s happening with that. 

 

And we see a bill before us in fact in terms of the government 

talking about having their inspections of long-term care homes 

posted on websites, on the Internet, and how that’s important 

for seniors to make the right choice. But you still have so many 

more seniors who are living at home, or in fact those in 

long-term care, who want to make sure their pensions will pay 

for the costs that they face in their senior years. 

 

And so this is no small thing. This is really important. I do want 

to say it’s very . . . The minister did not say who brought 

forward these changes. I would assume that it’s a public 

employees pension plan board that did. Now I would hope that 

there would have been more points in the government’s, the 

minister’s statements in his second reading speech, particularly 

around who brought this forward, why did they bring it 

forward, what were the concerns. 

 

But often we see that in second reading debate speeches by the 

ministers, not nearly enough detail for us to go on. And in fact 

quite the opposite, they caused more questions than answers, 

and we’re not sure what was the impetus for this bill. Much of it 

makes common sense. But as I said, the question around the 

moving to a simple majority from a unanimous vote leaves us 

with some question marks because I know that is not a small 

thing. That’s a pretty significant change. And what are their 

range? Is this just for money bills? Or is this for ordering 

catering? I don’t know. Do you have to have a — now that 

would make sense — simple majority? You don’t need to have 

a unanimous decision if you’re doing just simple operations. 

 

But as I said, there’s lots of questions here. And so I know that 

many of us will want to get into this debate. Many of us will 

have more questions. But as I said, before I take my place, that 

this is a critically important piece of legislation. Anything that 

deals with pensions for seniors is because really this is what so 

many seniors look for, to make sure their senior years are 

looked after and that they are not a burden but in fact that they 

can see the fruits of their savings. They’ve been led to believe 

that it will be there for them, and we want to make sure that a 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4279 

fair return on their investments is happening so they can retire 

with dignity and look after all the needs they have but have a 

little bit more so that they can enjoy life. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And we would hope that the government — I just want to say 

one last time — really engage in the debate around CPP 

because that is a really worthwhile one, particularly for 

low-income workers. It’s a great program and I think any 

chance that we can get to say, let’s do more work on that. Let’s 

make that a real priority. Because we can do our part here in 

Saskatchewan to make sure all Canadian workers are well 

looked after, and particularly Saskatchewan residents because 

we know many Saskatchewan residents do travel. Their home 

may be here, but they do travel about, and it’s important to have 

one good, well-run national pension plan. And plans like the 

public employees plan will work well in conjunction to that 

providing the majority of the funds, but CPP is hugely 

important. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 

Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The Child 

Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise today and join the debate on Bill No. 98, The Child Care 

Act, or Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants. It’s again 

referencing the French language there, Mr. Speaker, because the 

primary purpose of this legislation is to render The Child Care 

Act bilingual and replace that Act, currently only in English, 

and replacing the Act with bilingual legislation, but again, 

embracing the French language. 

 

And I guess I’m very glad to see this legislation coming 

forward, Mr. Speaker, because there is nothing more 

fundamental than that early French language instruction in 

terms of the importance of having linguistic development there 

as part of early childhood development and what that means for 

developing the potential of a child and then the way that accrues 

dividends for a culture and a society, Mr. Speaker. Linguistic 

development is absolutely critical. 

 

And so I was glad to see that the Conseil des écoles 

fransaskoises, the CÉF, and the Association des parents 

fransaskois, the APF, were consulted and that in fact these 

changes come as a result of requests that have been made by 

those groups that do such critical work on behalf of the 

Fransaskois in the province of Saskatchewan in the advancing 

of and promotion of the French language in so many different 

spheres of life in this province. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing more critical than that 

early childhood development in many respects. But as regards 

that development of linguistic capacity, if you can learn French 

as your mother tongue, if that is how you are reared, and then of 

course, Mr. Speaker, that is a critical part of your early 

childhood development, then you’re going to be that much 

further down the line, and the French language will take a solid 

root within your life. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, certainly for myself I look at the 

involvement that my niece has had in French immersion and 

how French immersion has been more broadly available 

throughout the city of Regina than it was when I was growing 

up in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. And you think about the 

different sort of pedagogies or the approaches to instruction and 

learning that are there, Mr. Speaker, that certainly as someone 

that had the, you know, a couple of hours of French language 

instruction from about grade 5 on through to grade 12, Mr. 

Speaker, it was . . . You know, and I think my teachers did the 

best they could with the student. But it was not sufficient for me 

to really advance in the French language either in how I was 

able to speak French language or to comprehend, and it’s 

something that I still struggle with to this day, Mr. Speaker. 

And again if you can have that immersion, you’re so much the 

better. And it goes of course almost without saying that if you 

can not just have immersion but if you can have that French 

language component of early childhood development, then the 

better off you will be. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we live in a global village. We live in 

a global economy. We’ve just very recently celebrated the Year 

of the Fransaskois and the 100 years of the Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise in Saskatchewan. And we’re all 

very happy to raise the Fransaskois flag and to salute and all of 

this, but without that French language, without that French 

culture, then the flags . . . That shouldn’t be the sum total of 

how we make our approach to nurturing these things, to 

honouring these things, to promoting these things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again in terms of the French language, the more that you 

can inculcate that French language capacity in our law and in 

the regulations that flow from that law, and then moreover, Mr. 

Speaker, how those laws shape the activities that are guarded 

over and watched over by the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises 

or the Association des parents fransaskois, then the better off 

we will be. 

 

And again as is sort of the hallmark of the legislative agenda for 

the government this session, Mr. Speaker, many of the pieces of 

legislation that are coming forward are very much 

housekeeping in nature. But again in terms of providing a 

bilingual translation of a piece of legislation, arguably it would 

fall into that category. But again that this is in response to the 

request coming from the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises or the 

Association des parents Fransaskois, again, Mr. Speaker, it may 

be housekeeping and it may be a relatively simple matter of 



4280 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

translating the legislation en français, mais c’est très important. 

C’est très bon pour la province de la Saskatchewan et pour la 

société de la Saskatchewan. [Translation: into French, but it is 

very important. It is very good for the province of 

Saskatchewan and for Saskatchewan society.] Mr. Speaker, it’s 

very important for Saskatchewan. 

 

So again while it may on one level seem to be part of this 

ongoing onslaught of housekeeping legislation that is coming 

forward from this government, in this regard, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important that we have this linguistic capacity in the very laws 

of this province, in the very regulations of this province. And 

again, in terms of not just having that bilingual translation 

available but again making the law and the regulations available 

en français to the six francophone child care centres presently 

operating in the province so that they may understand in the 

French language the very rules and regulations governing how 

they approach the nurturing and care of children is of critical 

importance. 

 

It would beg, at that point, Mr. Speaker . . . I know that within 

the francophone community as well as in broader Saskatchewan 

that the supply of child care does not come anywhere near to 

meeting the demand, and I’d be remiss if I didn’t recognize that 

at this point, Mr. Speaker. And I know that in the francophone 

community for les fransaskois, c’est la même chose 

évidemment, monsieur le Président. [Translation: the 

Fransaskois, it’s the same thing of course, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

There is a shortage of good quality, qualified French-language 

capacity child care in this province. And again that’s I think 

part and parcel of broader initiatives that we see at play in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, wherein the Conseil des écoles 

fransaskoises are currently engaged in legal action with the 

province of Saskatchewan to try to secure their rights under the 

constitution, to try to secure their rights to access to 

French-language service and instruction and support for 

French-language education in this province. 

 

And we see that unfolding, Mr. Speaker. We watch that with 

great interest, and again it’s part of I think a broader area of 

conflict between the Fransaskois community — which is a very 

generous, very congenial, very vibrant community, Mr. Speaker 

— and this government, where unfortunately this has had to go 

before the courts to ensure that French-language education in 

this province is getting its due from this government. 

 

And we hope to see speedier resolution of the conflict, Mr. 

Speaker, and we hope to see . . . We’d have thought that with 

all the celebration and recognition that was evident in the Year 

of the Fransaskois, the 100th anniversary of the forming of the 

Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise, monsieur le Président, 

you’d have thought that that would have been a good time to 

resolve the outstanding grievances between the communities 

but, unfortunately, that goes on. 

 

With the legislation though, in terms of the housekeeping on 

offer here today, referring to the minister’s second reading 

speech, the minister states: 

 

. . . some minor changes were made that are housekeeping 

in nature: first, removal of alphabetical listing from 

interpretation; secondly, removal of previously repealed 

sections; third, legal modernization of language; four, 

reorganization of sections for clarity; five, references to 

department change to ministry; six, section on inspections 

and investigations split to provide legal clarity and, in 

addition, allows the investigations section to include search 

of vehicles. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the changes of substance again are 

relatively housekeeping in nature. But I think the signal 

accomplishment with this Act is the presentation of it in a 

bilingual format and the translation into French, and then in turn 

the making of that available to the partners we have out there in 

early childhood development in the Conseil des écoles 

fransaskoises and the Association des parents fransaskois. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in looking at the legislation itself and paging 

through the different provisions, again being glad to see the 

changes to French language and the provision of French 

language translation, I’m reminded that — this is the year 2013 

— that the French fact in Saskatchewan has been here for many, 

many years. And you think back to the earliest voyageurs that 

came to this province. And in terms of the deep roots of the 

Fransaskois community, and certainly in our family tree, 

monsieur le President, nous avons beaucoup de fierté avec 

l’association de la famille McCall avec les famille Breton et 

Laverdiere, monsieur le Président. [Translation: Mr. Speaker, 

we have a lot of pride with the association of the McCall family 

with the Breton and Laverdiere families, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

[15:15] 

 

It’s obvious that in Saskatchewan many, many people have 

these French connections and these French aspects to their 

lives. And you need look no further than different of the 

members of this Assembly. And I think for example of my 

colleague from Cumberland and himself bearing . . . being a 

proud Métis person, but bearing a proud Franco-Métis name, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the application of the legislation though, Mr. Speaker, or in 

the consideration of this legislation here today, it’s the first time 

to . . . The best time to plant a tree is 40 years ago. The next 

best time is today. So we’re glad to see this legislation coming 

forward here today. And I think it’s also sort of . . . It’s part of 

the broader recognition that is taking place in this province 

around the importance and the vitality of the Fransaskois in this 

province.  

 

And I also think of the fact that my colleague from Nutana, in 

asking questions in question period in the French language . . . 

And this is a surprise and then in some ways a bad surprise, Mr. 

Speaker, but in some ways a good surprise. When she asked her 

questions in French, it was accorded as the first time that 

questions had been asked in the French language in the history 

of this province. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if you think about, you know, 1905 

and the founding of Saskatchewan and all the history that has 

gone before that and how that worked into the history of the 

north-west territorial chambers, Mr. Speaker, and again, I’ve 

always had an interest in that because in the middle of my home 

community, North Central, mere blocks from my house, there’s 

the old territorial administration grounds where the whole of 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4281 

then the North-West Territories which consisted of the lion’s 

share of Manitoba, the whole of Saskatchewan, the whole of 

Alberta, Northwest Territories, Nunavut, all of that was at one 

time administered from the territorial administration buildings 

in the middle of north central Regina on Dewdney Avenue. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that for all the great individuals of 

French heritage and extraction and no doubt language 

capability, and then moving on to 1905 and the founding of the 

province and on from there, that we never had questions put in a 

question period that were placed in the French language is again 

. . . It’s something that I’m very proud of my colleague from 

Nutana for having done so. But again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

signal to, you know . . . It’s the year 2013. We’ve got a lot of 

catching up to do. So this piece of legislation is part of that 

catching up. This legislation is part of that recognition of the 

importance and the fundamental nature of the French language 

to the province of Saskatchewan, its importance under the 

constitution and under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms that 

I think we all cherish very, very dearly in this country, Mr. 

Speaker, that it’s fundamental to what is Canada. 

 

So glad to see this legislation coming forward here today. And 

the legislation itself, Mr. Speaker, the different . . . the 

application of the Act and how it is, as is often the case, as is 

the case in legislation, Mr. Speaker, the application of the Act 

being enumerated en français. 

 

Champ d’application de la loi 

3 La présente loi ne s’applique pas: 

 

a) aux personnes qui ne fournissent des services de 

garde et de surveillance qu’aux enfants qui sont 

membres de leur famille immédiate; 

 

b) aux services de garderie qui sont fournis 

exclusivement à un enfant, au domicile de l’enfant, 

par une personne autre qu’un des parents de l’enfant; 

 

c) à toute autre personne ou à tout autre service 

exemptés par règlement. 

 

[Translation: 

 

Application of Act 

3 This Act does not apply to: 

 

(a) persons providing care and supervision 

exclusively to children who are members of their 

immediate families; 

 

(b) child care services that are provided exclusively to 

a child in the child’s home by a person other than a 

parent of the child; or 

 

(c) any other persons or services exempted by the 

regulations.] 

 

Again and from there, the application of the law and who’s 

entailed in the application of the law, Mr. Speaker, again 

referring to not applying to “persons providing care and 

supervision exclusively to children who are members of their 

immediate families”; section (b), “child care services that are 

provided exclusively to a child in the child’s home by a person 

other than a parent of the child”; or (c), “any other persons or 

services exempted by the regulations,” again how the Act is 

itself applied. 

 

Moving through the Act itself, Mr. Speaker, to the question of 

the general prohibition of the Act, wherein “No person shall 

provide child care services except in accordance with this Act 

and the regulations.” 

 

Peut-être en français, monsieur le Président: 

 

Interdiction générale 

4 Il est interdit à quiconque de fournir des services de 

garderie sauf en conformité avec la présente loi et les 

règlements. 

 

[Translation: Perhaps in French, Mr. Speaker: 

 

General prohibition 

4 No person shall provide child care services except in 

accordance with this Act and the regulations.] 

 

Carrying on through the legislation, Mr. Speaker, we turn to the 

question of who is requiring a licence. And of course in the 

existing legislation it refers to, section 5(1) states: 

 

5(1) No person shall operate a child care centre or a group 

family child care home, or cause a child care centre or a 

group family child care home to be operated, unless the 

person holds a licence for the child care centre or group 

family child care home. 

 

Or section 5(2): 

 

(2) A person may operate a . . . child care home with or 

without a licence. 

 

Et en français: 

 

Licence obligatoire ou facultative 

5(1) Nul ne peut exploiter ou faire exploiter une garderie 

non résidentielle ou une garderie résidentielle de groupe 

en milieu familial, à moins d’être titulaire d’une licence 

d’exploitation pour ce genre de garderie. 

 

(2) Dans le cas d’une garderie résidentielle en milieu 

familial, la licence est facultative. 

 

[Translation: And in French: 

 

Whether licence required 

5(1) No person shall operate a child care centre or a 

group family child care home, or cause a child care 

centre or a group family child care home to be operated, 

unless the person holds a licence for the child care 

centre or group family child care home. 

 

(2) A person may operate a family child care home with 

or without a licence.] 

 

Again carrying on through the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

One of the interesting things that will emerge is regarding what 



4282 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

happens with the regulations itself. And with that, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d turn to the question of what regulations that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council is able to make. 

 

En français, dans le projet de loi: 

 

Règlements 

30(1) Le lieutenant-gouverneur en conseil peut, par 

règlement: 

 

a) définir, élargir ou restreindre le sens des mots et 

expressions utilisés, sans définition, dans la présente 

loi; 

 

b) établir des catégories d’établissements, de licences, 

de licenciés ou d’enfants pour l’application des 

règlements; 

 

c) désigner des services qui ne constituent pas des 

services de garderie au sens défini à l’article 2; 

 

d) établir des normes relatives à la conception, à la 

construction, à l’exploitation, à l’entretien, à 

l’ameublement et à l’équipement d’établissements ou 

de catégories d’établissements, et imposer le respect 

de ces normes; 

 

e) établir des normes relatives à la santé, à la sécurité, 

à la nutrition et à la discipline au sein des 

établissements ou de catégories d’établissements, et 

imposer le respect de ces normes; 

 

f) fixer les heures d’ouverture des établissements ou 

de catégories d’établissements; 

 

g) prescrire: 

 

(i) les exigences en personnel dans les 

établissements ou des catégories d’établissements, 

 

(ii) les qualifications professionnelles que doivent 

avoir les personnes qui exploitent des 

établissements ou des catégories d’établissements 

ou qui y fournissent des services, ainsi que leurs 

fonctions et responsabilités; 

 

h) établir des normes relatives à la protection contre 

les incendies et aux procédures d’urgence dans les 

établissements ou des catégories d’établissements, et 

imposer le respect de ces normes; 

 

i) soustraire un établissement ou une catégorie 

d’établissements à l’obligation de satisfaire à une 

norme prescrite par la présente loi ou les règlements; 

 

j) désigner des éléments de programmes, d’activités 

ou de services à fournir dans les établissements ou des 

catégories d’établissements, et rendre obligatoire la 

prestation de tout ou partie de ces programmes, 

activités ou services; 

 

k) indiquer quels documents doivent établir les 

exploitants des établissements et les circonstances 

dans lesquelles ces documents doivent être conservés; 

 

l) fixer le maximum, le cas échéant, d’enfants ou de 

catégories d’enfants qui peuvent être inscrits en même 

temps à un établissement ou à une catégorie 

d’établissements, et interdire le dépassement de ce 

maximum; 

 

m) fixer le maximum d’enfants, par catégorie, qui 

peuvent être présents en même temps dans une 

garderie résidentielle en milieu familial ou dans une 

garderie résidentielle de groupe en milieu familial; 

 

n) fixer le maximum, le cas échéant, d’enfants au sein 

d’un groupe dans un établissement ou une catgorie 

d’établissements; 

 

o) fixer le maximum de places résérvées dans un 

établissement à des enfants en bas âge 

 

p) pour l’application de l’article 25, autoriser et 

réglementer l’octroi et le versement de subventions à 

des licenciés ou catégories de licenciés ou 

d’allocations à des parents d’enfants inscrits à un 

établissement ou à une catégorie d’établissements; 

 

q) réglementer la prestation de services aux enfants à 

besoins spéciaux; 

 

[Translation: In French, in the bill: 

 

Regulations 

30(1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 

regulations: 

 

(a) defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of 

any word or expression used in this Act but not 

defined in this Act; 

 

(b) establishing categories of facilities, licences, 

licensees or children for the purposes of the 

regulations; 

 

(c) designating any services as services that are not 

child care services as that term is defined in section 2; 

 

(d) establishing standards for the design, construction, 

operation and maintenance of facilities or categories 

of facilities, including standards for furnishings and 

equipment and requiring compliance with those 

standards; 

 

(e) establishing standards of health, safety, nutrition 

and discipline in facilities or categories of facilities 

and requiring compliance with those standards; 

 

(f) prescribing the hours of operation of any facility or 

category of facilities; 

 

(g) prescribing: 

 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4283 

(i) the personnel requirements for facilities or 

categories of facilities; and 

 

(ii) the qualifications, duties and responsibilities of 

persons who operate 

or provide services in facilities or categories of 

facilities; 

 

(h) establishing standards for fire protection and 

emergency procedures in facilities or categories of 

facilities and requiring compliance with those 

standards; 

 

(i) exempting a facility or category of facilities from 

the requirement to meet a standard prescribed by this 

Act or the regulations; 

 

(j) prescribing elements of programs, activities or 

services to be provided in facilities or categories of 

facilities and requiring all or any of those programs, 

activities or services to be provided; 

 

(k) prescribing the records to be kept by persons who 

operate facilities and the circumstances under which 

the records are to be retained; 

 

(l) prescribing the maximum number, if any, of 

children or any category of children who may be 

enrolled at any time in a facility or a category of 

facilities and prohibiting enrolments greater than the 

maximum number; 

 

(m) prescribing the maximum number of children in a 

category of children that may be in attendance at any 

one time in a family child care home or a group 

family child care home; 

 

(n) prescribing the maximum number, if any, of 

children who may be cared for in a group within a 

facility or a category of facilities; 

 

(o) prescribing the maximum number of child care 

spaces in a facility for the care of infants; 

 

(p) authorizing and governing the making of grants 

and payment of subsidies pursuant to section 25 to 

any licensee or category of licensees or to parents of 

children enrolled in any facility or category of 

facilities; 

 

(q) respecting the provision of services to children 

with special needs;] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think you get the idea. It’s good to see that this 

language is brought forward to provide that complement, to 

provide that French language capacity in the legislation for 

something as fundamental as the laws and regulation governing 

child care in this province. 

 

It’s the year 2013; we’re glad to see this legislation coming 

forward, Mr. Speaker, if I might speak for myself. But I think 

that’s maybe a shared sentiment amongst my colleagues as 

well, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that this is in response to the 

Fransaskois community, both le Conseil d’éducation scolaire as 

well as the l’Association des parents fransaskois. 

 

It’s good to see this legislation coming forward, Mr. Speaker, 

but again there are so many more needs that must be addressed. 

There are some very important ways that this government is 

engaging or not engaging with the Fransaskois community. But 

again we’ll discuss those as they arise. 

 

But today it is good to stand in this legislature to recognize Bill 

No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies 

d’enfants. It’s good to see this, Mr. Speaker. I know that other 

of my colleagues desire participation in this debate as well, and 

with that I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 100 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 

and debate Bill No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013. I guess I want to start out with making 

some comments about the school divisions, the municipalities. 

And I know that’s how they pay for, you know, some of the 

services that are provided to residents in municipalities. A part 

of I guess a community you’re a part of, the requirement is that 

you pay for some of those services. And some small 

communities, we know through the assessment, there’s different 

values. 

 

And I’ll get into the assessment process and what SAMA 

[Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency] does for the 

municipalities, school division, and the province. But having 

said that, I want to just talk about some of the service that 

smaller communities get or don’t get. So you know, your mayor 

and council will determine with consulting with the community 

residents, you know, what type of . . . whether they’re going to 

have pavement, gravel roads. 

 

There’s many things that the municipalities have to do, and I 

want to commend our mayor and councils in northern 

Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, and urban centres who are 

elected by the people to represent them and to carry on the 

business and take care of I guess the business of running the 

city or a small, you know, rural community or a northern 

community. They’re there. They do great work. And they have 

challenges. 



4284 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

But you know, at the end of the day, part of the funding they 

get, whether it’s from the province, programs that they applied 

through federal government, but they provide services to the 

residents they’re asked to serve. And as a mayor and council 

they do that. 

 

And part of the assessment, when the tax notice goes out to 

them each year to the residents like myself . . . I live in a small 

community, and you know, we have an assessment. We get our 

tax notice. It tells us how much we’re going to pay based on the 

mill rate that, you know, the municipalities pay. And that’s 

determined through an assessment of the value of . . . I guess 

I’ll use my own property. There’s assessment done, and that 

determines how much . . . When the mill rate comes out, how 

much the municipalities set the mill rate at will determine how 

much I’m going to pay for that year on the property I own and 

the residence I live in. And that’s a good thing. I mean it helps 

to pay for part of the, I guess part of the services that I’ve asked 

the leadership that I voted for or, you know, that’s elected by 

the people. 

 

So they carry on the business, and they do that. And that whole 

process, it works good. Some will have issues with it, and that’s 

up to individuals. And they will raise those issues, like I have, 

with my mayor and council. If I’m not happy, I can go to mayor 

and council meeting and raise my concerns, whether it’s a letter 

. . . So I can let them know whether I’m happy. 

 

But this assessment, that’s done to determine how much they 

will send me a tax bill for each year. And the assessment is 

done by SAMA who does the assessment, you know, every four 

years. So having said that, they do the assessment. They 

determine from the tax notice I get or tax bill, if you want to 

call it, that I get from the municipality, but also on the school 

division portion. So I said earlier that the municipality will 

determine the mill rate, the mayor and council will, and so what 

services we’re going to get. And that’s fine. You know, they 

have to answer to the people if people are unhappy. And that 

process is there. 

 

But it’s interesting. Government came in, and then when this 

current government, Sask Party government came in, they 

decided they were going to change that. And they’ve gone on, 

and now school divisions can no longer designate a mill rate to 

bring in dollars to the school division to service the schools and 

to take care of them. It is set by the government, the Ministry of 

Education. The government decides what mill rate will be 

levied against the taxes. 

 

So school divisions used to, and you know, when I sat on the 

school division we ran . . . You’ve seen challenges that you had 

in the school division. You had the funding that would come in 

from government which assists you as a school division to 

operate. And sometimes we have our rural school divisions. We 

have northern school divisions. We have urban ones where they 

look after students in making sure that the students get a good 

quality education. They try to do what they can with the 

resources at their disposal. But the boards of education used to 

have an opportunity to set the mill rate. And if they seen that 

there was certain projects or areas where students needed more 

supports, the school division could, you know, look at that and 

say, we’re going to have to raise the mill rate a bit to help us 

make sure our students are getting a good quality education. 

Now we know that a majority of the funding for school 

divisions would come in from . . . For some of them, not all of 

them. Some would say most of the funding would come in from 

the government. Some communities, it’s less. Some urban 

centres might argue that and say, well no, we pay more. So 

there’s a formula that’s worked out, and it works. And that’s 

how they operate the school division. 

 

And you know, at the end of the day, again it’s through that 

assessment done. It’s the agency that looks after doing the 

assessment every four years. Then it allows the school division 

. . . The municipalities know what the property is worth so they 

can levy the proper mill rate and come up with a bill for taxes. 

So each year you have to pay your taxes and hopefully, you 

know, that process works fine. 

 

But you know, having said that, I know the school divisions, it 

worked well. They got to determine getting the funding from 

government, and if they needed assistance, like I said earlier, 

they could generate it. And unfortunately this government, I 

believe in 2009, took that ability from school divisions to 

generate any income basing on the mill rate on properties that 

. . . when the residents are serving the students. And some will 

say maybe it was too high. There’s different arguments all over. 

At the end of the day, it was based on trying to do what’s best 

for the students and the families that live in the communities 

and the boundaries of school divisions. 

 

So again I want to say, it’s the good work that our schools do 

with limited resources. And we hear some of the challenges 

right now with school divisions, with support staff, and all the 

different challenges they’re based on. Well if that would have 

been the case for school divisions, they could have generated, 

you know, some income from raising the mill rate to actually 

help students in the classroom, if that’s what they needed to do. 

They could identify certain things. 

 

And the school divisions do do a great job. Like you know, 

they’re elected by the people to represent them. And they do a 

great job, and they try to make sure they stretch every dollar 

they have in making sure that they take care of the employees 

that work there, whether they’re within the school division, as 

far as support staff, or their teachers. But you know, they do the 

job, and the school division has an obligation to take care of 

them. But that’s all determined by an assessment. You know, 

SAMA does the assessment and determines what the . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

But having said that, I wanted to just show and explain my 

understanding of where we’re at. And for those listening, that I 

can from my view . . . the way it’s changed. This government 

has changed the school division’s way of generating that. They 

took that away from the school divisions. And that was 

something that the school division I know . . . I heard they were 

very frustrated individuals I talked to and school division 

members that I heard. 

 

And when I was on the board, that was something that was 

really, it was a tool that we used to assist us to make sure we 

were doing what we can with limited resources. But it gave you 

that opportunity, whether you were dealing with the education 

of our kids or facilities, you had the ability to generate some 

income to assist you in years that you were struggling. 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4285 

But unfortunately again the Sask Party government decided to 

eliminate that and have done that. And they can have their 

arguments based on whatever it is they want to use. That’s fine. 

 

You know, that’s up to them to explain to Saskatchewan 

residents why they’ve done and to the boards of education and 

to the struggling . . . You know, if you look at the teachers and 

the families, they’re struggling. And you look at capital and all 

the different things that are going on, the P3s [public–private 

partnership], building schools, and different things that they’re 

doing. That’ll be up to them to explain to residents and our 

boards of education why they’re doing what they’re doing. So 

at the end of the day, like I say, I’ll leave that with the 

government to explain what they’ve done. And they owe an 

obligation and they owe an explanation to the residents and our 

taxpayers in our province and the children that go to our 

schools. 

 

So having said that, now I talked a little bit about 

municipalities, and I talked about school divisions and what 

they try to do, and they’re elected. But it’s this whole 

assessment. Some are frustrated with the assessment. And I’ve 

had somebody . . . There’s an opportunity and I know that this 

is going to try to clean up some of the issues that they have. 

 

And it’s interesting, you know, when they talk about 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, when they 

talk about the agency that does the assessment. So they go 

around making sure there’s a formula. It’s very complicated, so 

I’m not going to try to say that . . . Many people I’ve heard are 

frustrated saying, what does it mean? They look at their tax bill 

and they see the amount. And if it goes up 100, $200, some it 

goes ridiculous, they’re upset and they’re wondering why. And 

they’re angry. And they’re saying, I’m paying too much tax. 

And I’ve heard that. People have shared that with me over the 

years that they’re frustrated. 

 

Having said that, that agency does a process. There is a process 

for individuals to, you know, appeal their assessment, their 

assessment, the notice. And they can. There’s a process going. 

And I had people who came into my office in the last year that 

were unhappy with the assessment and wanted to appeal it, and 

there was a process that they had to go through. And there’s a 

time limit that you have to notify them that you want, you’re 

going to appeal your tax assessment. So you could do that. 

There is a process, and that agency will hear that. And I guess if 

you meet the requirements and you feel that, you know, your 

tax notice is too high, you can have that appeal process. You 

can go through that process, making sure you meet the 

deadlines. The assessment, they will hear your case if you meet 

the requirements, and they’ll go through it. 

 

Now they could, from my understanding, could say there needs 

to be . . . I guess your property would be reassessed. They could 

look at, there’s a reason why you could show some reason why 

your property . . . Or they would explain to you maybe better 

why your property has gone up in value, whether it’s the 

property or your home’s gone up. But having said that, that’s 

part of that process that they go through to determine your 

assessment and the value, and then after that the mill rate will 

come. 

 

Now according to this, what I can read — and I know the 

minister’s comments that he’s done, and I know some of my 

colleagues have responded, and there will be more to respond to 

it — there’s a formula. And at the end of the day when the tax 

notices are all sent out and everyone’s divided up, 

municipalities get their share of the tax. School divisions get 

their share of it. There’s a formula, and I think it was 39/61 per 

cent. Sixty one per cent goes to, I think in the 2012 year, went 

to the municipalities; 39 went to school divisions. And it’s quite 

a large amount of money to assist them to do the services that 

they’ve been asked to do. 

 

Now having said that, government also puts in some dollars into 

the agency, and government pays the part . . . Now I’m not sure, 

and I think in committee we’re going to have some questions. 

And I think, you know, we need to find out. It sounds like 

government will continue to go to the budget process to fund 

dollars to the agency that does assessments, but it almost sounds 

like, from what I can get out of it . . . And it’s what I’m taking 

from it, but like I said, we’ll have to get clarification in 

committee. And we can ask some direct questions and go 

through this, and I’m sure my colleagues will do that. 

 

Now having said that, they’ll go through getting the 

information. It sounds like right now the cost is shared amongst 

municipalities. It’s shared amongst government for the agency 

to carry on the duty that it’s asked to do. Now whether there’s 

enough resources for them to do the business and, you know, 

we’ll have to see. And I think it sounds like they consulted with 

the municipalities. I’m not sure if, and I don’t believe the school 

divisions pay anything into it. I’m not sure. I’m not sure what 

the formula is. I don’t have all the details. But I know the 

provincial government out of the . . . each year looks at the 

budget and allocates dollars. And I think they’re going to be 

allocating more dollars to the agency to carry on the work that 

they have to do. 

 

Now this agency that we talk about that does the assessment, 

I’m not sure at this point, you know, is it a private company? Is 

it ran like a Crown? Is it ran independent? Like I’m not sure 

how it does it. So I’m not sure of the partnership. And I guess 

we’ll ask those questions and get cleared up. And that would be 

an interesting, you know, process when you go through this as 

you come on and as we develop this. And I guess we can ask 

questions. Some may know that answer because they’ve dealt 

with this before, and that’s great if they do. But for me, I think I 

would like some more clarification, and it would be good to 

know that. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But having said that, they’re also coming up with, I guess 

cleaning up some of the wording, maybe some of the language 

to allow, and some of their amendments to allow some of the 

amendments that they’re asking to have happen. And at the end 

of the day, I guess the ability to make sure — and that’s a 

concern — for the agency to be able to make sure that they’re 

allocating or asking for payments for services that they’re doing 

for municipalities, it almost sounds like . . . 

 

And again, we’re going to have to go through this to find out 

from the municipalities and, you know, SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] to see how will they be 



4286 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

impacted and what type of impact will they have. And I think 

government refers to that. They have talked to SUMA and 

SARM, and there’s no issues, if I’m correct, you know. And we 

need to check with them to make sure that’s the, you know, 

that’s what’s going on, that there are no issues with it. 

 

But I guess, it could be more cost to the municipalities. If what I 

get from this amendment, there could be more actual cost, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to municipalities for the services that they get 

from the agency that does their assessments. 

 

So having said that, there’s a process. I’m not sure. And I think 

there’ll be some questions, and we’ll be in contact with some 

municipalities. I know the critic will do their job to find out, 

yes, is that exactly the case? And you know, maybe some 

municipalities that might have issue with it, and if they have 

concerns, we know that we would advise them to get a hold of, 

you know, our critic and the official opposition to raise those 

concerns. They can also, you know, get a hold of the ministry 

and the minister to ask them what’s going on, what the changes 

are. 

 

And I am encouraging municipalities, who do a great job . . . 

Our mayors and councils do do the great job that they do, and 

you know, the people have voted them in and asked them to do 

it. They do a great job. I don’t know how this will impact them, 

how much more they will have to pay, you know, if an agency 

is asking for more resources to do the work it needs to do. 

 

I guess I hope it’s not just a . . . They have the opportunity. 

They had to go through I guess a process to ask for those extra 

dollars. And whether it goes through cabinet or through the 

municipalities, there’s a mechanism or a process in place if they 

are concerned, that they can ask, you know, why are we getting 

this increase? Why the changes? 

 

And I think there could be questions. And if there’s not from 

municipalities, well fine. If they understand it and they’re 

comfortable with that, that’s fine. I just hope the process is there 

to make sure there’s protection and there’s an opportunity for 

them to ask some questions when they have concerns. And I 

want to, you know, look at that clearly to make sure that that 

happens. And I know we’ll ask some questions. 

 

So having said that, overall, you know, there are some financial 

opportunities. There’s some, I guess, accountability. There’s 

even some cleaning up of the school divisions in here, and it 

might be just language, that they’re getting rid of some of the 

wording on it or changing it. And we’ll have to see how it all 

plays out at the end of the day and through committee and when 

we talk to individuals, our mayors and councils. And I know, 

you know, I’ll have an opportunity to talk to some of the mayor 

and councils that I represent and seeing if they’re understanding 

it and if they’re agreeing with this. And if they have any 

concerns that we can raise in committee, then we will do that 

for them. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn 

debate on Bill 100. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 100, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 101 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise today this afternoon to enter into the 

debate on Bill No. 101, An Act to Amend The University of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1995. And it is of interest to reflect on how 

our higher education is organized in this province and the 

universities play a major, major role and particularly . . . well 

both have, over the course of time, the University of Regina . . . 

But it is a newer university and the University of Saskatchewan, 

I think, in the minds of many people in Saskatchewan play a 

unique and special role because of its age and it’s one that many 

of us have attended. Myself, I have a degree from the 

University of Saskatchewan, have one as well from the 

University of Regina, and so I feel like I can speak both . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Both languages. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Both languages of both cities. They’re both 

fine, fine institutions. But this afternoon we’re talking about the 

University of Saskatchewan. And to many families, the U of S 

has a special place in their heart because it’s a place where 

many kids went to school and got their degrees and represented 

the first degrees that some families, family members attained. 

 

And they both have a unique role in Saskatchewan, and of 

course now we have other institutions that can grant degrees, 

and this is part of the place before us now. But I think I just 

wanted to reflect on the University of Saskatchewan and, you 

know, the role it plays in the province or in the city of 

Saskatoon. The architecture, the incredible knowledge that has 

come out of the U of S, and the role it plays across 

Saskatchewan, across Canada. And whether it be in the typical 

areas you would think of, whether that be agriculture or where 

you think of the synchrotron or where you think of the arts, it’s 

a fine, fine institution. It’s one that deserves a lot of support and 

recognition, and I hope that the province can continue to do 

that. And of course that means that there’s always the tweaking 

of the original legislation, and this is what we’re here to do is to 

amend The University of Saskatchewan Act, 1995.  

 

So I was taking a look back through that Act and it is interesting 

when you think about how the university in so many ways . . . 

You know, you would think things could be simpler, but it has 

thought of a unique process of how they do their business. And 

of course we have the convocation and that’s what we all strive 

to actually be part of, that day of convocation where as 

graduands we are entered into that and come of out of that day 

with our diplomas and recognized and become alumni and all 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4287 

the things that are before us. 

 

And then you have the chancellor, the senate, the board, and all 

of these have their duties and responsibilities and processes of 

becoming members of and that’s all very, very important. And 

of course there’s the council, the university council, how do you 

. . . what’s it made of and what do they do and who is the 

secretary and who’s the chairperson and how do you get elected 

to the council and what do they do? And of course then you 

have the assembly, the assembly, and what do they do and 

who’s the secretary and who’s the chairperson? And this is all 

. . . And then you have the officers of the university, of course 

the president and the deans and the heads and the secretary 

there as well and the controller. So it’s all very interesting how 

this, how something . . . You know, I think it’s maybe a thing of 

beauty. Other people may think it’s a thing of bureaucracy. I 

don’t know. 

 

I’m trying to read through this and get a sense. I don’t have a 

chart in front of me that makes the flow of this. But it comes 

from a tradition many, many years, hundreds of years old — not 

this university hundreds, but it is getting on in age. But the 

university tradition is one around the world that is . . . you 

know, speaks to independence, speaks to academic excellence, 

and speaks to a larger role within the community and within the 

province and within our country. 

 

And clearly this university strives to do that and has done a 

fantastic job in the past, and I’m really confident it will do so in 

the future. It’s one that has a high level of integrity, and it meets 

the challenges of the times and has done that in the past and will 

continue to do that. And whether it’s at the individual level of 

hoping to contribute more to society, have a more meaningful 

job because you have a degree, and now you can have a 

diploma . . . And that’s what we’re talking about is the ability to 

have a diploma. And that will be interesting to see how that . . . 

 

Well in fact I have from the University of Saskatchewan a 

post-graduate diploma and then moved that up to a master’s. 

I’m not sure what the exact term of what that . . . Master’s of 

administration I think it is. I don’t know. I should know. I have 

it, but it’s been a while now. So at any rate it’s a very important, 

it’s a very important institution. And this is the debate that 

we’re having here today. 

 

And I know many, many of us in this Chamber have a degree or 

diploma probably from the . . . or a certificate. I remember 

when my brother got his voc ag. I think it was a one-year 

certificate program, vocational agricultural certificate from the 

U of S. It was a big deal. It was a very big deal. And for him, 

particularly as a farmer, that meant an awful lot as particularly 

. . . And I think that was back in the late ’70s that my brother 

went, got the voc ag papers. But as you know, farming has 

changed so much in this province and particularly through the 

’70s, ’80s, ’90s, and on, and you really had to become much 

more technically adept. 

 

And it was the beginning . . . Even at that time I think in the late 

’70s or mid-’70s, computers were not quite, you know, in 

everybody’s home yet. That happened more in the ’80s but 

right, very close to that time period. 

 

And of course I remember in the mid-’80s is when the 

Agriculture Building got built at the U of S, and there was some 

controversy in terms of some of the funding that happened from 

the corporate sector and what that all meant. That was not a, 

you know, straightforward thing. There was a lot of discussion 

about the independence of the university. And of course the 

universities more than ever now — and it’s an unfortunate 

circumstance but maybe it’s part of the world we live in now — 

have to go out and do a lot more fundraising than they ever did 

before. It’s a reality, and much of that is through the corporate 

world. And the corporate world is stepping up, and of course 

they see it as their role as a good corporate citizen. 

 

We see that, whether it be in the commerce area, whether that 

be in the business, the law area. There is a lot of that now 

happening in universities and in post-secondary, and that is to a 

certain extent a good thing. The problem arises when they start 

to impinge or influence the independence of the university and 

expect certain things to be done. And we hope that doesn’t 

happen, or particularly that it can influence scholarly work and 

research, because this is where that kind of work gets done, at 

the universities, and we want to make sure that . . . It is so 

important that that research is left at an arm’s length from 

undue influence. 

 

And I know that the academic world strives to make sure that is 

the case. And we have to make sure that there are the proper 

checks and balances. So perhaps this is why we have so much 

governance at the university level, whether it be the senate, the 

board, the council, the assembly, and the roles that they play, 

you know, to make the wheels of the university move forward. 

But having said that, this is why we are here today, to talk about 

that. 

 

But as I said, it’s a critically important piece for us because if 

we don’t get this right then that influence can, you know, creep 

its way into places where it ought not to be. And that’s why it’s 

important that universities and anything that receives public 

funding and purports to be neutral and not biased, has to have 

that level of transparency and accountability. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And that’s why it’s really important when we talk about, how 

do people get onto these places of decision making within the 

university? It’s not just as straightforward as filling the seats. 

That’s probably the least of the issues. We want to make sure 

there’s good, credible people making decisions of the places 

that we hold in such high regard because of the role within our 

communities. 

 

And it’s hugely important, whether it be health care . . . and you 

know, the university has done so much work in terms of that. 

And we can talk about the different kind of things that they’ve 

done, whether it be nuclear medicine and how the University of 

Saskatchewan has done so much in that area, or other areas as 

well, whether it be in agriculture and whether, you know . . . 

And I know that there is a huge debate, a huge debate in terms 

of the role of GMOs [genetically modified organism] versus 

organic farming, all of that kind of thing. The efficiency of 

equipment, machinery, all of that, that’s a debate that needs to 

happen. But it must be done in an appropriate way that lends 

credibility to the university. 

 



4288 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

Of course, engineering is another one, and today we’ll go meet 

with a lot of people from the APEGS [Association of 

Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan], 

many of whom are graduates of the University of 

Saskatchewan. I know my oldest brother actually and two of his 

children — might be three; I think it’s two — are actually 

graduates of the engineering department at the University of 

Saskatchewan. So a huge impact in terms of our province, and 

whether that be mining engineering . . . And that was what my 

brother graduated from. He was one of the last graduates from 

the . . . that offered the mining engineering degree. I’m not sure 

if it’s come back into play. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s started up again. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Has it started up again? Right on. But it went 

out for a while. It went out for a while which was really unusual 

for a province that has done so much in terms of mining. I 

appreciate the correction because it just didn’t make any sense 

to have a university that didn’t have a mining engineer degree. 

 

Of course, civil engineering and all of that kind of thing is 

there. And of course, you know, in the work that it’s done in 

terms of the oil fields is so hugely important, and probably of 

any of the brain drain that we’ve experienced in this province, 

the number of people who got their engineering degrees here 

and went to Calgary . . . And of course there was always that 

famous sign on the side of the bus that says something about 

how your boss is from Saskatchewan because so many of the 

people had engineering degrees. 

 

And so that’s really important, whether it be nursing and the 

medical area of doctors and the whole range there, and of 

course teaching. Now this is where I do have to admit that I did 

get my first degree of . . . my B.Ed. [Bachelor of Education] 

from the University of Regina. And there was always this big 

controversy where the best teachers came from, whether they 

came from Saskatoon, the U of S, or did they come from the U 

of R [University of Regina]? You know, this is where my 

loyalty gets really kind of dicey because I do have to say the U 

of R has a pretty good program when it comes to B. Eds. Now 

for a master’s, I think that the U of S is pretty darn good. But 

this is something we can debate at another time because right 

now that’s not the debate before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it? 

It’s not Bill 101, which has the best teaching program, the U of 

R or the U of S? 

 

But we kind of moved away from that as well. And I think for 

many of the bills that we have before us today, we’re seeing . . . 

And it would be interesting to hear more from the other side 

about this because there used to be such a debate — and I never 

really supported this — about how we should have just one big 

university here in Saskatchewan. I really valued the idea that 

when you have two or more, you had a real opportunity for 

different approaches to how you taught, how you did research. 

And you really met the needs of students. And we see this now 

with SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] and Briercrest and other institutions being able to 

offer degrees. 

 

So I think it’s important, and I think this is a very worthwhile 

debate that we have around our post-secondary education and 

what does that mean. And you know, the wonderful thing of it 

and the amazing thing we’re going to be debating today is in 

terms of the fact that the universities do have some . . . The 

alumni have some input into the decision making at the 

university level. 

 

I’m not sure, and this is something that we can find out more, 

but I don’t think that’s happening in the SIAST area, the 

technical area, that they don’t have that same kind of board. 

They don’t have the same kind of senate, that kind of thing, 

that’s made up. It’s a very different kind of governance model. 

And this is something that we really have to guard in terms of 

the University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, 

that we don’t lose that input both from the alumni and as well 

the students. That’s critically, critically important. 

 

So having said that, I do want to take a minute to review the 

comments of the Minister of Advanced Education when he 

introduced this bill back on November 12th. And he wanted to 

talk about the proposed amendments and what they’re all about, 

and I think he identifies about six of them. Of course the sixth 

one would be the housekeeping ones, and I don’t need to go 

through that. 

 

First there’ll be “. . . help to clarify the awarding of diplomas in 

the list of powers of convocation.” And of course the current 

legislation calls for the ability for the convocation to award 

degrees and certificates and not diplomas. But you know I have 

to say, I guess this is just catching up with what practice is 

because I did get a postgraduate diploma. It wasn’t a certificate, 

so I better make sure that’s what it was because I did pay 

something for it. But at any rate, it adds that in and is clarifying 

that, and that’s an important piece. 

 

Next, they’ll help to ensure that individuals elected to 

represent the senate, most specifically and especially 

outside [of student] members of the senate, they will work 

to ensure that they represent the senate, will be graduates 

of the university. 

 

And I assume that that makes a lot of sense. I think that’s 

important. Now it’s interesting that we do have members of the 

senate that aren’t necessarily from Saskatchewan, and I think 

that was done intentionally, so we would have a broader 

experience across Canada or in particularly Western Canada. 

Now I could be wrong on this, and this is why we’ll have 

questions in committee about this, that they have to have 

degrees from the U of S, or I guess diplomas or certificates. 

And that’s very, very important. That’s very, very important. 

 

But I think that we’ll have to ask some more questions about 

that because I know that there . . . I’m pretty confident there are 

members of the senate who are not residents of Saskatchewan. 

Now they wouldn’t be the ones who were . . . Now this is 

maybe the catch. They weren’t elected, but I think the senate 

can have appointments on it. And so that will be . . . We’ll have 

to find out more about that, but maybe it’s the board that you 

have people appointed to. But we’ll have to clarify that. Do they 

have to be a resident of Saskatchewan as well? And so that’ll be 

very, very interesting to talk about that. 

 

And they talked about . . . The third point is the process by 

which student members of the senate are elected and this is 

carried out in sections 29 and 32. And then it talks about this 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4289 

one, and this is one that I know I think that my colleague, the 

member from Nutana, talked about: the terms of office for the 

senate nominees to the board to allow them to serve a three-year 

third term, but how inconsistent that is with the faculty. And 

that’s stuck at two years. And we’ll talk a little bit about this 

because I went back and looked at the Act. I thought that was 

very, very interesting and a good catch. Why is it the faculty 

members are limited to two years and the other ones from the 

senate are for three years? But I’ll talk more about that because 

I want to hold up the Act and talk a little bit about that. 

 

And of course the fourth one is about student members on 

hearing boards and how they’ll work through that. 

Requirements of corporate seal, and I think that’s an important 

issue; and I really appreciated reading about that. And that was 

an interesting conversation about that. The fifth one is allowing 

a senator to serve a third three-year term to bring parity, that 

type of thing. And that’s straightforward, and as I said, 

housekeeping. 

 

I do want to talk a bit and go . . . And this’ll be interesting 

because we’ve had this same discussion prior to when this 

government did away with the visitor part of the legislation. 

The member from Greystone, the Minister of Advanced 

Education, talked about how he had got a letter from the 

University of Saskatchewan requesting these amendments to the 

legislation. So that’s who asked for it. That’s fair enough. We 

know that. And then he talked about how the ministry then 

consulted with the University of Saskatchewan and the U of R 

on the proposed amendments. So they got the two letters from 

them in support, and that was good. And then they went back 

out and worked through the discussions with the university’s 

secretary’s office. And they also consulted with the University 

of Saskatchewan’s Students’ Union and the Graduate Students’ 

Association, and they both have provided letters of support. 

 

At least one letter that’s missing I think here would be from the 

Faculty Association, particularly when they’re the ones who are 

diminished in terms of their role on the board, I would assume, 

from how I’m reading that. And if I go to section 45 . . . Well, 

let’s just go to section 41. I’m looking back at The University of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1995, and section 41, the Board of 

Governors, who are also known as the board. And of course 

they have quite a role of responsibilities, their powers, that type 

of thing, but I want to talk about . . . So the Board of Governors 

is composed of the chancellor, the president, president of the 

students’ union, five members appointed by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council — so that’s by cabinet, essentially — two 

members elected by the senate, and one faculty member 

selected by members of the assembly who are faculty members, 

secretary, secretary to the board. 

 

44 talks about the chairperson, who that is. And that is critically 

important because the member, the minister talked about how 

the reason they’re doing this is to provide for some sort of 

continuity so you can develop leadership. So he’s talking about 

the five, or the two members elected by the senate as special, 

that they should be considered for leadership roles. But what 

about the faculty member? They seem to be able to be the 

chairperson. There’s not any limitation saying you cannot be a 

faculty member and a board member, not on this role, not on 

this, not in this section anyways. 

 

So what we’re really talking about is members of the board, in 

clauses 42(c) and 42(d), may be re-elected to the board but may 

not serve more than two consecutive terms. And I think that 

they’re actually saying you can now serve three consecutive 

terms, so that’s fair enough. That’s what they want to do. But 

then they change the one to say that the senate nominees who 

are elected get to be three years and not two years. So 

essentially saying you can go three years times three, that’s nine 

years. But if you’re a faculty member, you can now go three 

terms times two, so you go six years. So there’s a limitation of 

that, and I wonder why, why would that be? 

 

And the letter from the faculty association is not part of the 

consultation. So maybe I’m missing something. But I would 

think that if you’re singling out a group, the faculty member 

who is elected by members of the assembly, why is that person 

not elected to a three-year term as well? 

 

And so now it may be a straightforward answer, and that’s why 

we have committees because we don’t get a lot of time on this. 

But I do think it’s somewhat ironic that the faculty association 

has not been part of the discussions here today, and so that’s 

interesting. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And I just want to make sure as I review this that I . . . Well 

those will be questions that we have when we have this in 

committee. And of course we’ll be talking to the faculty 

association over the winter months and say, so how do you feel 

about that? Is this correct? Are we reading this right, or are we 

misreading this? And were you consulted in this? Because 

clearly the minister has not identified them as one of the groups 

who was consulted. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we always want to 

make the legislation as best as we can, and so our job is to do 

the due diligence on it, the scrutiny. The unintended 

consequence . . . We don’t want to see a bill back here next 

year, you know, An Act to amend the University of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1995 with one line . . . Oh we forgot the 

faculty, and there was no good reason for that. So why don’t we 

find out the reason now? 

 

So I know that there will be many of my colleagues who will 

want to also speak to this. We hope this wasn’t just an 

oversight, that there was a real reason. Or maybe I’m reading 

this wrong. Because you know, I got to tell you when I started 

reviewing the original legislation, I saw you have the 

convocation. You have the senate. You have the board of 

governors. You have the council. You have the assembly. It’s 

quite an interesting thing to keep track of. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know others will want to 

speak to this, and I think it’s appropriate at this point to move 

adjournment of Bill No. 101, An Act to amend the University of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1995. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill 101, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 



4290 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 107 — The 

Wildfire Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To rise and 

debate Bill 107, The Wildfire Act. To make some opening 

comments, and I guess before I get into details of this document 

and some of the changes that the government is proposing and 

coming in compliance with I guess today’s wildfires that we’re 

dealing with and the way industry and everyone has a role to 

play, I want to start out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by talking about 

northern Saskatchewan and where my home is and where I live 

and some of the challenges we’ve seen with wildfires in some 

of the communities and some of the hardship that, you know, 

happened to some of the northern communities. 

 

And I think about, in ’99, the Mallard fire that happened in La 

Ronge. You know, that was a fire in itself. It was a, you know, a 

challenge. But having said that, the community went through 

that process and today I guess the municipalities, they have I 

think they’ve come together. They learned from it. Hopefully 

government and the ministry has learned from it to protect . . . 

and safety of homes, of cabins, and, you know, just of life. No 

one wants to, you know, lose a loved one or have a 

Saskatchewan resident have a, you know, an incident where you 

lose someone in a wildfire or a fire. 

 

But having said that, you know, I want to talk about the good 

work that many in northern Saskatchewan . . . And it’s not just 

northern Saskatchewan, but a majority of I guess the fires that 

happen, happen in northern Saskatchewan. But I guess the fire 

protection workers, and I’m talking about the good men and 

women who fight the fires as they’re asked to do, and you 

know, the good work they do to protect homes, communities, 

business that are out there in some of the communities. 

 

And I want to talk a little bit about that and give a, you know, to 

the support that firefighters do, you know, whether it’s initial 

attack teams that go out and initially start attacking a fire should 

a fire happen. And just the way they do that, I want to give 

some credit to the good work that they do. They’re very 

dedicated. You know, some of them are well trained and they 

do a great service to this province. And sometimes, 

unfortunately, you know . . . 

 

And I’m going to talk about, going back and forth as I talk, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, referring to this bill, The Wildfire Act. I’m 

going to be giving you some of the good work that’s done, 

some of the challenges and some of the concerns people have 

raised about wildfires. And let’s talk about the legislation, some 

of the challenges RMs [rural municipality] had with the buffers. 

But I’ll talk about that. 

 

But I want to give, you know, some credit where the good work 

that many of our firefighters do and the good job they do. And 

you know, they do . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Tochor: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Everyone in this 

Assembly can’t do what we do down here if we didn’t have the 

loving support of our family and spouses. And I’m lucky to 

introduce my wife who’s in your gallery. Danielle, a wave? 

And for the first time ever in the Assembly on the outside, 

we’re going to introduce Jacob Tochor — a little wave there, 

Jacob. So please join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in and, 

you know, to start out and, I guess, to the member, welcome his 

family to the Legislative Assembly. Join him in that. 

 

Having said that, I’m going to get into some of the details of 

what I was talking about earlier is the good work that the . . . 

fighting fires in our province and wildfires in northern 

Saskatchewan, but they’re not just in northern Saskatchewan. 

We know rural communities have a lot of grass fires. And we 

know that there’s, you know, there’s good people out there, 

whether they’re with the fire service, volunteers, fire 

department. And I know there’s a number of the volunteer fire 

departments. But also the good people that work for the, you 

know, the environment and they work in the fire area for 

wildfires and the good work that they do. 

 

And then I think about some of the challenges that they’re faced 

with sometimes and some of the challenges that I guess 

government puts onto some of the workers that do the fine job. 

And you know, I’ve heard some of the challenges that some of 

the workers have expressed with . . . I guess you want to make 

sure everyone is safe when they’re doing their job. 

 

And this is a job that, I’ll tell you, we’ve seen in Saskatchewan 

and other parts of our world where, you know, you have the 

men and women who try to protect our homes and to save lives. 

Sometimes unfortunately the sad accident happens and you lose 

those workers. And I just want to talk about, commend the good 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4291 

work that individuals do and not take away from the great job 

they do and the tough job they do and what they do for our 

province and for Saskatchewan residents. 

 

They do. They put their life on the line for us to protect our 

homes, to protect our businesses, to protect our communities. 

And you know, that in itself is a great job. And I tip my hat to 

those workers who put themselves in harm’s way to protect our 

homes, our province, and what is . . . But having said that, the 

challenge is . . . I know that it’s not only on the ground, 

front-line workers who go out and fight fire and, you know, try 

to deal with them once they start. 

 

But you know, we have the fire protection base in La Ronge 

and we see the good work that, you know, our fire protection 

does when it comes to the planes and the water bombers and the 

good work the base in La Ronge does. And I know they’re set 

up in different communities to protect the fires and the good 

work that they do, the many hours that they’ve put in. And 

whether it’s the pilots, whether it’s the maintenance people, 

whether it’s support staff, the secretaries — they all do a great 

job. And I just want to commend that, the job they do, and 

again thank them for the good work they do. Because it’s 

important that we have that service. 

 

There’s also helicopters, whether they’re, you know . . . And 

some of those are private business ventures and they assist with 

wildfires and, you know, protecting us again. You know, they 

go out and protect our homes and our communities and our 

resources. You know, you look at the trees and you look at our 

natural resources that are out there. It has great value not only 

for the industry that’s harvesting some of that. And I talk about, 

you know, how our trees and many of our trees . . . And we 

have to have a lot of trees that protects and, you know, cleans 

the air and helps us with our environment. And we see that. So 

it’s important that we keep that resource, not only in harvesting 

the wood but in keeping it there to make sure that, you know, 

the natural cycle of the tree that takes out pollutants out of the 

air. So I just want to say that in itself is a good thing. 

 

But having said that about the good work that our fire 

protection people do and the good work that they do do, you 

know, I want to again just give credit where credit is due. But 

you know, you see some of the challenges. And I know we’ve 

talked about right now the workers that worked in the fire 

towers in northern Saskatchewan and the rest of the province. 

You see the challenges that they’re seeing, the concerns that 

they have raised. And we have seen a lot of people raising 

concerns. My colleagues have talked about it. It’s been in 

question period. There are concerns about safety and about 

having cameras in our fire towers taking the place of 

employees, people that that was their job and they did a great 

job. And I commend the fire tower workers who did that, spent 

the hours that they’ve gone up. 

 

And I’ve talked to some of the I guess supervisors that were 

within the industry years ago and have seen it. And you know, I 

asked them, was there a lot of, you know, safety issues or loss 

of life with these towers? And the government says it’s about, 

well the reason we’re taking them out is because of safety. And 

that’s a good thing. We want to make sure people are safe and 

our workers that do the job, there’s provisions, regulations that 

protect, you know, our employees whether they’re working in 

the fire tower. 

 

But having said that, they . . . No longer we will have towers. 

Government has decided to scrap the fire towers. And having 

those watchers and those individual workers who did a great 

job, they took care of their family. They provided a good 

income for their family to make sure that they can provide for 

their family. And a lot of these jobs are in northern 

Saskatchewan. But again we see what this government is like 

when it comes to northern Saskatchewan. It wants to take the 

good resources and take all the money down to Regina and take 

care of, you know, the situations that they want. Like it’s take, 

take, take. And I think northern Saskatchewan people are 

getting a little bit . . . They’re frustrated. And you know, they’re 

going to start raising it. 

 

And you know, again I talk about the leadership. You know, the 

leadership, you talk about. And they’re doing their part to raise 

the concerns. And I give the credit of the leaders in northern 

Saskatchewan when, you know, when they talk about, it’s not 

just about taking the resources out. And they’re doing their part 

to raise it at the table. Whatever minister they deal with, the 

ministries they deal with, they raise the issue. Whenever they 

meet with the government, they make sure that the government 

understands the challenges. It’s not just about taking our good 

resources. And we have many resources. 

 

And it’s not about keeping those resources to northern 

Saskatchewan, and all the wealth. It’s sharing it. They’re 

willing to do their part in northern Saskatchewan. It helps. We 

have many people coming in the mining industry from southern 

Saskatchewan. We encourage that. It’s good. There’s people 

working. But we have to ensure that the services are there for 

northern residents too, to make sure they’re taking a good 

opportunity, that they can make a good living for their family. 

 

So I want to just show some examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 

some of those challenges. And this wildfire Act that they talk 

about . . . And I’m going to talk about some of the challenges 

that are out there. And we heard some of them, frustration that 

came out when they announced some of the changes in this Act 

that they were going to change. 

 

And I guess the one is the buffer. They talked about a 

4.5-kilometre buffer around communities. Well you sure heard 

an outcry from RMs and from those communities, the leaders. 

And I’ve talked about that in, you know, one of the bills earlier 

about the good job. We elect our leaders, mayors, and council 

to serve us and to serve the residents. And right away when they 

seen this could impact their communities greatly, they did what 

they needed to do, and they made it clear they were not happy 

with the Sask Party government’s pushing at this and the way 

they were going at it. So they made it very clear. 

 

But you know what? It’s interesting to see, you know. And I 

encourage our municipalities; I encourage our First Nations, our 

Métis leaders, residents of the province, when you’re unhappy 

with government . . . And we’re seeing that. People are starting 

to speak up. They’re not going to sit back and be quiet 

anymore. They’ve given the government years to do some of 

the stuff, the good work they’re supposed to be doing. And 

they’re demanding that there’s some action on it. 

 



4292 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

When you talk about a government talking about resources, and 

they have so much wealth and our province is doing so great, 

then, Mr. Speaker, they expect more from their government. 

 

And we see that with our seniors. We see that with our 

municipalities. So having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly 

the RMs were very frustrated and they voiced their concern. 

They’ve done what they needed to do. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provisions that the 

government’s . . . [inaudible] . . . into The Wildfire Act, and 

they’re saying it hasn’t been amended since, I think the last 

time was somewhere in the ’80s was the last time. So they’re 

saying now it’s coming into compliance, and it’s giving them 

certain ability to regulate and to come in with some regulations, 

whether it’s industry. And some of the industry when they’re 

developing a plan, when they’re going out and the developers 

are going to develop an area where it hasn’t been developed, 

from my understanding . . . And we’re going to have to ask 

some of these tough questions, and we’ll work through those 

tough questions in committee. And I know we’ll make some 

comments. But having said that, from what I got from some of 

the comments and some of the information so far that we’ve 

been shared with, you know, from comments the minister made 

from the bill itself, it has to go through. 

 

But having said that, there is a clause in here where there has 

been some industry, whether I think something like . . . Would 

it be outfitters was one of them? They weren’t included in 

regulations. If you are the one that has caused a fire, from what 

I can get, then you would be responsible to pay. The 

government could come and take action, and if it’s the cost to 

cover a fire, whether it’s a developer, there were certain clauses 

and individuals that I think were in the existing legislation. Now 

they want to add those that were exempt or for some reason at 

the time. And I think some of those, it talks about oil and gas 

operations, mineral exploration, road construction, public 

utilities, outfitters, peat moss operations, railway operations 

were not included in the legislation. And now the government is 

going to include those so that, should those industries or those 

organizations create or happen to cause a fire that, you know, 

creates a wildfire, then the cost will give provisions in the 

ministry to go after them to cover the costs that the ministry 

has. 

 

Now I’ve talked about the buffer. They were going to charge 

municipalities dollars, and they weren’t going to cover that 4.5 

kilometre buffer. And they’ve made it clear that no, no you’re 

not, and municipalities . . . And so the government has. And 

there again it shows, when we have our elected officials raising 

concerns, organizations taking government to task on some of 

the things they’re trying to do, and that’s good. That shows me 

people don’t have to be scared. If you’ve got concerns, and you 

want to raise those concerns when legislation’s being 

introduced or changes that the government’s going to make 

impacts the residents you’ve been asked to represent or 

organizations you’ve been asked to, let the government know. 

Let them know. And I mean, there’s ways of doing it with 

respect, and they can do that. 

 

There’s also ways to use the opposition. There’s many ways. 

There’s petitions. There’s meetings with officials, with 

ministries, with government to raise your concerns. And some 

of them do that, and they do a good . . . [inaudible] . . . And 

some of the organizations that advocate for municipalities and I 

guess groups don’t have a problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 

raising their concerns. And they do that greatly. 

 

So having said that, that’s another area where I say I want to 

make it very clear. I commend the organization, the RMs that 

brought forward their concerns about the buffer. Whether 

they’re northern municipalities, urban, rural, your voice was 

heard. You raised your concerns. You didn’t think it was fair 

that this government would do that to your residents that you 

impacted, the cost. So you covered yourself, and you made sure 

that you did do the good job of representing the people you’ve 

been asked to serve. So I want to give credit where credit is due. 

Sometimes it needs individuals, organizations to take the 

government to task, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make sure that 

they’re doing what they need to do for many of our 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

But having said that, you know, there is provisions in here that 

are going to come into play. And they talk about regulations. 

And regulations are something that you have to watch because 

we may pass an Act and legislation that gives the government 

. . . Later they will come up with the regulations. I’m hoping 

and I wonder who they’re going to consult with. And will they 

consult? And you know, they have done some work, initial 

work in some of the communities. They did some visiting of 

communities and got some information. 

 

But I know there was many other challenges from the 

information they got about The Wildfire Act. They went out and 

consulted and, you know, I know that there was some meetings 

that happened around the province. And that’s good. You’re 

supposed to do that, and you need to do more of that. This 

government’s track record when it comes to consulting hasn’t 

been too good and, you know, people are frustrated with that. 

But having said that, they did a little bit of it, and they’re 

moving forward. 

 

But these regulations after the fact that will come into play will 

be determined by the ministry and give the minister the powers 

to bring in regulations. I’m hoping, at the end of the day you 

know, after this part of the Act is proclaimed and it goes 

forward, when the government comes up with the regulations, 

they’ll make sure that they talk to the RMs; to the 

municipalities, whether they’re urban, rural, north; they make 

sure they consult with industry, with the people that will be 

impacted on these fires. 

 

When I think about, you know, another part of the communities 

that get evacuated from a wildfire, and I think of the community 

of Wollaston Lake. And they went through quite a time, and 

their whole community was evacuated because of a wildfire that 

happened. And I know there was a group from the universities 

— I believe there was two of them — did a research and 

interview with the community members and chief and council 

from Wollaston Lake, the Hatchet Lake First Nation. 

 

And I know there’s been some recommendations. I think there’s 

about 13 recommendations that they’ve brought out that said 

from the report or the interviews they did. They interviewed a 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4293 

lot of community members — like I said, chief and council —

and they’ve made some good recommendations on how, when 

you’re going to evacuate a whole community like Wollaston 

Lake . . . the whole community was evacuated and they were 

separated from their families. And they were separated from, 

you know, their language. You had some families going with 

young children. Some of the older children we heard were left 

behind and they were split, went to different places. So they 

weren’t all together, and I think that caused a lot of grief and 

some concern for children and parents and family members. 

Whether you’re an adult or 18 or 19, 20, I don’t know, families 

sometimes stick together. And that’s good. 

 

So when you’re separated and you went to three or four 

different communities as you’re being evacuated, and that 

whole process, I guess some good things needed to be learned. 

And there’s about 13 recommendations in there. I hope this 

government will take those recommendations when they’re 

making regulations. And any of those regulations that they’re 

going to adopt, they will look at those 13 recommendations that 

come forward when they’re developing the regulations. I hope 

they will take all that and consider it, and the ministry will look 

at all that because this is a good report done by a couple of 

students from the university. And they did a lot of work and 

they developed a report with recommendations, and it’s crucial. 

 

And some of the concerns . . . And I know we’ll make sure, and 

I think everybody needs to have a look at these, the report that 

they provided to deal with some of the challenges in northern 

Saskatchewan. And it’s not just about fires. Any time you’re 

getting a northern community and you’re going to evacuate that 

community, you make sure that you work with the leadership 

and community residents to make sure, when you’re going to 

evacuate a whole community, you’ve done what you need to do 

as a government or as an agency supporting those evacuees, that 

you have all . . . Whatever you can do, Mr. Speaker, to make 

sure that those residents . . . And if it means that you evacuate 

them to a community close to their home, you do that. If it’s 

available, you do that. You make sure. 

 

And I think that’s one of the recommendations they talk about, 

being close; where it’s a community that has the same culture, 

the language. It’s important to them and that makes them feel as 

close as they can to home because they have the language, they 

have the culture. And that’s important. 

 

I think that’s one of the recommendations in there as well. So 

there’s many things to look at when you’re evacuating a whole 

community, and you know, whether you make sure that when 

they’re evacuated they don’t go for hours without water, food. 

And unfortunately in this situation in Wollaston Lake, that 

happened, and they talk about that in there. And I think some 

people, community members that were interviewed, shared 

some of the tough stories about, you know, not having access to 

some of those provisions for hours because they were 

transported by small aircraft from Wollaston Lake to another 

small . . . to a bigger airport where they could then be flown 

with bigger airplanes. So you talk about that. Those are the 

challenges and the grief and the stuff that those community 

members went through. 

 

So there’s an opportunity for government to look at those 

recommendations and to deal better with communities when 

they’re going to be actually evacuating whole communities in 

that situation and determining when it’s the right time to 

evacuate and when should you evacuate, who should go to 

make sure they’re working. And I know there’s emergency 

measures and they have an agency that works with that. And 

they do a great job too, and I want to give credit to that, you 

know. That’s the process. They do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

do a great job. And that’s important. 

 

Now having said that, in this report it talked about, like I said 

earlier, 13 recommendations. The recommendations came out 

of the research and the interviews that they conducted in the 

community of Wollaston Lake. But it wasn’t only Wollaston 

Lake I think. Clearly, they also talked to the fire commission’s 

office, I believe. I just want to make sure I have that 

information on me here. Yes. Yes, that’s where it is. It’s with 

the provincial commission of emergency management and fire 

safety office that works with communities when they’re 

evacuating and making sure that provisions are there. I think 

when this situation and the fire . . . It’s something that they 

work closely with the communities to make sure that . . . And I 

guess with Red Cross they set up a lot of the discussions and the 

planning when you’re evacuating a community, whether it’s for 

wildfire or for any other reason. 

 

But having said that, the reason this community got evacuated, 

Wollaston Lake, was because of a fire, a wildfire, that happened 

close to their community. Then the community members were 

evacuated out of the area. 

 

So having said all that, the regulations will come down. And I 

want to make it very clear about the regulations after this 

legislation is proclaimed, making sure that, making sure that 

individuals are consulted that will be impacted. And whether 

that’s mayors and councils, whether it’s First Nations leaders, 

chief and council leaders, whether it’s residents . . . And here 

we have an example of communities that were impacted greatly 

in northern Saskatchewan, and I think it’s important that 

government does its due diligence. And whether you use this 

report, you also consult with the leadership from those 

communities. You bring forward that information. 

 

It’s important that we get that backup and we do this right. It’s 

about safety. It’s about protecting people’s personal properties, 

their homes, the family home. It’s about protecting businesses 

who operate in a community when you have a wildfire and you 

have challenges going on. So that needs to be where 

government needs to focus on, clearly. 

 

But I know there’s other provisions that government is looking 

at in the bill. In the minister’s comments he talks about certain 

Acts that he will bring forward, and giving him certain authority 

for the ministry then to carry on the business. So at this point, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I shared a little bit. I know my colleagues 

will have more to say as they join the debate. 

 

I know in committee we can, you know, ask a lot of questions 

and get some clarification and talk to community members and, 

you know, northern leaders and our rural, urban mayors and 

councils, and ask them how does the First Nations industry . . . 

How will this impact you? You know, are you okay with this? 

Is there anything we could do better? Is there any amendments 

we could do? Is there any regulations that we could bring 



4294 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

forward that would help? 

 

And sometimes I think that’s important that we sometimes can 

share with the government. And our leader has made that clear. 

We’ll work with government when it makes good sense. We’re 

willing to work and pass legislation that helps Saskatchewan 

people, protects them. We want to do that. And that’s what 

we’re asked to do. And we’re all elected, and that’s what we’re 

asked to do. So having said that, there’s a provision in that 

where government can listen to the opposition when we bring in 

information to share with government. That’s good, makes 

sense to protect Saskatchewan residents. That’s what it’s about, 

and that’s a job that we’ve been asked to do. And we will 

continue to do that. 

 

There’s more I could say on this bill, Mr. Speaker. But at this 

point I’m prepared to adjourn debate on this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 111 — The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to 

join the debate tonight on Bill 111, The Personal Care Homes 

Amendment Act, 2013. It’s a relatively short piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, coming forward. But referencing the minister’s 

second reading speech where he talked about the intent being 

“. . . to improve accountability and better inform residents and 

families about personal care home inspection results,” 

obviously, it’s a hugely important endeavour, Mr. Speaker. 

Personal care homes are just that, you’ve got people that are in 

a very vulnerable circumstance, Mr. Speaker, in some cases. 

And it’s of vital importance that these are properly monitored, 

properly regulated, and properly accounted for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

In terms of the safe and appropriate care, safe and appropriate 

environment, it’s interesting how this legislation comes forward 

at this time, again responding to recommendations from both 

the Provincial Auditor and the Provincial Ombudsman around 

the need for more information about personal care homes being 

available to the public. Again, Mr. Speaker, this is of vital 

importance. And certainly in an era where the Health ministry 

can post information on restaurant inspections on the web, then 

surely to goodness the time has come for something like this so 

that this regulation, this monitoring isn’t just being performed, 

but that the public is able to access this information in a readily 

available manner. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, looking at The Provincial Auditor 

Act, one of the formative pieces as regards to the need for this 

legislation to come forward, I’m referring to chapter 34 of the 

2012 report volume 2 from the Provincial Auditor of 

Saskatchewan. Again chapter 34, Regulating Personal Care 

Homes for Resident Health and Safety, that this has now been 

responded to by a relatively precise piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, is good. I’m glad to see that. 

 

But again in terms of the broad front of action that is required 

around the question of whether or not we have adequate care for 

our seniors — but certainly the way that that’s represented in 

personal care home situations but the broader question of 

long-term care in general, Mr. Speaker — I think we’ve seen a 

debate in this province about whether or not this government is 

doing the job that need be done by our seniors in particular. 

And I think it’s pretty plain, Mr. Speaker, that the job is not 

being done by the members opposite when it comes to 

providing the care that is so desperately required for our 

seniors. 

 

We see them coming forward with different measures, Mr. 

Speaker. After saying that there was no cause for alarm in the 

spring, the minister then sent the CEOs out on a tour. The CEOs 

have come back with the report, which again provides some 

pretty bracing reading, Mr. Speaker. And the emotional 

response, the communications response on the part of the 

minister was appropriate. He said that reading various of that 

information made him angry. And it should, Mr. Speaker. But 

then the response that the urgent action fund of $10 million 

being put forward as the answer from this government for the 

situation that confronts our seniors in too many places across 

this province, I don’t know that that does the job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t know that the minister coming forward and expressing 

anger after reading the CEOs’ tour report, after being part of a 

government that gutted the minimum care regulations under 

which long-term care is regulated, Mr. Speaker, without any 

fanfare, certainly, in the summer of 2011 . . . and again it’s 

interesting to see that this was supposedly done in the name of 

providing better personal care and better personal care plans. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the idea that it’s some kind of mutually 

exclusive proposition where you can’t have a basic standard of 

care and at the same time some kind of personal care plan for an 

individual senior, defies belief, Mr. Speaker. But that’s what we 

see put forward in somehow a valid argument on this front. And 

again, it does not do the job that need be done by our seniors in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t do the job around 

long-term care and it doesn’t do the job in terms of what this 

government has been entrusted with by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And it certainly doesn’t satisfy the people that are contacting 

our offices, that are contacting the official opposition, saying 

that when they hear that government skate on platitudes and say 

that there’s no cause for alarm, they come forward with a 

situation that describes something very different, Mr. Speaker. 

And the more that those voices come to the fore, I think the 

more that government will be forced to act. And not to say, you 

know, pass the buck and say there’s no cause for alarm; not to 

pass the buck on the CEOs’ tour that receives a half-hearted 

response in terms of the so-called urgent action fund but that 



November 27, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4295 

sees the actual response of this government work its way into 

the regulations, that works its way into the funding, that works 

its way into the kind of human resources strategy and capital 

strategy that needs to be brought to bear. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think of last night on the 6 o’clock news, 

again the situation with Barbara Blyth coming forward and the 

way that she spoke up in that article. And here’s a lady in 

advanced age but still . . . you know, has her own personal 

challenges with cancer, but somebody that is not just looking to 

her own circumstance, Mr. Speaker. But the fact that she looks 

at the response of this government and says, okay, they 

acknowledge that there’s a response. Or in the case of the 

North, Mr. Speaker, in the case of La Ronge and area, there’ll 

be a study come forward saying that here’s the long-term care 

need for the North, but that Ms. Barbara Blyth comes forward 

and says, you know, they recognize that there’s a problem, but 

what are they doing about it? And the unsatisfactory nature of 

the response that’s been made from this government. 

 

I guess I’m inspired, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that 

somebody that’s got her own problems to look to, to attend to, 

and the way that she has reached out to community, the way 

that she has reached out to the member from Cumberland, the 

way that she is speaking out not just for herself, Mr. Speaker, 

but she’s speaking out on behalf of the aged and the infirmed, 

and that she won’t stop until there’s a better response being 

made. And surely to goodness somebody 84 years of age, 84 

years of age, Mr. Speaker, and you know, I’m sure she’s got 

better things to be doing with her time. But that she is there 

speaking out, not just on her own behalf but on behalf of those 

that are of that age that can’t speak out on behalf of themselves, 

Mr. Speaker, as in northern Saskatchewan, is a tremendously 

inspiring thing. 

 

And again she looks and says, you know, how is it that this 

government recognizes the problem but then they can’t see 

through to do something about it? How does that work, Mr. 

Speaker? And she used stronger language than I’m sure you’d 

allow me to use in terms of the rules of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. And I see you nodding in agreement. But I think she 

stated it forcefully and accurately in terms of taking the measure 

of this government and taking the measuring of what they’re 

doing around long-term care in this province and how it is 

failing the seniors of this province. And again, you know, 

Barbara Blyth, 84 years of age, struggling with cancer and, you 

know, has got her own circumstance to be looking after, Mr. 

Speaker. But the fact that she can see clear to speak and not just 

on her own behalf, but behalf of others, again is one of the 

things that gives me hope that we’ll some day see a better 

response from the Government of Saskatchewan to the seniors 

of this province. 

 

Again in terms of this piece of legislation that is in front of us 

here today, Mr. Speaker, it’s a relatively short, short piece of 

work. It provides for better accounting of the situation in 

personal care homes as it is experienced around this province. 

In terms of the providing of information from the monitoring 

and the issuing of licences and again in and of itself, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s an important thing. 

 

The more information, the more knowledge that consumers can 

get their hands on, get their heads around, then the better 

decisions they will be able to make. And in terms of the work 

that the Ombudsman and that the Provincial Auditor have 

conducted around personal care homes in this province, again 

as is often the case with the work that they do, bringing the 

powers of analysis and research to bear, an audit function to 

bear on different of the pressing files facing this province, we 

owe them a debt of gratitude. 

 

And again as good as it is to see this one piece of legislation 

coming forward, Mr. Speaker, we owe that work so much more. 

I think again in terms of chapter 34, regulating personal care 

homes for resident health and safety, I think about when the 

auditor states the case as they saw it in the province: 

 

For the period of April 1, 2011 to August 31, 2012, we 

found the Ministry did not have fully effective processes 

to regulate personal care homes. 

 

Carrying on from the report, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The Ministry did not have a formal process for identifying 

and inspecting high-risk personal care homes more 

frequently. During April 2011 to April 2012, the Ministry 

inspected personal care homes about every two years. As a 

result, the Ministry issued licences without recently 

inspecting personal care homes. After April 2012, the 

Ministry began inspecting or visiting personal care homes 

every year. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the way that things have made some small 

progress being drawn attention to by the auditor, but the fact 

that again they did not have fully effective processes to regulate 

personal care homes — which means, Mr. Speaker, you know, 

the government doesn’t know what’s going on. And they’re the 

ones that are responsible for knowing what’s going on. People 

have a reasonable expectation that the government knows 

what’s going on in the personal care homes, and that that 

information can be provided to the people so they can make 

informed decisions for themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the period under consideration for this 

report, there were 245 total licensed personal care homes in the 

province. And again you think about the, you know, ranging 

from the range of circumstances that would be involved in those 

245 homes across the province and again that the government 

didn’t know what was going on and was being called out on 

that by the auditor, Mr. Speaker, that is cause for concern. That 

they didn’t have the process in place and they didn’t have the 

appropriate monitoring and regulation regime in place, Mr. 

Speaker, that is cause for concern. And that they weren’t able to 

provide this information to the people of the province, Mr. 

Speaker, to again equip people to make the best possible 

decisions that they can, again there is a small remedy before us 

here today in Bill No. 111, but again you think about the 

broader context of these questions. It’s a relatively small step on 

a long journey that needs to be undertaken. 

 

You think about the way that complainants are followed up on. 

You think about the issuance of the licences. You think about 

the fact that each personal care home has typically about 10 

residents. But again quoting from the auditor’s report, page 297, 

that “each personal care home has about 10 residents, although 

there are some with as few as one resident and others with over 



4296 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2013 

100 residents,” Mr. Speaker. Again that we follow up on 

restaurants . . . There’s all kinds of activity that the Ministry of 

Health keeps track of, Mr. Speaker, but the fact that here we are 

today and this is when they’re finally coming forward with this 

kind of approach, again we’re glad to see it coming forward, 

Mr. Speaker. But in terms of the timeliness of this, it’s late. In 

terms of the adequacy of this measure, in terms of the broader 

matters to be considered before the province, it’s late. It gives 

us pause, Mr. Speaker, for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4265 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4265 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4265 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4290 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4265 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4265 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4265 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4266 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Celebration of Hanukkah  

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4266 

 Remembering Guy Bouvier 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4266 

 Artist Wins Governor General’s History Award 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4266 

 Albert Library Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4267 

 Moose Jaw to Host Scotties Tournament of Hearts  

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4267 

 Big River Saw Mill Reopens 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4267 

 Affordable Housing Project in Regina 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4268 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4268 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4268 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4268 

 Health Care Staffing in Wolseley and Area 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4270 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4270 

 Funding for Health Care and Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4271 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4271 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4272 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4272 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 122 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4272 

 Bill No. 123 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4273 

 Bill No. 124 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Consequential Amendment) Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4273 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4273 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4273 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4273 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4275 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4276 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4279 

 



 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4283 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4290 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4294 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


