




















































Hansard: March 28, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 41A  THURSDAY, MARCH 28, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3017 

 March 28, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce my 

wife, Danielle, who is sitting in your Speaker’s gallery. As all 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in here can attest, 

we can’t do what we do without the loving support of our 

family, and I’m so appreciative of everything. And as the 

province grows I’d like to . . . also our family is going to be 

growing as well. We are expecting our first child in July and 

very excited for that. And so I’d ask all members of the 

Assembly to please welcome Danielle and the newest member 

of the Rider nation, coming July 10th. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly a group of nine Girl Guides that are seated in the 

west gallery. They are from the 1st Strasbourg Girl Guides 

Ranger Unit. Members of this unit come from the communities 

of Strasbourg, Southey, and Lumsden. They are accompanied 

by Bonnie Pratchler, Lorna Gritzfeldt, Connie Fuessel, and 

Barb Boughner. I’ll be visiting with them later, Mr. Speaker. 

They are here to observe the proceedings of the Assembly and, 

as I said, I’ll be visiting with them later on and I’m sure they’ll 

have quite a number of questions. So I’d ask all members to 

welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

proudly rise today to present a petition in reference to cellphone 

coverage for the Northwest, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; and English River First 

Nations, also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of 

Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nation along with the 

community of Turnor Lake, including the neighbouring 

communities in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the impressive part about this petition is this 

petition has been signed from all throughout Saskatchewan. 

And this particular page has been signed primarily from the 

people from Dillon. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know since that Act was introduced in December, literally 

hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been carried 

out in the interests of due diligence. And if this bill does 

become the new law of the province, working people, 

particularly young workers, immigrant workers, and other 

vulnerable workers will suffer from a hasty watering down of 

our current labour standards which set the mandatory 

minimums for all Saskatchewan workers. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Passover and Easter Celebrations 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for many Saskatchewan people 

and people throughout the world, this weekend is a time to 

celebrate redemption and faith and hope. 

 

Jews are in the midst of observing the festival of Passover, 

recalling the story of their exodus from slavery in ancient 

Egypt. It is a story of overcoming oppression through courage 

and determination and faith. It is a story of hope and inspiration 

that has been shared for thousands of years. 

 

At the same time Christians, including my own family, will be 

celebrating Easter and recalling the story of Jesus’s life, his 

tremendous sacrifice, and his resurrection. It is a story of the 

power of grace and redemption and reconciliation, a story of 

hope triumphing over despair and love conquering all. 

 

Passover and Easter hold particularly special meaning for Jews 

and Christians respectively, but I think everyone can identify 

with elements of each of these stories, for they remind us that 

out of darkness can come light and out of defeat can come 

victory. 

 

So to all Jews observing the festival of Passover and to all 

Christians celebrating Easter, I wish a very meaningful and 

joyous celebration. And to all Saskatchewan people, I wish a 

great long weekend filled with family and friends and focused 

on the things that matter most. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

World Autism Day 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 

today to recognize the sixth annual World Autism Awareness 

Day which is being held on April 2nd. 

 

Autism spectrum disorder is often marked by intellectual 

disabilities, challenges in communication, delayed social 

interaction skills, difficulties in motor coordination and 

attention, and physical and health issues. Even with the 

improved detection and awareness, research and support is a 

continuous need. That’s why our government is committed to 

investing $7.6 million this year to specifically improve targeted 

autism services and supports. 

 

More than $1 million of our overall commitment has been 

dedicated to supporting enhanced therapeutic programming for 

preschool -aged children and specialized intervention training 

for professionals in both the health and education systems in 

Saskatchewan. There is also work being done in the Saskatoon 

Health Region with the Little Tots program to provide a 

specialized applied behavioural analysis program to our 

preschoolers. Mr. Speaker, through the child and youth agenda, 

there has been a substantial increase in direct client services for 

our children and youth with autism spectrum disorder. A 

number of advocates in our province will no doubt be holding 

their own awareness events on this important day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, April 2nd will be a day of recognition to raise 

awareness for autism spectrum disorder, to demonstrate the 

understanding of the disorders and acknowledge those 

individuals and families who live with it on a daily basis. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Abe Apesis Memorial Hockey Tournament 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to honour the memory of one of our great hockey players, 

Abe Apesis. 

 

Abe was a hockey legend from English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and Abe sadly passed away in 2007. 

This weekend there will be Abe Apesis hockey tournament 

taking place in Prince Albert, and many of our communities 

will be gathering to celebrate sport and our First Nations and 

Métis hockey heroes like Abe. 

 

Abe played senior hockey for the Meadow Lake Stampeders in 

the 1960s. He was scouted by the Saskatoon Blades and played 

for the Kelowna Buckaroos Junior A hockey team. The last few 

years of his life, Abe stuck mostly to masters tournaments but 

never lost his passion for the game. 

 

Abe had incredible speed and stickhandling skills but, more 

importantly, Abe had the ability to inspire people and 

encouraged many youth to get involved in sport. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to thank the community of Patuanak for keeping the 

memory of Abe Apesis alive. 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to play with a few of our 

hockey greats in our area who are still with us: Louis Gardiner 

from Ile-a-la-Crosse, John Young from Buffalo Narrows, Leon 

Cataract from Turnor Lake, and, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the 

communities that they are from to honour them as well in the 

same fashion that Patuanak has honoured Abe. 

 

While we see many young people coming on strong, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to pay tribute to those players who blazed the 

trail. And the young ones are coming on, Mr. Speaker. We are 

proud of our youth, and what they have been able to achieve, 

young players like Eric Roy from Beauval, Cody Pedersen from 

Buffalo Narrows, Jordon Iron from Canoe Lake, and Rambo 

from La Loche. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this House join 

with me in honouring Abe Apesis and the other Aboriginal 

hockey greats from our area. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Saskatchewan Athletes Attend National Assessment Camp 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 

weekend four young female basketball players from 

Saskatchewan will be in Toronto trying to earn spots on teams 

that will represent Canada at competitions in Lithuania and 

Russia later this year. Paige Crozon of Humboldt and Kaylee 

Halvorson and Quinn and Zayn Dornstauder of Regina will 

attend Canada’s basketball 2013 national age group assessment 

camp from March 29th to April 1st. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada is ranked number four globally in the age 

group program, thanks in part to our homegrown Saskatchewan 

talent. Humboldt’s Paige Crozon is a freshman at the University 

of Utah. She was a member of Team Canada in 2011 and 2012. 

Kaylee Halvorson is a freshman at the University of 

Saskatchewan. She was a member of Team Canada in 2009, 

2011, and 2012. 

 

Quinn Dornstauder is a senior at Dr. Martin LeBoldus High 

School in Regina. She played for Canada last year in the world 

championships in the Netherlands. Zayn Dornstauder also 

attends LeBoldus High School and was a second team all-star at 

the under 15 Canadian championships last year. 

 

On top of that, Mr. Speaker, Lisa Thomadis, head coach of the 

University of Saskatchewan’s Huskies, was named the new 

head coach of the Canadian women’s seniors basketball team. 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t resist sharing yet another proud fact. There 

are more Saskatchewan female basketball players attending the 

Canada basketball assessment camp than players from Alberta 

and Manitoba combined. Please join us in wishing them well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Heritage Architecture Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What does a 

stone house in Moosomin, a barn in Indian Head, a tattoo 

parlour in Moose Jaw, a warehouse in Saskatoon, and an office 

building in Regina have in common? That answer is that all of 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3019 

these historic structures have received the prestigious 

Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan’s Heritage Architecture 

Excellence Award. 

 

Now since the inception of the awards in 1996, a total of 130 

projects throughout the province have been recognized. 

Certificates are awarded to the building owner, architect, and 

general contractor in each of several categories, including 

adaptive reuse, conservation, renovation, or restoration of a 

building, as well as educational programs such as guided tours 

of heritage homes and even local cemeteries. 

 

Reflecting the provincial scope of the awards is the fact that 

over the past five years, projects in Eatonia, Cannington Manor, 

Prince Albert, and The Battlefords have also been bestowed 

with this award. 

 

I encourage all members to look around their constituencies and 

encourage individuals and organizations to come forward with 

projects that merit consideration for an award. The Lieutenant 

Governor will personally present certificates to this year’s 

award recipients in June at Government House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity to commend the 

Architectural Heritage Society of Saskatchewan and 

heritage-minded residents for the good work that they are doing 

to preserve and promote our rich historical legacy. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Regina Resident Named Citizen of the Year 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 22nd I 

had the pleasure of attending a luncheon to honour a constituent 

of mine, Mark Stefan, who was named CTV’s [Canadian 

Television Network Ltd.] Regina Citizen of the Year for 2012. 

 

Over the decades Mark has made great contributions to sports, 

arts and culture, community health, and education in our city. 

Mark is a member of the Regina Rotary Club and MacKenzie 

Art Gallery board of trustees. He also served as vice-president 

of the Grey Cup planning committee and was involved in 

organizing the 2009 World Junior Hockey Championships. In 

addition, Mark mentors business administration students at his 

alma mater, the University of Regina. 

 

Mark has been described by his co-workers as a man with an 

open heart who makes community service fun. This year his 

sense of responsibility extended beyond Regina to the global 

village. Accompanied by his daughter Nicole, Mark served with 

Habitat for Humanity in El Salvador to help build a home. 

 

There is no place in Canada to see the power of volunteerism at 

work than right here in Saskatchewan. Mark’s inspirational 

leadership in community service is indeed an example for us 

all. Through volunteers like Mark, we will keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

A Time for Reflection, Celebration, and Forgiveness 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All around the 

world, people are preparing to celebrate Easter, one of the most 

important religious holidays of the Christian calendar year. On 

Easter we celebrate and remember the suffering and the 

sacrifice of Jesus Christ, who is understood by Christians to 

have died for our sins, the sins of humankind. It is a time for 

reflection, of celebration, and forgiveness. 

 

Easter is also a time spent with family, spent thinking of the 

promises that Jesus gave to all people who will one day join 

Him in the kingdom of heaven, and thus a time to remember 

those of our loved ones who are no longer here with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Easter was among the first holy days to be 

celebrated by Christians, and observing this celebration 

connects this generation of Christians with the many passing 

centuries of Christians from all cultures, backgrounds, language 

groups, racial identities, and political affiliations that have ever 

been known by the name Christian. And thus it connects the 

people of Saskatchewan who choose to celebrate this day, 

whatever their background, to those who have come before and 

also to each other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly, staff who work in this 

building, along with the people of Saskatchewan — Happy 

Easter and safe travels. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Surgical Wait Times 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in question 

period we discussed a recent report from the Canadian Institute 

of Health Information. CIHI is an independent non-profit 

organization that provides high-quality data for our health care 

system, Mr. Speaker. CIHI is the gold standard for health 

information. It’s non-partisan and is respected by people in the 

country, and it’s viewed in the same sort of light as Stats 

Canada. 

 

Recently a report from CIHI shows that surgical wait times in 

the province are actually getting longer. Yesterday when I 

asked the Premier if he agrees with the recent report from CIHI, 

he said no. So I ask the Premier again today: why is he 

stubbornly ignoring the CIHI report that shows wait times in 

Saskatchewan are actually growing longer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the numbers speak for 

themselves in terms of surgeries completed in this province, in 

terms of what’s happening to wait times in Saskatchewan as a 

result of this government’s surgical wait times initiative. As a 

result of the deployment of private clinics, Mr. Speaker, 

something the Leader of the Opposition opposes, wait times for 

six months is down 55 per cent; 12 months, down 83 per cent; 

for 18 months, down 92 per cent since our government 



3020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

implemented this particular initiative, since we began deploying 

private clinics. 

 

Interestingly, Mr. Speaker, CIHI use a certain methodology. 

They have a narrow focus in terms of the kinds of surgeries. 

They also, you know, they also focus on smaller regions where 

a number of two or three surgeries per year can greatly, greatly 

see a fluctuation in the percentage numbers. 

 

We have a great deal of confidence in the numbers I’ve just 

given, in part, Mr. Speaker, because they’re informed by our 

own health care system and also because we’re using the same 

numbers the NDP [New Democratic Party] introduced in 2004. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, CIHI is independent. CIHI is 

non-partisan, and CIHI is respected for the work that it does 

and the numbers that are provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s look at what the report had to say. In 2011 

half of those needing hip replacements had surgery within 102 

days. By 2012 that wait grew to 120 days. In 2010 half of those 

needing knee replacements had their surgery within 135 days. 

But last year they waited a full 30 days longer. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m not making these numbers up. These are the numbers from 

an independent organization that is providing information for 

the government and the government should be listening to it. 

 

My question to the Premier: why does he choose to ignore 

information from a widely respected organization that is 

non-partisan, that is providing numbers that are accurate for the 

health care system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the numbers that Sask Health 

uses uses the same methodology that was developed and 

implemented by members opposite in 2004 when the NDP 

finally started to measure wait times And oh by the way, when 

they discovered we had the longest wait times in the country, 

when they began to measure wait times, they started to use this 

methodology that we’re talking about today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve already noted, the Minister of Health has 

noted that the Regina Health Region is experiencing some 

troubles in terms of the goals and the objectives of the surgical 

wait times initiative. Resources are deployed in this budget. 

 

The other regions are on track, Mr. Speaker. And the bottom 

line is that wait times for surgery in the province of 

Saskatchewan under the Saskatchewan Party are dramatically 

shortened than they were under the NDP. Part of the reason for 

that, Mr. Speaker, is that we now have more doctors in the 

province than we did when the NDP were in office. We have 

1,000 more nurses now working in the province than when the 

NDP were in office, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve invested $70 

million in this budget to reduce wait times. This is our record. 

We stand by it, Mr. Speaker. It compares favourably with 

anything we saw from members opposite when they were in 

office. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s response to CIHI is 

bizarre. It’s bizarre, Mr. Speaker, because it’s CIHI that the 

Premier has turned to on many instances to bring forward 

reports and to validate positions. 

 

There’s a report the Premier would be familiar with, From 

Innovation to Action: The First Report of the Health Care 

Innovation Working Group, co-chaired by the Premier Wall, 

Premier Ghiz and Clark, cites CIHI as a reliable source for 

information. The Ministry of Health Strategic and Operational 

Directions 2011-2012 cites CIHI. A news release from January 

27th from the government cites CIHI as a reliable source with 

accurate numbers. 

 

So it’s puzzling now, Mr. Speaker, why CIHI is good on certain 

days for the Premier and for the ministry, but on other days 

CIHI should be ignored and has no standing, and just trust us 

what we put in our news releases. Trust our spin in our news 

releases. It’s the fact of the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: why is CIHI good for 

government news releases on some days, but on other days 

CIHI is completely ignored by the Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP methodology 

for measuring wait times that they implemented in 2004 good 

enough up until today’s question period, Mr. Speaker? That’d 

be my question for the Leader of the Opposition. When the 

NDP started measuring wait times in this province, finally, Mr. 

Speaker, when they were dragged kicking and screaming into 

finally measuring wait times in Saskatchewan, we were 

experiencing, under their ponderously slow health care system, 

here’s what the numbers were, Mr. Speaker: people waiting 

longer than 12 months for surgery in 2004 when they began that 

measure; 9,428 Saskatchewan people waiting for surgery under 

the NDP. 

 

What about today, Mr. Speaker? As a result of this surgical wait 

times initiative, the one the member opposes — and this would 

be a good chance for him to stand and say does he still stand by 

his position of no private clinics delivering surgeries in a public 

system — because, because of that deployment, Mr. Speaker, 

the number’s gone from 9,428 waiting under the NDP to 937 

with more work to be happening, Mr. Speaker. These are their 

measurements, not ours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Potential Spring Flooding 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We said earlier this 

week that we’re pleased to see the Water Security Agency 

working on some preparations for what could be a disastrous 

spring flood, including the new mobile website which was 

announced today. We know there’s more snow and higher 

groundwater tables than 2011. We welcome that work, 

especially since they’re so underfunded and understaffed. 

 

What is concerning are the minister’s words and the Premier’s 

spin, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan deserve to see 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3021 

how much the government has budgeted for flood relief in the 

budget. Instead the Sask Party says that the 5 feet of snowpack 

is less predictable than lightning, and so they don’t budget for 

potential flooding? Seriously, Mr. Speaker, why does this 

government fail to properly budget for flood damage relief? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s just 

simply inaccurate. Mr. Speaker, $182 million has been set aside 

in the budget from the Growth and Financial Security Fund, 

targeted for any flooding relief that’s needed, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, our ministries, across several ministries, are working 

hard to prepare for flooding. We’re very concerned about the 

potential. We’re taking all necessary precautions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member’s line of questioning on whether it’s 

a line item expense or not, Mr. Speaker, I think that the citizens 

of this province aren’t so concerned about what page of the 

financial statement the expenditure shows up as they’re 

concerned about whether or not this government will respond in 

the case of a natural disaster to assist our citizens. And the 

answer is clearly yes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that the 

three-year average for costs to the province for flood damage 

was over $100 million per year and yet the government has no 

need to budget for this in the proper place in the budget. It says 

that if there might be damages, they’ll just find money 

somewhere else. That’s no way to properly coordinate a flood 

response, Mr. Speaker. And instead of just yesterday asking 

cabinet ministers to sit down and work together for a response, 

this government should have been planning for a spring flood 

through the end of winter. 

 

Next door in Manitoba, the government approach to flooding 

includes investing, building, planning, and educating. It’s just 

part of their culture, Mr. Speaker. Here in Saskatchewan, the 

Premier leaves flooding out of the budget and puts out a hasty 

press release on the eve of a potential flood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why can’t this government take a lesson from 

Manitoba, properly plan for flooding, and then leave the press 

releases to actual news? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. The question is totally inaccurate. The 

premise that the member opposite puts forward is totally 

inaccurate. If the member wants the facts, I’m happy to present 

the facts to the House today. 

 

You know, the member opposite talks about when we began 

planning. Well, Rafferty and Alameda began their drawdown 

on November 21st, Mr. Speaker. Lake Diefenbaker, Lake 

Diefenbaker is at its lowest levels in recent years. That 

preparation began last fall, Mr. Speaker. 

This government is proactive. This government is committed. 

This government is fiscally responsible. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

government will be effective. The members opposite should 

already know that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the budget has yet to be voted 

on. The ink is not yet dry, and this government has already 

spent a big chunk of its piggy bank instead of properly 

budgeting for the spring melt. And yesterday, yesterday the 

Premier issued a non-news press release that key ministers are 

now going to talk together about the pending flood. It’s unclear 

what this committee is supposed to do beyond their obvious 

ministerial duties and responsibilities to people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government needs to give flood preparation 

full proper planning in the budgetary process, just like they do 

with forest fire protection and crop insurance. To sneak this 

money out of our savings, which is supposed to be for the 

province’s future, shows that this government just doesn’t get 

proper planning and preparations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party apparently left cabinet 

coordination of the flood response to the very last minute? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, the premise of 

that question, like all questions from the members opposite 

today, is just simply inaccurate. It hasn’t been left to the last 

minute. As the minister in charge of the Water Security Agency 

just said, Rafferty-Alameda lowered already in November. 

 

Over the last two years, permanent flood mitigation projects 

have been undertaken. Mr. Speaker, she’s so concerned about 

the financial statement, $182 million earmarked, Mr. Speaker, 

for flooding if necessary. Mr. Speaker, on top of that, since this 

government took office, we’ve dramatically increased PDAP 

[provincial disaster assistance program]. We’ve increased, the 

assistance levels are higher, the deductibles are lower, and the 

payments are much, much quicker than under the NDP. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Decision Regarding Film Employment Tax Credit 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 

had two days to answer why his government chose to hire an 

economist to look at the tax credit only after they made the 

decision to kill it. This government seems to have put the cart 

before the horse. Can the minister tell us today why his 

government made a decision, then commissioned a report paid 

for by taxpayers to try to justify that decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



3022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

yet once again for the third day in a row we’re talking about last 

year’s budget, a report that was commissioned by senior 

ministry officials, as was confirmed yesterday to the media, that 

was commissioned last year, Mr. Speaker, after the decision 

had been made by cabinet over months of deliberations with 

respect to the budget, Mr. Speaker, last year’s budget. 

 

What I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that the hon. member 

doesn’t want to talk about this year’s budget. And in this year’s 

budget, Mr. Speaker, we’ve put forward a new support 

mechanism for all the creative industries in Saskatchewan 

called Creative Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in that Creative 

Saskatchewan is a $5 million fund, a new investment fund for 

all the creative industries to access with respect to supporting 

their particular genre, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we know the hon. member for some reason doesn’t care 

about the other creative industries other than the film industry, 

Mr. Speaker. She says, and I quote, “. . . her concern with the 

new fund is that it divides money with the other arts . . .” Mr. 

Speaker, it divides money with the other arts, and I quote, “. . . 

is not going to stimulate film production here in Saskatchewan 

. . . It does nothing for the economy, and that’s the bottom 

line.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe in all the creative industries in this 

province; that’s why we’re putting $5 million towards Creative 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 30th of 

last year, when asked by a reporter what the net cost of the tax 

credit was, the minister responded with, “We haven’t done an 

analysis with respect to what the total economic activity is.” 

 

Interesting, Mr. Speaker, as I’m looking at a report, it’s titled 

Saskatchewan Film Employment Tax Credit Analysis, March 

2012. Why has this minister been dodging questions on the 

economic impact of the tax credit when his own office had a 

report that gave him that exact information? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday and I 

say again today, perhaps the hon. member didn’t hear my 

answer. This was a report commissioned by senior ministry 

officials back in March of 2012, two months before I was even 

in cabinet, Mr. Speaker. I have not seen this report, Mr. 

Speaker, I have not seen this report until two days ago in my 

office. 

 

And it’s interesting that the hon. member, the hon. member will 

take selective quotes out of this particular report, Mr. Speaker, 

that did not, did not engage in the basis of a decision with 

respect to the film employment tax credit. But in this report, 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder why the hon. member won’t read the 

exact quote. In the first paragraph of the executive summary, it 

says: 

In terms of some performance indicators such as 

production volume, the number of productions, and 

employment, the Saskatchewan film industry is 

performing at low levels equivalent to those observed a 

full decade ago and has witnessed a steep decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we said. Film tax credits had 

become a bidding war amongst provinces, Mr. Speaker. This 

government made the decision not to pursue that bidding war. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the minister should 

have read a little further down in that report as well, but I know 

the media has a copy of that report and I’m sure has already 

done that. 

 

What the report says, that when the Sask Party government 

killed the film tax credit, the film industry was creating jobs, 

economic activity, and tax revenues. The government study did 

not show the minister what he wanted to see, so the government 

buried it. 

 

Isn’t it time for that minister and that government to admit they 

had no justification for killing the tax credit and with it an 

entire industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I think as I said yesterday, 

we’ve got a clear delineation of how to approach supporting our 

creative sector in this province, Mr. Speaker. This government 

is interested in supporting all the creative industries: music, 

digital media, visual arts, crafts, publishing, and the film 

industry, Mr. Speaker. Those members are only interested in 

supporting and attracting Hollywood producers to 

Saskatchewan to give them taxpayers’ dollars to take their 

movies to Hollywood and make the money on the distribution 

rights of those particular movies, Mr. Speaker. We’re interested 

in supporting indigenous producers, which is exactly what 

Creative Saskatchewan is going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the member vote in favour of the budget later 

today to support Creative Saskatchewan and $5 million for all 

the creative industries? That’s the question they need to answer, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Budget and Financial Management 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today this House will vote 

on the budget. It’s a short-sighted budget that pushes costs on to 

future generations. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And they can applaud those costs if they 

want. It’s including reporting that’s been called misleading and 

wrong by our Provincial Auditor, from a government that 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3023 

pretends to be holding the line on debt when anything else is 

but the case.  

 

Mr. Speaker, last year this government started with $8.5 billion 

of debt. At the end of this budget year, they’ll be at $10.4 

billion. That’s a $2 billion increase in just two years, Mr. 

Speaker, almost more than 22 per cent increase in debt in two 

years — $2 billion of debt in two years, a 22 per cent increase. 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how is that responsible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan there has been a lot of very, 

very positive reaction to this budget. We’re hearing from so 

many different groups in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

now we’re starting to actually hear from many groups across 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business] did a news release that talked about 

business opportunities in Saskatchewan and how businesses 

were reacting to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote 

directly from that news release of today, March 28th, dated here 

in Regina, and it says this: “Small-business owners in 

Saskatchewan are the most optimistic in Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the reality that people in Saskatchewan . . . 

There are so many positive comments about how we’ve moved 

forward in so many areas, whether it’s health or advanced 

education, Mr. Speaker. And I will make some comments about 

his question about debt right away. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think he’s learning from 

the film minister on how to not answer a question. But the 

question was about debt. This government’s pushing debt on to 

future generations in other ways as well. And one example of 

tying the hands of those future generations is the costly P3 

[public-private partnership] privatization schemes brought 

forward by this government. It’s a more costly, 

no-money-down, pay-much-more-later approach that’s proven 

itself less effective and needlessly wasteful. Not only that, it’s 

making our province’s books even more tricky to understand, 

creating a third set of books to hide debt off the two sets of 

books that have already been called misleading and wrong. 

 

As it relates to the costly P3 privatization schemes, why is this 

minister asking future generations to pay for his short-sighted 

decisions today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

budget summary documents that were started by the NDP back 

in 2004, where we actually put in place all of the documents 

regarding the General Revenue Fund and all of the other 

additions to the summary financial statements, I’m sure the 

member has noted that the government’s general debt back 

when we became government five years ago was $6.8 billion. 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the government’s general debt, right in the 

document that the member looks at, is $3.8 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite looks at the column that is 

entitled Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, as 

one of my members indicated, the Crown corporations used to 

identify power poles by putting paint on them, and they needed 

to be replaced. You know what’s happened? The paint has 

faded and the power poles have not been replaced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to allow our Crown 

corporations to borrow money to make sure that we have an 

infrastructure in place that can deliver the kind of services that 

our Crowns are expected to deliver. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan 

people ignore the loud nonsense we get from the Finance 

minister. And they’ll probably look to the green sheet of this 

government, its own budget, that says at the end of last year we 

had $8.5 billion of debt; end of this year, $10.4 billion. That’s 

$2 billion increase in one year. Not just that, they’re adding a 

more costly, risky P3 privatization scheme. They’re robbing our 

Crown corporations of the dollars they need. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, nowhere is this budget more short-sighted, 

more evident than in education. This is a budget that’s failed to 

support our students, our classrooms, and our teachers. This is a 

government that fails to respect the needs in our classrooms 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how exactly does denying the 

students of today the opportunities and supports they deserve 

and need serve the next generation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

to clarify a few things. He’s identified the growth in the Crown 

debt, and I’ve said that why Crowns are continuing to borrow. 

 

He needs to answer the question, is he opposed, is he opposed 

to the City of Regina using a $100 million debt, a loan to build 

the stadium here in Regina? That’s part of that. Is he against 

that? Is he against the fact that $125 million have been allocated 

to the casinos to upgrade the VLTs [video lottery terminal] and 

ensure that we’re competitive with other provinces and other 

parts of North America? Is he against that? Is he against the fact 

that further borrowing will be done for the Boundary dam 

project to ensure that we continue to move forward? Is he 

against that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Because you can’t talk out of both sides of your mouth, Mr. 

Speaker. You either have to be against something or you’d 

better be supportive of Crowns moving forward and being as 

important as they are right now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Performance of Government 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen throughout the 



3024 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

course of QP [question period] today, it has been a case study in 

Sask Party stubbornness, Mr. Speaker. First we had the Premier 

stubbornly refuse to accept numbers from CIHI, despite the fact 

that half the time he embraces CIHI numbers and uses them in 

his own reports. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we heard ministers stubbornly refuse to 

properly account for the expenses that could be coming with 

flooding, to properly budget. Mr. Speaker, a refusal to properly 

do that. Then, Mr. Speaker, which is par for the course, we have 

the film minister stubbornly refusing that the Sask Party 

government had absolutely no proper analysis and foundation 

for their decision to eliminate the film tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we have the Finance minister 

stubbornly refusing to move to one set of books and give 

Saskatchewan people an accurate picture of the total financial 

picture for the province. My question to the Premier: why such 

a stubborn approach? When will he and when will his front 

bench ministers start using an approach based on common 

sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t even know where to 

start in terms of that preamble. It’s so full of inaccuracies 

because, you know, you can ask the wrap-up question and stick 

with your stubborn theme, but you maybe should have paid 

attention to at least one of the answers. 

 

Let’s pick on the flood preparation issue for one thing. The 

minister stood up and said that water was being released from 

Rafferty back in November, Mr. Speaker. Diefenbaker action 

was taken. Twenty-five million spent over the last two years in 

flood mitigation. That’s preplanning. That’s proactive. Mr. 

Speaker, money’s also set aside in this budget. It was hidden in 

the minister’s budget speech, for crying out loud, on budget 

day. These are the kinds of things we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I might suggest to the new Leader of the Opposition that he 

might want to get a little more stubborn actually, find a little bit 

more resolve, because so far he hasn’t come to a position that 

he hasn’t changed. He says one thing about health care 

efficiencies and then when we’re doing it, he says he’s opposed 

to it. He likes to point to CIHI numbers when they’re good, but 

maybe not so much when they were bad for his government, 

Mr. Speaker. He has two different positions on Keystone he has 

to clarify. The same is true for uranium, Mr. Speaker. If you’re 

going to apply for another job in this province, if you’re going 

to be a leader of a party, you may want to actually find a 

position and maybe stick with a position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Health on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’m 

very pleased to have this opportunity to introduce some special 

guests that are seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re representatives from the Autism Resource Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we have with us the president of the board, 

Angela Ricci. And we have a board member, Dr. Didi 

Emokpare; vice-president, Stephanie Casper; and the executive 

director, Theresa Savaria. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals are responsible for a great deal 

of support in raising awareness for those that live their lives 

with autism spectrum disorders in our province and in this city, 

Mr. Speaker. I look forward to meeting with them after 

question period. I want to thank them for attending this 

morning, and I also look forward to joining them next week, 

Mr. Speaker, for a special announcement. So I would ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Minister of Health in welcoming these special people in 

Saskatchewan who have been working with autism for many 

years. And we appreciate the education that they have done to 

the public and the work that they have done with Saskatchewan 

Health as they’ve attempted to get the right services for autistic 

people in Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the opposition, we 

bring our greetings as well. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 90, The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 90, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When will this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3025 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[10:45] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

morning following question period to have the opportunity to 

enter into the debate that we’ve been having over the last days 

here on the budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to making 

some remarks, but before getting into the content of the budget 

I would like to make a few additional remarks as this has been 

my first opportunity since being elected leader to give a speech, 

and so I do want to make a few comments and thank yous to 

individuals. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my colleagues in the 

opposition for their support and thank them for I think their 

willingness to pitch in where needed and to make our team 

work. And it’s like any caucus when you’re working with 

individuals, as members on the opposite side could also attest. 

You do become very close to individuals and you rely on one 

another in a variety of circumstances. So I want to thank my 

colleagues on the opposition benches for their willingness to 

pitch in, as I said, and thank them for the work that we will be 

doing in the years ahead as well. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to thank a few individuals who are 

often behind the scenes and don’t receive the attention that they 

deserve. I’m thinking, Mr. Speaker, of the individuals working 

in our caucus office, our many CAs working in our 

constituency offices, as well as those working in the party 

office, Mr. Speaker. I know we don’t say thank you as often as 

we should at times, and so I want to take this opportunity to 

thank them for all of the work that they do that allows us to 

conduct our work in the Assembly and our work throughout the 

province. 

 

I also want to make a few comments, Mr. Speaker, because as 

members will know and as the general public will know, as a 

party we’ve recently come through a leadership race. And I 

want to say a special thank you to each of the other candidates 

and especially to all of their teams, because the race was a good 

race. It was competitive but it was not destructive. And to the 

candidates and to their teams, certainly it caused a few sleepless 

nights for me as we go through that process, but it’s what a 

party needs in order to be strong, what a party needs in order to 

turn the page and start the next chapter, Mr. Speaker. So I’m 

thankful to everyone in the party who pitched in and made a 

contribution throughout the leadership race process. 

 

I’m also, Mr. Speaker, tremendously grateful for the individuals 

who helped in my own campaign. And a campaign is always a 

lot of work, and members on both sides of the House will 

know, when it’s a one-month campaign in a general election, 

it’s a lot of work. But in a leadership race, when it’s stretching 

over half a year, there’s a lot of work to do. So to everyone who 

made a contribution in bringing food, in helping with driving, 

in stuffing envelopes, in making signs, in doing data entry, in 

working the phones, and in keeping the office running, in 

managing the campaign, in making donations — to every one 

of these individuals, I’m very grateful for the contributions that 

have been made. 

 

I also want to say a special thank you to my parents and my 

family. They’ve always been very supportive and very 

encouraging of what I do. I know through the leadership race 

my dad was always travelling and out attending events and 

being very supportive. And I joked with him that I didn’t play 

organized hockey as a kid, so I didn’t drag him or I didn’t bring 

him out to rinks all across the province in early mornings and 

late nights, but I think I made up for it through the commitment 

that he showed through the leadership race. So I’m very 

thankful to my dad for that. 

 

And most importantly, to my wife, Ruth, who’s absolutely 

amazing, I’m very grateful to be married to her and raising our 

family with her. To my girls, Ingrid and Clara — they probably 

aren’t watching TV, and if the TV is on, they’re probably 

watching Franklin and not the legislative channel — but I want 

them to know that they’re the reason that I’m involved in 

politics and the future that . . . And I want a better future for 

them, Mr. Speaker, one that is healthier, one that’s more 

equitable in our province, and also having a cleaner 

environment in our province. 

 

And the future that I want for my two girls, Mr. Speaker, is the 

future that I want for all Saskatchewan children. And I know 

that’s the view that we have as New Democrats, the view that 

we want to extend opportunity to more and more people and 

create a future that brings the best possible future to the greatest 

number of people. 

 

And it’s with that lens, Mr. Speaker, of how we are thinking 

long term, how we are thinking in a sustainable way, and how 

we are bringing opportunity to more and more people, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s through this lens that I approach the budget and 

examine the budget to see what is right in the budget and where 

the budget is off track, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As an NDP official opposition, we’ve been very clear in the 

areas we wanted to see improvements and where we wanted to 

see progress in the budget. The one area, Mr. Speaker, where 

we wanted to see strong action was in the area of improvements 

to education to support our students, to support teachers. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, through the conversations we’ve had 

with teachers, with parents, as we’ve been in communities and 

as we’ve been travelling the province, we’ve heard, Mr. 

Speaker, how the classroom is under strain, how there are 

increased demands, increased needs for educators, how there 

are increased challenges brought from the reality of the 



3026 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

modern-day classroom, Mr. Speaker. And we wanted to see the 

right resources, the right investments in those areas. 

 

So the first area was in education, Mr. Speaker. The second 

area where we wanted to see good improvements was in the 

area of long-term care for our seniors, for our grandmas and 

grandpas and our moms and dads. And many of us can think of 

loved ones who are in a situation where they are vulnerable, 

where they need long-term care, and they need better options. 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, that seniors, the individuals who built 

this province, should have more choices and better choices as 

they contemplate what sort of living arrangements they should 

have as they grow older. 

 

So the first area where we wanted to see improvement was K to 

12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education. We wanted to see 

improvements, Mr. Speaker, with long-term care choices and 

options for seniors. And, Mr. Speaker, we wanted to see a 

movement and a shift by the Sask Party government to a more 

transparent, a more open, and a more accountable government 

when it comes to the finances especially, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to the issue of maintaining more than one set of books. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the public sector accounting 

standards from across the country have moved in the direction 

of having one set of books. We have been of the position that 

we should move in that direction as well because, Mr. Speaker, 

it gives Saskatchewan people a better picture, a better 

understanding of the true state of the province’s finances. 

 

So on these three issues, Mr. Speaker, of K to 12 education, of 

long-term care, and of increased transparency, Mr. Speaker, 

sadly I see this budget as being oh for three. I have not seen the 

steps that are needed, Mr. Speaker, in these three areas, in order 

to support the budget. Instead, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen 

— and this is what we have been talking about over the past 

days as opposition members — is a credit card budget, a 

budget, Mr. Speaker, that pushes the costs into the future, that 

pushes the cost on to future generations, on to our children and 

on to their children, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

that’s not a common sense approach, this approach of just 

letting our kids pay for it. I know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the 

approach that I want for my girls, and I know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not the approach that many other families want to have for their 

children. Because they know, Mr. Speaker, that their children 

will in fact be paying the price, will be paying for the cost that 

the Sask Party, the decisions that the Sask Party is making now. 

 

Another area of concern within the budget, Mr. Speaker, that 

we identify and which troubles us, is the movement and the 

favoured approach that the government now has towards P3 

privatization approaches. Mr. Speaker, this is a fine example of 

how the credit card approach to budgeting is taking place, with 

the big reliance on P3s and increased privatization. So as the 

budget identifies, Mr. Speaker, new schools, the Saskatchewan 

Hospital at North Battleford, and even some highways projects, 

Mr. Speaker, will be paid through P3 privatization schemes. 

 

Our concern, Mr. Speaker, with this type of approach is that it 

is more expensive in the long run. In some ways, Mr. Speaker, 

it can be likened to the issue of renting or renting to own 

instead of actually buying. We could think of — to use an 

example, Mr. Speaker — of an individual who wants to buy a 

shiny new laptop, goes into a rental store and signs a 10-year 

contract to purchase that laptop with a monthly fee to rent the 

computer. But, Mr. Speaker, the individual still has to pay for 

the Internet himself and for the printer, for the laptop case, 

headphones, and everything else that is needed in order to make 

the laptop work properly. The cost of the 10-year contract, Mr. 

Speaker, is much more, much more than actually paying for the 

laptop upfront. And at the end of the contract, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not clear whether the individual will actually own the laptop or 

whether it is handed back. That is not clear. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if at any time if the individual was to decide 

through the process of the 10 years of making those rental 

payments that the laptop was not what suited his needs, that the 

laptop needed upgrading, the laptop needed repairing, Mr. 

Speaker, he’s out of luck because he’s in the costly contract that 

he’s unable to get out of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s what P3 schemes are like. It’s the taxpayer footing 

the entire bill for the project, Mr. Speaker. And it’s kicking the 

responsibility further down the road. It’s kicking the 

responsibility down the road on to future generations. So we’ve 

raised concerns, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to raise 

concerns around the issue of P3s and the increased 

privatization. 

 

We also have concerns, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of debt. It’s 

the same, the approach, the philosophy, of letting our kids pay 

for it, Mr. Speaker, that’s increasing our debt in the province by 

$835 million this year. In the last budget, Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party added 1.1 billion to the total provincial debt. So over the 

two years, with last year and with this year’s budget, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party has added about $2 billion in debt. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that $2 billion of debt doesn’t take into 

account the debt that has been off-loaded to other organizations, 

Mr. Speaker. We think of our universities, where the Sask Party 

government decided, at the University of Saskatchewan, to 

off-load nearly $100 million of debt, and the problems that that 

has created on campus, Mr. Speaker. But the true intent and the 

true desire of that, Mr. Speaker, was the desire of the Sask Party 

government to paint a rosier picture of their own provincial 

finances by pushing that debt on to the universities’ books. 

 

We also see debt, Mr. Speaker, being off-loaded onto K-12 

schools that aren’t being properly funded, Mr. Speaker, as 

school boards are doing their best to provide the education 

needed to children here in the province. 

 

We see debt also, Mr. Speaker, being pushed on to 

municipalities with large infrastructure needs, Mr. Speaker, and 

government not doing enough to address the concerns of 

municipalities. 

 

And we see debt, Mr. Speaker, in the area of the Crowns. 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker, need the ability to reinvest their profits in 

order to provide services to Saskatchewan people, in order to 

make the upgrades that are needed, Mr. Speaker, and in order to 

ensure that utility bills for Saskatchewan middle-class families 

are in fact kept low, Mr. Speaker, and that the Crowns are 

working in the best interests of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, worst of all, when we look at the issue of 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3027 

debt, it’s the Sask Party’s reliance on, Mr. Speaker, this 

approach of putting the debt on to future generations that they 

will be paying off for many years to come. 

 

Another area of concern, Mr. Speaker, that we see, is in the area 

of education. And we’ve been talking about this a great deal 

through our budget speeches, and we will continue to do so, 

Mr. Speaker, because the Sask Party government is not taking 

the necessary steps right now in order to ensure that educators 

in the classroom have the resources that they need to provide 

the top-notch, top-level education to our children that children 

need and that parents expect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget we’ve seen a huge focus on testing 

instead of teaching, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen $6 million, 

including 5.5 million in software, that is budgeted for 

standardized testing. Mr. Speaker, standardized testing takes 

teachers’ attention away from teaching students in order to 

focus on bureaucracy and administration. That is not, to me, 

Mr. Speaker, a common sense approach. What is a common 

sense approach, Mr. Speaker, is providing the necessary 

resources there so increased one-on-one time with students can 

be delivered — so increased time with students, Mr. Speaker, 

meeting their special needs, providing enrichment to each 

student, Mr. Speaker, in the classroom. 

 

You know, this issue, Mr. Speaker, of standardized testing . . . 

I’m reminded of a conversation that I had just recently, Mr. 

Speaker, with a parent talking about her son’s experience in a 

kindergarten classroom. And this teacher, Mr. Speaker, was 

praising the work of the teacher and how the teacher 

communicates the performance of her child in the classroom. 

Through the reporting mechanisms that are already in place, the 

parent had a wonderful understanding of where her son was 

doing well as well as the areas, Mr. Speaker, where the son 

could improve. 

 

And it’s because, Mr. Speaker, that teacher has the devotion to 

her classroom but also, Mr. Speaker, because of the experience 

and the willingness to communicate with parents what is 

needed for Saskatchewan children. And, Mr. Speaker, when we 

move to a focus that is more about testing instead of teaching, it 

takes teachers away from that one-on-one time they need with 

students to do the proper instruction, to do the proper 

evaluation, and to do the proper reporting to parents. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker, in the budget . . . Another way that 

the budget falls short on the area of education is dealing with 

the pressure of new students within the province, Mr. Speaker. 

The budget identifies about 4,500 new students in the province. 

But to address that, Mr. Speaker, we saw a budget increase of 

40 portable classrooms, Mr. Speaker. We know that is not 

enough, Mr. Speaker, to meet the needs in the classrooms. And 

increasingly large class sizes are something the parents are 

raising with us, parents are raising as a concern, Mr. Speaker. 

The Sask Party also, Mr. Speaker, with their fondness of the 

standardized approach when it comes to testing, Mr. Speaker, 

they won’t consider standardized maximum class sizes. So it’s 

fine on the one hand but it’s not fine on the other. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we wanted to see for education in this 

budget was smaller class sizes, a true commitment to reducing 

the class sizes in the province. Mr. Speaker, we wanted to see 

the reinstatement of the 350 educational assistants that have 

been eliminated under the Sask Party government. We wanted 

to see, Mr. Speaker, more support for English as an additional 

language, recognizing, Mr. Speaker, that that’s a smart growth 

strategy that allows our province to do well in the long run. We 

wanted to see more teachers, Mr. Speaker, and more 

classrooms, more opportunities, Mr. Speaker, more individuals 

in the classroom so they can teach our children. 

 

And we wanted to see a better investment, Mr. Speaker, in new 

schools. And I think of Hampton Village in my own 

constituency and the pressure that Dundonald School and St. 

Peter School are under and the need for the new school in 

Hampton Village. And it’s not just a school like Hampton 

Village, Mr. Speaker, but it’s also repairing leaks and repairing 

the problems with asbestos in other facilities — projects that 

need to occur, problems that need to be fixed, issues that need 

to be addressed in order to have a safe and positive learning 

environment for our kids. But instead of the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, taking this approach and taking right action, they’re 

asking future generations, Mr. Speaker, to take up the . . . to 

pick up the bill and to make the decisions later on that need to 

occur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see concerns when it comes to the area of 

health care. Mr. Speaker, this is an area where not enough is 

being done, and I think, Mr. Speaker, we see on a number of 

fronts where health care is being undermined. 

 

We look, Mr. Speaker, at the area of health regions and the 

Cancer Agency, the instruction from the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, that these, the health regions and the 

Cancer Agency, find $54 million in cuts. Mr. Speaker, this 

ignores the fact that health regions, Saskatoon and Regina for 

example, are starting this fiscal year already in a deficit position 

of about $25 million each. Officials, Mr. Speaker, in the health 

regions will identify that they’ve already made cuts, that they 

presented a budget that is lean already to the ministry, Mr. 

Speaker. And the insistence to find $54 million in cuts, Mr. 

Speaker, will have an effect on the health regions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, our concern is that will affect the clinical care that is 

provided, the services that are provided to our families, the 

services that are provided to our loved ones. That’s a big 

concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s consistent with this approach, Mr. Speaker, where 

we’ve seen from members opposite where they offload, where 

they push the tough decisions on to other organizations in order 

to provide some insulation from that decision, whether it’s the 

$100 million of debt at the University of Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s decisions that school boards need to make or 

whether, Mr. Speaker, it’s decisions that health regions are now 

having to make because of increased cuts. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, needed to see better movement for new 

long-term care spaces for seniors. The facilities mentioned in 

the budget, Mr. Speaker, are recycled announcements from 

2009. And we believe, Mr. Speaker, that seniors in the province 

deserve more options and better options when it comes to 

long-term care. And, Mr. Speaker, we also have to ensure, 

when we’re spending dollars for long-term care, that we’re 



3028 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

spending dollars in a smart way. That we’re not pursuing 

approaches, Mr. Speaker, that actually cost us more in the long 

run, actually cost taxpayers more in the long run and use up 

precious health care dollars. And we can think of the 

experience, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party had with Amicus, how 

it has been identified that that has cost millions more than what 

was necessary. 

 

I am happy in the budget, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 

topic of health to see a funding increase to the First Link 

program to help families and individuals that are affected by 

Alzheimer’s disease. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in a number of 

question periods and in other opportunities, I think this is a 

common sense approach, Mr. Speaker, and I think this is a wise 

allocation of dollars because, Mr. Speaker, it’s that increase in 

dollars that will allow individuals to care for their loved ones in 

a way that they want to and are able to and allows individuals to 

stay in their homes for a longer period of time. So I called for 

this, Mr. Speaker, through numerous question periods, and I’m 

happy to see that there was increased funding for the First Link 

program. I recognize though, Mr. Speaker, that the increase of 

about $400,000, while important, there’s more to do in that 

area, Mr. Speaker, so we can’t lose sight of that. 

 

I’m also happy, Mr. Speaker, to see some funding for home 

care. But, Mr. Speaker, the increased funding for home care on 

the overall picture for the province doesn’t create more spaces 

and more choices and more options for our grandmas and 

grandpas. So much more needs to be done. 

 

In the lead up of the budget, Mr. Speaker, going back to the 

Provincial Auditor’s report, we also heard some concerning 

aspects about some care facilities and the care provided to our 

seniors here in the province. And what was highlighted was the 

need for increased standards, increased enforcement, basically 

better levels of care in order to ensure that the seniors, who are 

in a very vulnerable position very often, are cared for in a way 

that respects the contribution that they’ve made to this 

province, respects them as individuals, Mr. Speaker, and first 

and foremost is a safe and healthy environment for them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the auditor’s report there was talk of lack of soap in certain 

facilities, indentified issues that . . . concerns to do with blocked 

fire exits, Mr. Speaker, or scalding water. So we need to see a 

better focus by the Sask Party government when it comes to the 

setting of standards, when it comes to ministry enforcement, 

and when it comes to the proper follow-up, the proper carry 

through when an issue, a problem is identified, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s completely unacceptable to have an issue identified, to have 

a problem identified and then not have the proper follow-up 

through the ministry in order to ensure the changes have in fact 

been made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the shortage of long-term care spaces, 

Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing in some facilities is how this 

has a ripple effect throughout the system, specifically, Mr. 

Speaker, how there can be individuals staying in the hospital 

longer than needed as they’re waiting for a suitable spot to go 

home or, Mr. Speaker, as they’re waiting for the appropriate 

and the proper resources though home care to be there to allow 

them to leave the hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When seniors are left waiting in hospitals for an appropriate 

spot to live, it creates a ripple effect, Mr. Speaker, that can 

cause problems and clog up our hospitals, Mr. Speaker, which 

causes problems in many other departments where we can see 

through that an increase in hallway care, Mr. Speaker, and 

longer waits in emergency rooms. So it’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, that we are in fact creating more options and better 

options for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So fixing long-term care, Mr. Speaker, improving and 

expanding the options available and providing better options for 

people is an important component in improving the health 

system overall. Now what I wanted to see, Mr. Speaker, in this 

budget was a stronger focus on health care, a stronger focus on 

long-term care options for seniors. 

 

Other concerns, Mr. Speaker, from the budget that we saw 

outside of the areas of K to 12 education, outside of the area, 

Mr. Speaker, of long-term care options, and outside of the area 

of increased accountability and transparency needed by the 

Sask Party government, was on the area of the environment. 

 

We saw, Mr. Speaker, efforts to address climate change in a 

meaningful way greatly reduced through this budget — cut 

another 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And this is combined, Mr. 

Speaker, with the cuts that occurred last year. We see that that’s 

a 73 per cent cut over two years. And unfortunately what we 

see from government members, Mr. Speaker, is unwillingness 

to recognize the concerns around climate change, the very real 

nature and existence of climate change. We saw a Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, that did not mention climate change. And 

we also saw, Mr. Speaker, a budget that did not address climate 

change other than cutting the funding in areas to actually 

address the concern, to address the problems. 

 

We also saw, Mr. Speaker, steps in the wrong direction when it 

comes to post-secondary students facing massive tuition 

increases and universities left in a debt crisis. Mr. Speaker, as 

the Sask Party government has had this reliance to push 

decisions on other organizations, as they’ve had this fondness 

to insist that other organizations take on borrowing in order to 

make their own financial picture look better, Mr. Speaker, this 

has created a financial crunch on our university campuses. And 

we hear stories from both institutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Earlier this week we heard of the imminent 100 layoffs at the 

University of Saskatchewan which is a huge concern. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we hear of increased program cuts, of programs being 

eliminated as well as services. And students are concerned, Mr. 

Speaker, because they want the programs that are needed there 

to provide the education that they need and deserve. And they 

also want, Mr. Speaker, the proper resources when it comes to 

staff on campus to provide the services to students. We also see 

concerns, Mr. Speaker, at the University of Regina with 

reductions in the number of sessional lecturers as one example. 

And we see tuition going up on both campuses. 

 

And we see, Mr. Speaker, also comments from the 

administrators of universities, Mr. Speaker. Thinking of the 

comments from the president of the U of R [University of 

Regina] identifying that they have taken steps, Mr. Speaker, to 

find savings in different places, and the insistence to find more, 

Mr. Speaker, will inevitably affect programs, will inevitably 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3029 

affect the staffing levels and the services most importantly 

provided to students, all at the same time as we see tuition 

increases going up for students. 

 

We also see growing communities, Mr. Speaker, and we see 

municipalities more and more being left to take care of 

infrastructure needs within their own local area, Mr. Speaker, 

pushing more debt onto municipalities and not providing the 

infrastructure needed. 

 

On the agricultural front, Mr. Speaker, we see tens of millions 

being cut from the business risk management programs and, 

Mr. Speaker, these are programs that help producers. These are 

programs that are there to provide services to producers, to 

provide increased security and planning ability for producers. 

And, Mr. Speaker, to see these steps, it is concerning. 

 

We also saw, Mr. Speaker — this was clearly identified through 

question period today — we saw a complete unwillingness to 

recognize how poorly the issue of the film employment tax 

credit has been handled by the Sask Party government. We have 

seen a minister, well two ministers, and both having problems, 

Mr. Speaker. But we have huge concerns. The members 

opposite, the Minister of the Economy is saying, well this is last 

year’s budget, last year’s problem. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s today’s problem. It’s today’s concern, 

Mr. Speaker, because it has effects on our economy today. It 

has effects on Saskatchewan families today, Mr. Speaker. And 

for the members opposite just to slough this off, to say, nothing 

to look at here, move on, everything is fine right now, that says 

there’s no attention here, Mr. Speaker. Don’t look at our past 

actions. Don’t look at how poorly we handled this. Don’t look 

at how we commissioned reports to try to cover our tracks, to 

try to provide spin for how we need to sell this to Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. We see a stubborn unwillingness, Mr. 

Speaker, to recognize that they made a mistake on the film 

employment tax credit and to recognize that they need to do so 

much better when it comes to the creative industries here in the 

province. 

 

And instead, Mr. Speaker, instead of recognizing that, instead 

of having a change of heart, instead of recognizing what 

Saskatchewan people, what Saskatchewan businesses or 

Saskatchewan families know to be true, Mr. Speaker, we see 

the members opposite casting blame on everyone else. I can see 

them casting it on the opposition. We see them casting blame 

on people in the opposition. We see casting blame on the 

previous minister, Mr. Speaker, but we do not see members 

owning up to the decision. We do not see the minister taking 

responsibility for the decision. And, Mr. Speaker, we do not see 

the right steps in this budget to address the problems created in 

last year’s budget when it comes to the film employment tax 

credit. 

 

We also see a stubbornness, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 

decisions that the Sask Party government made around the 

Aboriginal employment development program. Mr. Speaker, 

this was a program that was very successful. It was a program 

that encouraged partnerships between First Nations and Métis 

individuals and groups, with business as well as government, 

Mr. Speaker. It was bringing results. It was providing a benefit 

to the province. It was engaging more and more people in the 

workforce, Mr. Speaker, which is a positive, which is a good 

thing. 

 

But for no good reason, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government eliminated that program in their last term. And 

sadly now without the presence of that program, we have seen 

movement in the wrong direction. 

 

If we look at the jobs, Friday’s job numbers, Mr. Speaker, in 

most months what we’ve seen the trend being since the 

elimination of that program is movement in the wrong 

direction. We have seen numbers that are more discouraging or 

we’ve seen numbers that are stagnant in many of the months. 

 

And individuals recognize, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 

short-sighted decision. This is not good long-term thinking. 

This is not sustainable thinking. This is not the type of decision 

that is in the best interests of all Saskatchewan people because, 

Mr. Speaker, all Saskatchewan people benefit, all 

Saskatchewan people will do better when we extend 

opportunity to more and more people in the province. And for 

that reason the Aboriginal employment development program 

was very important. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, economists recognize that this is a problem. 

Businesses recognize that the elimination of the AEDP 

[Aboriginal employment development program] was a problem. 

Certainly people in the province, including those who are First 

Nations and Métis, recognize that it is a problem. And I think 

secretly, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government even 

recognizes that it was a problem. And so late in the game, Mr. 

Speaker, after the damage had been done by eliminating the 

program — not unlike their decision to eliminate the film 

employment tax credit — we saw government members strike 

the task force, Mr. Speaker, on Aboriginal education and 

achievement, Mr. Speaker, unemployment. 

 

And the task force, Mr. Speaker, in itself, the individuals doing 

the work are respected individuals who have a great deal to add, 

a great deal to say and, Mr. Speaker, though somewhat late, I 

look forward to the opportunity to seeing their report. My 

concern, Mr. Speaker, is after cutting the AED, after seeing 

numbers go in the wrong direction and late in the game striking 

the task force and then the task force taking a considerable 

amount of time to come up with the findings, my concern, Mr. 

Speaker, is the track record demonstrated by the Sask Party 

government doesn’t bring a lot of confidence, Mr. Speaker, that 

they’re going to act on that task force in a way that is in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And we saw the first glimmer, Mr. Speaker, of this with the 

dollars designated to the task force of just a few million dollars. 

Not a significant amount when we look at the issue before us, 

when we look at what the needs are and what the challenges 

are, but more importantly, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 

lost opportunity that we have by not taking the right steps now. 

So it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that when the report comes 

forward, when it is made public, and when I trust there will be 

good advice in the report . . . I’m sad, Mr. Speaker, that it was a 

delayed response by the Sask Party in relation to their 

elimination of the AEDP but I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 



3030 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

report brings forward good information. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it has to be taken seriously by the Sask Party 

government. And in order to be taken seriously, Mr. Speaker, 

the right dollars have to be put in place in order for the 

recommendations, in order for the good information that is 

obtained through the report to be of use to Saskatchewan people 

and to be of use to Saskatchewan people in the short term, but 

especially, Mr. Speaker, in the long term. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what the budget has indicated for the 3 million or so that has 

been allocated to this, it is not enough to address the issue when 

we look at the challenge, when we look at what the lost cost is, 

the lost benefit is to the province by having everyone engaged 

here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What Saskatchewan people do want in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is long-term thinking, Mr. Speaker, that’s in the best 

interest of Saskatchewan people. What we do not want, and 

what I believe Saskatchewan people do not want, are 

short-sighted decisions that benefit some, Mr. Speaker, 

especially friends and insiders, but not for the broader public, 

Mr. Speaker. We need the proper long-term thinking, the proper 

long-term vision in order to create the future that we want in 

Saskatchewan so that everyone can benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to create an economy in the province that 

benefits everyone. We need an economy, Mr. Speaker, that is 

there engaging people — First Nations and Métis people, 

engaging new Canadians and newcomers to our province, 

engaging those of us who have been here for some time, Mr. 

Speaker, engaging the young, and engaging the old. We need an 

economy, Mr. Speaker, that benefits everyone in the province. 

 

What we also need in a long-term view, Mr. Speaker, is an 

environmental plan that does what is required to address 

climate change in a meaningful way. And we will hold the Sask 

Party government to account, Mr. Speaker, on their do-nothing 

record when it comes to climate change. We will hold the Sask 

Party government to account, Mr. Speaker, when we see cuts to 

climate change, when we see cuts to programs that could help 

address the issue. We will hold them accountable, Mr. Speaker, 

when we don’t see the proper type of action we need from our 

public utilities, from our Crowns in leading the positive change 

that we want to see when it comes to climate change. We will 

hold them to account on that issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we also need in a long-term vision, a long-term plan for 

this province, Mr. Speaker, is a health care system that actually 

helps us be healthy, a health care system, Mr. Speaker, that 

addresses many of the root causes of our illness. And Mr. 

Speaker, when we’re only addressing the symptoms, when 

we’re only addressing issues once people become sick, Mr. 

Speaker, when we’re not having the proper focus on housing, 

when we’re not having the proper focus on early intervention 

programs, Mr. Speaker, we will be speaking out on those 

issues. 

 

And we will be speaking out, Mr. Speaker, when we see health 

care dollars being spent in a way that are not in the best interest 

of Saskatchewan people. And we will be speaking out, Mr. 

Speaker, when we hear and we see of cuts being instructed by 

the Sask Party government on to other organizations that will 

have an effect on clinical care here in the province. 

Mr. Speaker, for a long-term vision of our province that is in 

the best interest of all Saskatchewan people, we also need to see 

an approach to northern Saskatchewan, to the environment and 

to its people, that sees northerners, Mr. Speaker, as the huge 

asset that they are to our province — not as a liability, not as a 

drawback, not as an expense, but as a huge asset that they are to 

Saskatchewan people. And this directly ties into the earlier 

comments I made, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 

investments in housing, when we talk about proper investments 

in the early stages for health care, when we talk about having 

programs that are in place to actually help people like the 

Aboriginal employment development program. But instead, Mr. 

Speaker, on so many fronts, we’ve seen the Sask Party 

government step away, pull away, not concerned about the 

issues of the North. And I think that is a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, need a plan in the province when we 

look at education that improves outcomes for First Nations and 

Métis students, Mr. Speaker, recognizing that the achievement 

gap between non-First Nations and Métis students and those 

who are First Nations and Métis, Mr. Speaker, is too great, 

recognizing in light of the same comments I made, Mr. 

Speaker, about extending opportunity to more people, that we 

are in fact putting resources in place so that we can achieve the 

goals that we need to achieve in order to be successful. 

 

It goes back to the earlier discussion about standardized testing 

over teaching. Instead of plowing millions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, into standardized testing, why not put those dollars 

into the classroom? Why not hire more teachers, Mr. Speaker? 

Why not reinstate the educational assistants that have been 

eliminated under the Sask Party government? Why not improve 

buildings where it’s needed, Mr. Speaker? Why not build new 

schools where they’re needed, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So instead of this tunnel-vision focus that we have from the 

Sask Party government on standardized testing over teaching, 

Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the resources that we need to put in 

place so that educators can do what they love and what they 

excel at, and so that our little ones can actually learn to their 

full potential and can do well. Teachers know how to teach, Mr. 

Speaker. Teachers know what they’re doing. Parents care about 

their children. Parents want the best education for their 

children, Mr. Speaker, and by not putting the right investments 

in our education system, but especially in the area of improving 

educational outcomes for First Nations and Métis students, Mr. 

Speaker, we are not doing justice to the considerations of future 

generations. We are not doing justice to the consideration of our 

kids and the kids of our neighbours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve identified some of the areas where we’ve had 

concerns about the budget. I’ve identified some areas, Mr. 

Speaker, where there have been some positive steps in this 

budget. The approach that we’ll be taking as an opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, and the approach that I will be taking as a leader, is 

one based on common sense. We will listen to good ideas no 

matter where they come from, Mr. Speaker. Good ideas based 

on common sense is what we need in order to have the 

long-term thinking. 

 

It’s common sense, Mr. Speaker, that we need to make the right 

investments in the classroom in order to have the right 

education for our children so that they can get into the 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3031 

post-secondary programs that we need, so that they can 

contribute to the economy, Mr. Speaker. That’s a common 

sense approach. That’s a good idea, Mr. Speaker, that we can 

support regardless of where it comes from. And I think that’s a 

good idea, a common sense approach that all members should 

support, and it should inform, Mr. Speaker, their position on 

testing over teaching. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the approach that we will take, the approach that I 

will take, Mr. Speaker, is to not change the things that are 

working here in the province. When things are going well in a 

direction, when they are on the right track, Mr. Speaker, we will 

support that in a constructive way because, Mr. Speaker, that is 

a common sense approach. That is what Saskatchewan people, 

that is what the constituents expect of us when we come to the 

legislature, yes representing our individual constituency but, 

most importantly, speaking for and speaking to the best 

interests of the entire province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when there are things that are right, Mr. Speaker, we can 

support those. But when the Sask Party government is 

misguided, when the Sask Party government is stubborn, when 

the Sask Party government is on the wrong track, when the 

Sask Party government won’t admit a mistake, when the Sask 

Party government won’t fix a problem that they’ve created in a 

program like the film employment tax credit, like the 

Aboriginal employment development program, Mr. Speaker, 

we will stand up and we will hold them to account on that. We 

will be firm, Mr. Speaker, and we will say, Mr. Speaker, that 

they should be doing better. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will be offering a positive alternative. 

We will be saying, instead of standardized tests, Mr. Speaker, 

how about we have standardized class sizes? How about we put 

the dollars into the classroom so that we can have the right 

resources for teachers so that the little ones can be in a class 

size that makes sense and allows them to thrive as individuals, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to recognize, Mr. Speaker, when 

things are off track, we will stand up, we will speak out, and we 

will offer a positive alternative. This budget, Mr. Speaker, is an 

example of the Sask Party pushing ahead and plowing ahead 

with a plan that is not in best interest of Saskatchewan people, 

not in the best interest of the middle class, and not in the best 

interest of vulnerable people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has not done enough for health care. It is 

pushing cuts on to health regions. Mr. Speaker, it does not do 

enough for education. It is causing more problems in the 

classroom instead of fixing problems in the classrooms. It is 

not, Mr. Speaker, reversing the poor decisions that have been 

made on issues like the film employment tax credit, like the 

Aboriginal employment development program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget does not do enough to expand and 

improve options for long-term care and home care for our 

seniors. This budget, Mr. Speaker, does not do enough to 

provide a clear and accurate and transparent picture of the 

provincial finances. And it does not do that, Mr. Speaker, 

because of their stubborn insistence to maintain two sets of 

books. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, is not in the best interests of future 

generations because of its reliance and its determination to go 

to a P3 privatized model when it comes to health care, when it 

comes to education, when it comes to caring for our seniors, 

when it comes to instructing our children, Mr. Speaker. This 

budget does not do enough for the Saskatchewan people 

because in too many instances it puts politicians ahead of 

people, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a credit card budget that is 

kicking the responsibilities, kicking the burden, kicking the 

debt down the road on to future generations, Mr. Speaker. So 

for these reasons I will not be supporting the budget presented 

by the government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, colleagues. Thank you. Mr. 

Speaker . . . Wow, everyone’s in a good mood. It must be the 

break that’s coming up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to first and foremost thank the Minister of 

Finance, thank his office, thank the officials over at Finance 

and really all the officials across government for their work on 

this particular budget that we’re debating today, that we’ll vote 

on later this day. Mr. Speaker, it’s a very large task and 

members on both sides of the House will know that. Certainly 

some members on that side of the House participated in many 

budget development processes, and so we know it starts fairly 

. . . Frankly it starts in the summertime, late summer and goes 

through fall and then a lot of work, especially at the Treasury 

Board level. And I want to acknowledge members of the 

Treasury Board who have had a lot of meetings, a lot of 

meetings to get the budget to the point where it is — balanced 

and moving this province forward. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made some changes in the 

organization of government. It’s not something we talk a lot 

about, but for a number of years we’ve been ensuring that it 

isn’t just members of Executive Council that are on these very 

important and strategic boards of government like the Treasury 

Board. We have private members as well involved in the 

Treasury Board process, Mr. Speaker. And we want to 

acknowledge the member for Arm River and the member for 

Cut Knife-Turtleford for their work they have done on the 

budget, all the members of Treasury Board. And we want to 

thank them for their work and willingness to go to all of those 

meetings that the Minister of Finance would call, all the time 

and frequently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think in the life of a legislature, one of the best 

tests, one of the best reflections on a government, on what its 

priorities might be, is a budget. It also, for the opposition, says 

a little bit about them. And I’d like to focus on those two things 

as I enter this particular debate, Mr. Speaker. And just before I 

do, again on these major opportunities to speak, I want to thank 

the people of Swift Current for their ongoing trust that they’ve 

placed in me to try to represent them as best as I can, and to 

acknowledge my family — Tami, Megan, Colter, and Faith — 

for their continued support and love so that I can also continue 

to do this work. 



3032 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve already taken the opportunity to welcome 

the member for Massey Place as the new Leader of the New 

Democratic Party, the new Leader of the Opposition. I offer 

those congratulations to him and through him to his family 

again. And I know we’re going to have many months of debate 

and, at the end of all of this, a very good campaign where we 

will offer competing visions and ideas to the people on behalf 

of our respective parties. And in the meantime, we look forward 

to the questions and we look forward to the debate that’s going 

to unfold, Mr. Speaker, with the Leader of the Opposition and 

his colleagues across the way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do think a budget is a reflection on a 

government, on its priorities, and I think then we should . . . I’d 

like to look at the budget in that context. Mr. Speaker, I would 

add one more context to the analysis and that would be the 

overall situation in Saskatchewan vis-à-vis revenues to 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw in 2009, with a precipitous drop in 

revenues to the Government of Saskatchewan when no potash 

was sold really anywhere and we were short around $2 billion, 

we noted that the economy of the province of Saskatchewan 

continued to move forward. We noted that the state of the 

finances, the state of the revenues to government was not 

necessarily a reflection of the continued strength in the 

economy. And you know, I think that was an interesting year 

for a lot of Saskatchewan people to realize . . . Most of us 

would think, quite rightly I think, quite intuitively, that as goes 

the revenues to government from taxes, from resources, so goes 

the economy. We know that’s not the case. 

 

[11:30] 

 

We saw that in 2009, as I’ve just referenced. And frankly we’re 

experiencing it right now because, Mr. Speaker, in almost every 

respect our economy continues to lead Canada. We have 3.8 per 

cent unemployment. Every economic statistic that is reported 

reflects our leadership, something that the government doesn’t 

take credit for but we do want to celebrate Saskatchewan 

people — entrepreneurs, businessmen and women — who are 

creating the Saskatchewan advantage and of course all of the 

people that work in those businesses. 

 

But our economy is the envy of the nation and yet revenues 

going into this year — frankly, towards the end of the current 

budget year, which will end in just few days — the resource 

revenues were soft. Potash revenues were down. Sales were 

made, prices had dropped a little bit. And the way our royalty 

structure works, one that we inherited from the members 

opposite, one we support — they no longer support it, we 

should note; they’d like to increase those; but the ones that they 

agreed on at least when they were in the Government of 

Saskatchewan — has left us in a situation where our royalties 

are very price-sensitive. 

 

So a relatively small decrease in the price per tonne for potash 

can have a disproportionately high impact in terms of our 

budget, can really hurt the revenue side of the budget. So you’d 

see, Mr. Speaker, for instance the forecast made a year ago by 

ministry officials and reported by the Ministry of Finance in 

terms of price are not, not that off from where they would be as 

we close this year and move into next year. But any change, 

any change in that price, because of the sensitivity of the 

royalty structure, causes revenues to decrease. We saw softness 

in oil as well. 

 

So moving into this particular budget, we believed that, and 

those who study these things, those who are experts believe 

these factors probably will continue, this softness in natural 

resources prices. Not certainly a huge drop, nothing to be really 

worried about in terms of the forecast, but still concerned in 

terms of a natural resource revenue softness. So that was the 

parameters. That’s the context for the budget development — 

tighter revenues, and yet, Mr. Speaker, an economy that’s 

leading the nation; an economy that needs the government to 

continue to invest in skills in terms of dealing with the labour 

shortage; and an economy that requires its government to 

continue to invest in education. An economy that requires, 

because we’re attracting people at a record pace, that we would 

invest in education, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll get into more details 

on this in a moment. 

 

But I would note at the outset with respect to education that the 

Leader of the Opposition who just spoke likes to use the word 

cuts, likes to ask rhetorical questions about resources for 

growing enrolment in the province. You know, Mr. Speaker, I 

think it’s very important for anyone who serves in this 

legislature, especially for a leader of the party on either side of 

the House, that they need, when they’re making their case, to 

recognize all the facts, even some of the facts that are 

inconvenient to their position, some of the inconvenient truths 

that we don’t hear the Leader of the Opposition acknowledging. 

We hear some members acknowledging them. Certainly the 

deputy leader during his leadership campaign I think did a 

better job of this perhaps. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can say to you that because of enrolment 

pressures last year, we said in the fall, the Minister of Education 

said in the fall to school boards across the province — and this 

was unprecedented; I echoed the same comments in the growth 

plan speech I gave in the fall as well — the message to school 

boards was this. We know that there are more people moving to 

the province than ever before. We know they’re bringing kids. 

We know the population is growing, enrolment is growing. And 

so when we have a better idea of those enrolment pressures, we 

will take I think the unprecedented step, the unprecedented step 

of a mid-year increase in investment right to those classrooms, 

right in those school divisions where growth happened. And I 

think the number was about $6.6 million at the end of a tight 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We sat down as a cabinet and a caucus and we said, we need to 

be able to respond to these pressures. It’s one of the pressures 

and challenges of a growing economy, a challenge that we 

welcome. So let’s find the resources we need, not only on the 

operating side, but also on the capital side in terms of some 

immediate renovations and improvements that could be made to 

schools that had pressures. 

 

And that is exactly what we did, Mr. Speaker. We kept the 

promise that we had made, that we would be there in the event 

that there are enrolment pressures, Mr. Speaker. The budget 

speech and all of the interventions on this side of the House and 

the interventions of the Minister of Education have been quite 

clear. We will also be there in the future in terms of enrolment 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3033 

pressures. The best indicator of future behaviour is past 

behaviour. That’s something we’re pleased about on this side of 

the House. 

 

They’re probably not that happy about it on that side of the 

House because the past behaviour of members opposite when 

they were in government was, well a couple of things with 

respect to the enrolment pressure. They wouldn’t have had to 

make an in-year investment in education, Mr. Speaker, because 

there were no enrolment pressures when the population was 

actually declining or was stagnant, Mr. Speaker. That was the 

reality under the New Democratic Party. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we know now, we’ve seen the documents, 

I think it was the minister of Education, Mr. Melenchuk, who 

was pretty clear about the fact that the province then . . . And 

that’s not, not that long ago I would say. The Minister of 

Finance references this every now and then. Not that long ago, 

the NDP were saying, we just think enrolment in this province 

overall is going to go down because we believe the population 

is going to continue to fall, that we’re going to continue to see 

the demographics in our province age, frankly, and there will be 

fewer and fewer students. 

 

There was never really a plan, by the way, by the NDP to 

change that fact; to say, no, that can’t be right in a province 

with all of these resources, with the great people that we have in 

this province of all places, where we have literally what the 

world wants, a world that wants food security and energy 

security. In that world, we should have a vision for growth. 

They did not. They had vision for decline. And guess what, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? Guess what? They actually acted on that. 

They frankly did not provide the investments for future growth 

in education. 

 

We inherited a situation, and the Minister of Finance was first 

the minister of Education, we inherited a situation from the 

New Democrats that was quite shocking and appalling in terms 

of education and infrastructure in the province — neglected 

schools, obviously no planning for new schools. Their focus 

was on how do we actually close more schools? What’s the best 

way to close schools? 

 

Mr. Speaker, things have changed. And in this particular 

budget, there are again millions of dollars pointed towards 

enrolment pressure. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say 

you can judge a government by its budget. You can judge this 

government by its increased investment in education heretofore 

and what we’re prepared to do in the future to help with those 

classroom pressures that we see in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on education, I do want to talk a little 

bit about the standards-based testing we’re going to be doing as 

part of the student achievement initiative. We should have a 

good debate about this. The member talked a lot about 

standards-based testing. In fact it was — I would argue, in 

terms of his speech he just gave — it was sort of the centrepiece 

of his critique of the government’s education policy. They use a 

few slogans and buzz words. They talk about teaching instead 

of testing. Mr. Speaker, this is a simplistic view of what the 

government has already been doing in four regions across the 

province. 

 

I want the Leader of the Opposition, if he would, to listen very 

carefully. Mr. Speaker, when we talk about standards-based 

testing in this province. We’re not talking about no child left 

behind. We’re not talking about the use of standards, frankly, to 

decide on funding for classrooms or to make accountability 

decisions for teachers. 

 

We’re talking about an investment in the classroom, an 

investment driven by teachers to improve the results for 

students, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And more to the point, we’re 

actually advancing. We’re offering something for which the 

evidence is in in this province. He’s now the new leader of the 

NDP. He needs to talk to those divisions that are doing this. He 

needs to talk not just to the school administrators that are proud 

of this, who are here in the gallery and with whom I met not 

long ago to talk about their specific examples, but he also needs 

to talk to the teachers. 

 

I remember our own education leader in the Chinook School 

Division, a gentleman by the name of Liam Choo-Foo who has 

been a long-time education professional and now with the 

Chinook School Division. His view was, his theory was you 

couldn’t actually take away from the teachers the 

standards-based initiatives that that division has deployed 

because the teachers see the results. And here they are, Mr. 

Speaker. Chinook School Division introduced something called 

the balanced literacy initiative. The Chinook School Division 

— and I think this was on their own actually, to be fair; I don’t 

think the government provided extra resources but they had 

budgeted for it — they actually invested in additional resources 

to focus on a challenge they had with respect to students not 

meeting their grade level standards in literacy. 

 

In fact when they began the standards-based initiative about 

four years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 63 per cent of students 

were reading at grade level. They used — here it comes — 

standards-based testing. They targeted resources for teachers. 

And four years later, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number of those 

kids, that cohort now reading at their grade level is up 20-some 

per cent. It’s up over 80 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 

standards-based testing. You need to properly resource it. But 

there’s $5.9 million, I believe, in the Ministry of Education’s 

budget to do just that, to expand on what’s possible to bring 

that result to all the school divisions. 

 

How would you, how could you oppose . . . They do because 

it’s sort of a dogmatic, ideological thing for even the new 

leader. It’s interesting, as a much younger caucus, new 

leadership on the front bench, but their ideology is as old and 

tired as ever, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We just saw it again with 

respect to private clinics. They refuse to understand that today 

in the province standards-based and student achievement 

initiatives are delivering better results in the classroom. 

 

Here’s another example. Prairie Valley School Division has 

seen a year-over-year improvement in 23 of 26 areas, including 

reading and math because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in part because 

a significant part of it is that they’re deploying standards-based 

testing and achievement. And they’re investing, by the way, 

they’re backing it up with resources in the classroom so 

teachers can take this information and actually do something 

with it. 

 



3034 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

That’s the point of what we’re talking about. We’re not just 

talking about a measure. We’re not talking about teaching to the 

test. We’re talking about using benchmarks, using 

standards-based benchmarks for kids, for teachers, in the 

classroom to say, here’s where they’re at now. We need them to 

do better. We want them to do better. Their parents want them 

to do better. We’re going to provide them the resources to 

ensure that happens. 

 

At the end of his speech he talked about this great vision for 

properly educating kids so they could then move on to 

post-secondary and then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, get a job in this 

economy. That is exactly what this initiative and this 

government is all about with respect to this education. They 

should vote for the budget. 

 

What’s happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Prairie Valley, 

exactly? Eighty-one per cent of Prairie Valley students graduate 

on time compared to 72 per cent province-wide; 23 out of 26 

areas, including reading and math, improvement. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, graduation rates there higher than in the rest of 

the province. What more evidence do they need to sort of set 

aside the ideology, to set aside really just their rigid position 

and their willingness to instead engage in a meaningful debate 

to throw out slogans, as the leader of the NDP did in his budget 

speech? 

 

In Melfort, Mr. Speaker, in that area they’re also using 

standard-based achievement. And I could tell you that they’re 

pretty pleased with what’s going on in that particular school 

division, especially in terms of graduation rates. So we’re 

carefully watching what works. The minister together with 

education professionals and a panel that includes teachers is 

going to bring forward — and this is very much germane to the 

budget debate because we’ve got extra resources in the budget 

for standard-based achievement, the student achievement 

initiative, I should say, Mr. Deputy Speaker — he’s going to 

work with those groups. We have years now to make sure that 

we take what is working already, support it, and export it to 

other parts of the province. 

 

And I hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope that this new leader of 

the New Democratic Party, who should be less encumbered by 

their old ideological approach, I hope that they will look 

carefully at the results. I would ask him now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, through you, to consider meeting with these directors 

of education in those four divisions. Talk to them. Talk to them 

first before they oppose this in a blanket fashion, in an 

ideological way. Understand that this is not no child left behind. 

This is an initiative informed by education professionals, going 

to be resourced properly by the Government of Saskatchewan 

so that we can simply see better achievement for students, 

improved graduation rates. That’s what the education system 

should be all about. 

 

And though there are those who will oppose it, and maybe 

they’ll change their mind, but if they continue to oppose it, I’ll 

tell you this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s a big reason why I 

support the budget — we are moving forward with it. We will 

provide support to the Ministry of Education and school 

divisions. And we’re going to get to those kinds of results for 

all children in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So you know, when you look at the education budget, there are 

certainly operating increases there overall for school divisions. 

And there’s very significant capital investments that we’re 

making, Mr. Speaker, two new schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

two new schools — Langenburg and Gravelbourg — projects 

that the respective MLAs have worked on hard, the 

communities have worked on. We have I think 40 relocatables 

in the budget. Obviously these are transitional supports for 

education capital, but important because again we’re growing at 

a very fast rate. We want to be there for them. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we did also mention in the budget 

the fact that through SaskBuilds the minister responsible is 

going to be looking at doing more schools at once — bundling. 

And that brings us to P3s because again I go back to the 

original premise. I think a budget is a good reflection of what 

the government’s priorities are and how it will implement those 

priorities. And they’re also a reflection of where the opposition 

of the day might be. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when members breathlessly talk about 

P3s, the deputy leader and the current leader, they talk about 

them as though they’re not working anywhere in the world 

today. They’re not working in Canada. They talk about them as 

though they haven’t even talked to their federal counterpart. 

The federal New Democratic Party have specifically endorsed 

the option for P3s. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Now I know — and we give them credit — I know the hon. 

leader, the new leader of the NDP doesn’t always support Mr. 

Mulcair. And this is a good thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It took 

him a day or two on Keystone. He kind of . . . I don’t know. I 

don’t know what they had to check or who they had to phone 

because the first time on Keystone he was pretty unequivocal 

and more . . . It was pretty equivocal, I should say. More on that 

in a moment. But the next day he did come out and say, no we 

support Keystone and we don’t support Mulcair.  

 

But on this particular issue on P3s, we think Mr. Mulcair’s got 

it right. We think the federal NDP are saying, absolutely. This 

is part of one of the tools, one of the arrows you need in your 

quiver to actually address the infrastructure needs of a growing 

province. It doesn’t mean you move away from 

government-owned capital. It doesn’t mean you move away 

from cash flowing infrastructure projects in a more 

conventional way. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we need 10 

schools in short order and we know that bundling those schools 

has worked in Alberta and pencils out financially . . . As 

Conference Board of Canada and others have identified, it does 

pencil out in the interests of taxpayers. It wouldn’t be just 

wrong to not look at that option; it would be irresponsible to not 

look at the option of building, say, 10 schools at once and 

dealing with this challenge. 

 

But again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, notwithstanding the relative 

youth of now the front bench, the deputy leader and the new 

leader, they are just tied to old ideology. Even Mr. Mulcair is 

shaking the shackles of that old ideology when it comes to P3s. 

Even Thomas Mulcair, I would argue a fairly left wing New 

Democrat, his party has said P3s are part of the answer. They’re 

one of the pieces in the pie. But not the new leadership of the 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3035 

New Democratic Party here in the province of Saskatchewan 

who seem happy to, who seem happy to just abide by this old 

and tired ideology that, by the way, didn’t work for this 

province in the past And I can say most assuredly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it won’t work in the future. And that’s why we’re 

going to work hard to have them comfortably sitting to your left 

hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think a budget does say a lot about a 

government’s priorities. And I want to highlight a few things 

here in the budget if I may. You know, it was a tighter budget. 

We came in I think at 3.1 per cent increase in overall 

expenditures. And it is a balanced budget on the GRF [General 

Revenue Fund] and on the summary. Because in the budget as 

you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and as the deputy leader, the 

Finance critic would confirm, we did present the summary 

finances of the province. The Minister of Finance certainly did 

that on budget day. And in fact, we went beyond that. We did a 

little better. We actually presented the GRF as well, and we’re 

going to continue to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But within that balanced budget, within some of the difficult 

decisions we made . . . And I’ll highlight one of them in 

particular with the ethanol industry where we’ve decided to 

move away from a tax credit, a kind of sector-based focus, a 

sector-based subsidy. If that sounds familiar to members, it 

should. We also did that, by the way, with the natural resource 

tax credit where we reduced that. We also better focused the 

labour-sponsored venture capital program, also a tax credit, as it 

were, for those who are investing. 

 

By the way, we had a debate about that in the legislature 

yesterday. And there’s only two, well there’s two major players 

in the LVC [labour-sponsored venture capital] market right 

now. And it’s interesting. I think we’ll hear more about it a 

little bit later. But with only two players, you’d think the critic, 

before he asked questions of the Minister of Finance, would call 

both of them. It’s only the two calls after all. But he didn’t do 

that. He didn’t do that before he asked his questions about the 

changes the Minister of Finance has announced. And now I 

think he . . . Well we may hear a little bit later that he wasn’t 

right about that. And maybe that won’t surprise very many 

people. 

 

So within a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s worth 

noting that this side of the House has again increased the senior 

income plan in the province of Saskatchewan. This is an 

income program for . . . an assistance program, I beg your 

pardon, Mr. Speaker, for low-income seniors. This program has 

been around for a very long time. According to our quick 

review, it was around, this particular program, there to help 

seniors, was around for the 16 long and ponderous years of 

New Democratic government in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You may wonder why . . . You may wonder this point. You 

may wonder if the NDP in any one of those years where there 

was inflation — maybe the economy wasn’t that strong, but 

there’s inflation every year; it’s 1 or 2 or 3 per cent perhaps 

through that period of time on an annual basis — you may ask 

yourself, well surely then they would have increased the 

income assistance program for low-income seniors. Surely 

there would have been something, a binary increase, a per cent 

or one and a . . . Nothing, Mr. Speaker. Sixteen years of nothing 

for low-income seniors. This was the social democrats — right? 

— the social democrats who like to talk about low-income 

seniors, but they’re not actually there for low-income seniors, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we won the election in 2007. $3.2 million increase in this 

particular budget, $250 a month. That’s up 178 per cent since 

2008, Mr. Speaker. That’s a pretty significant lift. 

 

I think some of the members over there are saying, well we’re 

new; we’re new. Some of the members over are saying, well we 

weren’t here for those 16 years. We weren’t really a part of it. 

Oh, Mr. Speaker, yes, they were. They are a part of a party, and 

I’m sure they were volunteers in that party’s army that would, 

again, talk about these issues but not do anything about them. 

 

What else did we do within a tight but balanced budget? The 

seniors’ personal care home benefit increased, now $3.4 

million. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is an important one. The SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] increase, 

Saskatchewan assured income for the disabled, increased 

support by another $50 a month — by 2015, 4,200 more dollars 

per year for people with disabilities — more for singles, more 

for couples so they can find greater independence with a little 

bit more support so they can engage in the economy, so they 

can have the dignity of their own home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not ever from members opposite. In fact when that community 

simply asked members opposite, would you just actually 

change the program we’re under — because they were under 

the Saskatchewan assistance plan payment, welfare basically, 

and they said, it’s not quite a good fit for those of us in the 

disabled community — will you just change the name? No. 

Years and years of no didn’t cost . . . wouldn’t have cost them a 

dime, but they refused to do it. 

 

Our government was elected. We were grateful for the chance 

to lead. The minister of Social Services at the time said, 

absolutely we will do that, and we will call it SAID. 

 

And then in the last campaign under a new Social Services 

minister, we laid out a plan to actually and finally increase 

money for the disabled in this province. And that is also in this 

budget. And that is also a reflection of the priorities of a 

government that you might see in a particular budget. 

 

The hon. member is right when he, the new leader of the NDP, 

has raised Alzheimer’s in the past, and so has First Link 

directly with this government, with different ministers. 

Certainly we were talking about this for some time under 

different ministers. And this budget, Mr. Speaker, includes 

$350,000 for Alzheimer’s First Link services, and we think it’s 

an important step forward. This is a disease that affects our 

family, and we want to see these supports increased through the 

future. 

 

Transit assistance for the disabled, capital grant, $550,000 — 

again in a tight budget, Mr. Speaker, in a budget where we 

wanted to balance it but there wasn’t a lot of extra room. We 

made decisions, and those decisions are a reflection of the 

priorities of a government. 



3036 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, in 1989 my dad was involved in a volunteer 

committee in Swift Current, and he was involved in a lot of 

volunteer activities. He still is, not quite so much anymore. But 

he is still involved in his community. They identified the need 

for a transition . . . for a women’s shelter, for a family shelter in 

Swift Current. They worked with the then, I think it was, the 

Devine government to try to get some support for this particular 

shelter in Swift Current. And the Devine government came 

through. They provided some assistance, and this shelter has 

been running so very effectively and with great compassion 

ever since that date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we looked through the record of the, again, the 

NDP government and tried to determine where they may have 

opened another shelter because certainly there were needs in 

other parts of the province and, Mr. Speaker, we found none. 

You can go through Hansard, and you can find a lot of talk 

from members opposite, from those who say, well we’re all 

about the disadvantaged; this party’s all about helping those 

who are disadvantaged. Yes, and members may be laughing 

about it, but this is the record. This is their record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to stand in the Legislative 

Assembly today speaking in favour of a budget that is for the 

first time in the life of this province, since that shelter that my 

father was involved in in Swift Current, is opening up a . . . 

supporting the opening of a brand new one in Melfort, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think what members opposite are, I think what members are 

noting is that — and I hope they take special note of this 

because soon they’ll be asking the people for the chance to lead 

and govern this province — you can’t just talk about things. 

You can’t even just enter a budget debate and say, well there 

should’ve been more for this or less for that or we would’ve 

done . . . You’ve got to be able to demonstrate you have the 

capacity, fiscal capacity, or even a record of actually doing the 

things that you talk about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an increase to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 

a $12 million increase, up 8.6 per cent; 10 million more for the 

surgical wait times initiative, as well as the innovative home 

care pilot in Regina, for another $2 million.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, also in a tight budget, we’ve identified $3 

million that will go towards the joint task force with respect to 

our partnership with the First Nations, with the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. We’ve been working on this task 

force for some time. This particular group of women and men 

have been identifying again pilots that are working, projects in 

classrooms that are getting better results for First Nations 

students. And we’re going to get their report soon and very 

soon, Mr. Speaker, and when we do, we will be able to 

highlight those projects that work, that are bearing results. And 

we’ll now have money in the budget to invest in those projects 

and bring them to other parts of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can take a look at the operating funds, the 

grants that we provide to third parties, frankly in a very tight 

budget, and see there are increases. Where other provinces are 

giving zeros to those groups, there are increases. They’re 

almost all of them better than inflationary increases to those 

important third parties. 

In the case of municipalities, 11 per cent increase in terms of 

revenue sharing. And here again I think it is a reflection of the 

government’s priorities when, because of the formula 

established by this government, this partnership with the 

municipalities, revenue sharing is increasing another 11 per 

cent. It’s up over 100 per cent since we took over from 

members opposite. And here again this was one that the NDP 

liked to talk a lot about and actually never did. And now it’s 

happening for municipalities, and it’s also reflected in the 

budget that we debate today. 

 

From a capital standpoint, Mr. Speaker, we see big increases. I 

noted at the top of the speech that our growth plan calls for a 

robust infrastructure investment program, and we followed 

through with that over our first term in government. And this 

budget is no exception. I think we’re close to 8 per cent 

increase in overall capital expenditures for the province. And so 

that means highways and that means two new schools, and it 

means important health care projects moving forward. The 

hospital that members from Moose Jaw have been working so 

hard will go forward in that community. The Saskatchewan 

Hospital in North Battleford will continue to move forward, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to get those pieces done. And in 

highways we’ve seen just significant increases year over year, 

another historic budget in highways, Mr. Speaker, because we 

understand that a growing province needs a good transportation 

system, and we’re going to be continuing to invest in highways 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

So all of that within a balanced budget. All of it done balanced 

on the GRF side, balanced on the summary financial statement 

side because we report in both as we’ve already noted, as the 

minister’s noted. We go that extra step of reporting in both of 

those areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what have those who rate the fiscal probity of a provincial 

government, of any organization, what are they saying about 

the province of Saskatchewan? I’m always interested in what 

the Finance critic and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition has 

to say about the Minister of Finance’s budgets. I enjoy the 

debates. They have good debates. Some of them are quiet, and 

some of them are not so quiet, but I enjoy them. I like listening 

to his questions. And often he’ll give his opinion on the budget, 

and that’s important. That’s part of his job. 

 

But I hope he’s okay with the fact that when it comes to 

actually measuring the fiscal health of Saskatchewan, when it 

comes to determining the fiscal probity of Saskatchewan, that 

we would look to those who are in the credit rating business 

first before we might be listening to the deputy leader, as 

earnest as he is, that we might also look to advice from the 

economists at the various chartered banks in the country. 

 

So here’s a few of them. The Bank of Montreal said, and I 

quote, “As expected, this is a largely stay-the-course budget. 

With firm economic growth, persistent surpluses . . .” Persistent 

surpluses. That doesn’t sound at all like what the Finance critic 

or the Leader of the Opposition just said. And yet this is an 

economist that’s . . . Anyway “. . . persistent surpluses and low 

debt levels . . .”That also doesn’t sound at all like the rhetoric 

we hear from members opposite. And the quote continues, “. . . 

Saskatchewan continues to earn its AAA stripes,” Mr. Speaker. 

And that of course is a reference to, that of course is a reference 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3037 

to the fact that there’s obviously credit ratings, each province 

has a credit rating, and never in the history of Saskatchewan 

have we ever been AAA. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Janice MacKinnon, who now the members don’t like — they 

don’t like Janice MacKinnon — Janice MacKinnon I think was 

in the ’90s when all the provinces were running, were dealing 

with big deficits, all of the provinces. We had one that was 

more acute here, absolutely. But when she faced that particular 

budget, Mr. Speaker, those budgets, those series of budgets, she 

became the first Finance minister in the Dominion of Canada to 

balance the budget in that era of governments trying to wrestle 

these fiscal challenges down to the ground . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes. They’re not clapping now because they 

don’t, they don’t like Janice MacKinnon anymore. Maybe it’s 

because she was about balanced budgets. Maybe it’s because 

she liked our surgical wait times initiative. 

 

I think it’s because she thinks we should probably use private 

clinics within a public system if it actually lowers wait times. 

But not these fresh-faced, new leaders of the NDP. They’re 

here. They give speeches. And they absolutely want nothing to 

do with innovation in the health care system. They want 

nothing to do with what even Janice MacKinnon recognized as 

important changes to deliver better health care within a public 

system, by the way, changes in terms of private clinics that are 

today in the province reducing wait times to historic levels, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re not interested in that. 

 

Anyway, so I was talking about Janice MacKinnon. And she 

really did a lot of heavy lifting to get the province to where it is 

even today because she got the books balanced again. And then 

successive governments were able to do some good work there 

as well. But, Mr. Speaker, what never happened, what never 

happened . . . Although that was good work — this is no but, 

this is an and. That was good work and there was no real, there 

was changes to the credit rating but we never ever got to AAA. 

How did we ever get to AAA, Mr. Speaker? That’s the highest 

rating you can have. How did we get to AAA? Well it was 

because there was an election in 2007. And yes we had some 

good luck in terms of revenue, but then what did the 

government do with that good luck? We paid down the general 

debt of the province by 44 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We balanced 

the budget every single year. That’s what we did and that’s 

what we’re doing this year. And the response from the credit 

rating agencies was to say, man we’re going to go AAA in 

Saskatchewan now. 

 

So we, unlike the New Democrats, we will acknowledge Janice 

MacKinnon and we will be grateful for the work that Janice 

MacKinnon did to help us get down this road. And we hope 

now that the party that used to formally claim Janice 

MacKinnon will say, and now to the credit of this outfit we’ve 

taken the next step, we’ve paid off general debt, we’re at a 

AAA credit rating here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What else were some of the banks saying? “Saskatchewan is 

expected to be the only province for fiscal ’12-13 reporting 

black ink. Its budget today projects a $54 million surplus to the 

General Revenue Fund.” That’s Scotiabank.  

 

Overall, given its relative economic and fiscal 

outperformance and sterling credit rating, Saskatchewan 

boasts a strong following in debt capital markets, where its 

bonds can be expected to continue to trade at a notable 

premium to more-indebted provincial peers.  

 

That was CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce]. 

 

Never heard that from the Finance critic. Never heard it from 

the Leader of the Opposition. But economists at banks are 

saying so. Here’s the Conference Board Outlook 2013: another 

bright point for Saskatchewan’s economy is the province’s 

fiscal position and a string of balanced budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, budgets are a reflection on the priority of a 

government. And we’ve made some difficult decisions here. 

The members of the opposition have given in their speeches a 

long list of things they wanted more money for. The Leader of 

the Opposition says, don’t look for efficiencies in health, 

actually even though when he was campaigning for the leader, 

he said that he would look for efficiencies in health. One of the 

problems I think he’s having there in terms of just the number 

of positions on any given issue. But they’ve said don’t look for 

efficiencies in health; give more money to universities; give 

more money to all the education partners. 

 

They’ve identified in a speech a long list of wants and needs 

and demands that the NDP would like to give to the people of 

the province in the budget but, Mr. Speaker, what they are 

missing is this basic fact, one that was never lost on Janice 

MacKinnon. The best way to ensure sustainability of quality of 

life, the best way to ensure government can afford to make 

those key investments going forward in the decades — not the 

months, but the decades — ahead is to balance your books and 

not borrow any money that actually will have to be paid back 

by your kids. They seem to have forgotten that basic fact. They 

have seemingly ignored and rejected what Romanow and 

MacKinnon knew and what they practised. 

 

We saw, Mr. Speaker, in the federal campaign — now granted 

that was when Mr. Lingenfelter was the leader; now we have a 

new leader — we saw a platform that had $5 billion worth of 

promises there. That would have meant massive deficits and 

rising debt for Saskatchewan. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that 

included some ideas we didn’t agree with like a special deal for 

First Nations with respect to resource revenue sharing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a chance in the budget debate, the 

perfect opportunity in the budget debate for the brand new 

Leader of the NDP to say, those ideas were wrong even though 

I helped write them, even though I wrote the tree booklet. That 

was it; rooted and growing, I think it was called. Even though, 

even though he could say . . . Yes here it is right here. I won’t 

hold it up, but there it is. 

 

You know, by the way, by the way, when we . . . By the way, 

when we made this point to the Leader of the Opposition that 

he wrote this book, he wrote the Lingenfelter book, I think he 

said, well you’re trying to tie me to Dwain Lingenfelter, and 

I’m only 34. To which we said, happy birthday. But the bottom 

line is, he wrote the booklet. Then out in the scrum the next 

day, his staff were saying he actually didn’t write the booklet. 

He just signed the transmittal letter on the booklet. He didn’t 



3038 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

write the policies that Mr. Lingenfelter ran on, the $5 billion in 

campaign promises . . . at least it helped inform that. He only 

signed it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we were noting on his leadership campaign 

website . . . It’s excellent. I’m glad we’re screen capturing it 

before they take it down because it was on that website where 

he said, we need more efficiencies in the health system. And 

then a few weeks later he doesn’t agree. But here’s what it also 

says. The member’s officials were saying, no, no, no, no, the 

leader didn’t write the tree booklet; he just signed it. But here’s 

what it says on the now Leader of the Opposition’s website 

under “Stronger democracy, long-term thinking and smarter 

decision.” There’s a line here that says, “But as Cam wrote in A 

Rooted and Growing Vision in 2010 . . .” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is . . . And he should . . . This 

is a chance as a new leader to just say, yes I did write that, and 

yes we had $5 billion in promises. And we had policies that 

weren’t right for the province — special deals for one particular 

group on resource revenue sharing. And we’ve heard from the 

people because now there’s only nine of us; we heard them loud 

and clear. They rejected this. They want us to move more in the 

direction of the party that has more members, in other words, 

fiscal responsibility. 

 

But they haven’t done that. He has not done that. He didn’t take 

the budget debate as an opportunity to say, we were wrong. I 

think the NDP are incapable of it. They blame a snowstorm on 

election day. They blame the old leader. They blame . . . I’m 

not sure all the other things that they blame. 

 

Part of it was the ideas that they were offering, Mr. Speaker. 

They weren’t in line with what Saskatchewan people want. 

Saskatchewan people do want more money for post-secondary. 

They want more money for education. They would like to see 

more investments in health care. They want to see more in 

highways. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? The people of this 

province, first and foremost their prime directive is, live within 

your means. Balance the budget. And these members haven’t 

heard that yet. 

 

So I think they’ve got some challenges over there. Obviously 

they’re going to vote against this budget. That’s pretty clear. 

And they’ll vote against the next budget and the one after that, 

and they’ll oppose the things the government’s doing. I sat in 

opposition; that’s certainly part of the role. But as we get closer 

to an election, now that the leadership question is settled, 

they’re going to actually have to start proposing some things. 

They’re going to have to say, yes we wouldn’t do that but we 

would do this, or we’re going to spend all this much more 

money on all these areas and here’s where we’re going to get it 

from. We’re going to get it from tax increases, maybe, or 

they’re going to go back to the old hobby horse of royalties. I 

don’t know what they’re going to do, but they’re going to need 

to be able to go before the people of the province and say, you 

should vote for us because we’re offering this particular plan 

for the province’s future. 

 

And from what we’ve seen so far from their interventions in 

this particular budget debate, I don’t think it’s going to wash 

with Saskatchewan people. We’ve seen some research that that 

might already be the case, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this 

province understand the importance of investment in quality of 

life, but they also understand the way to keep that for the long, 

long term, the way to make sure that our kids and their kids and 

their kids after that can make some decisions, can invest in 

those important quality-of-life areas, is that we are fiscally 

responsible today, is that we balance the budget. 

 

And as tempting as it might be for a new leader or for any of us 

to promise everything to everyone, Mr. Speaker, it is a recipe 

for disaster that we have been down in this province. And the 

members on this side of the House have learned that history. 

Members on that side of the House lived it, some of them. Their 

party lived it. You’d think they would not have forgotten it. But 

they have forgotten the importance of fiscal responsibility, of a 

responsible plan and vision presented to the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll just close with this. A budget is most 

assuredly a reflection of the government that presented it. And 

in this budget we see strategic investments in infrastructure. We 

see investments for those who are most vulnerable in our 

society. We see, Mr. Speaker, increases in health. We see 

increases in education and still more increases in 

post-secondary. A new student residence here at the University 

of Regina, new hospitals, new schools — Mr. Speaker, we see 

all of that. We see a priority that we have placed on those who 

need our help more than anyone else. But above all, we see that 

there is fiscal responsibility in Saskatchewan. And it is a 

reflection of our priorities. 

 

Other provinces are going down a different road. Other 

provinces have listened to those economists who say, John 

Maynard Keynes said you should deficit budget at a time like 

this. The problem is, it isn’t John Maynard Keynes or — well, 

he’s dead — but other economists that actually have to get you 

out of that challenge. It’s politicians. We have to try to make 

the decisions then to get out of a deficit if we would follow 

along the track of the NDP because that’s where they would 

take us. We would be in a deficit. 

 

We have to balance the budget. We’ve got to make sure we’re 

not borrowing some future generation’s money to take care of 

current challenges. We need to make the decisions that we have 

made in this particular budget, Mr. Speaker. It is a reflection . . . 

The budget is a reflection of this government’s priorities: key 

investments, the strongest economy in the country, and a 

balanced budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it is also a reflection 

— this debate, the response to the debate from the NDP — on 

the opposition, and it’s a reflection of a new leader but the same 

old NDP. It’s a reflection, Mr. Speaker, on them. We have 

somebody brand new now who is sitting across the way but 

who is tied to these tired old ideologies that even leaders and 

stalwarts in his party like Janice MacKinnon and Thomas 

Mulcair have thrown off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so in that context this side of the House is encouraged. 

We’re encouraged to move forward, to engage members 

opposite in a meaningful debate. And most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, we are motivated. We are determined to continue to 

work to earn the support of the people of this province. We will 

never ever, ever take that for granted, and we will remember in 

the last election, even if members won’t on the other side, that 

the people of this province said, live within your means; keep 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3039 

the Saskatchewan advantage; balance the budget. We’re leading 

now; we should continue to lead; don’t go back to the ways of 

deficit budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard that message in the election. The 

Minister of Finance was clearly paying attention because that is 

precisely the kind of budget he’s presented in this House to the 

people of the province, that’s being heralded across the country. 

And that’s why — I don’t really need to hear him wrap things 

up — I’ll be supporting the budget. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Minister of Finance, I 

must inform the Assembly that under rule 30(7), the Minister of 

Finance is about to close the debate. Are there any other 

members who wish to speak? I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour to be able to enter the 

debate again as far as the budget of 2013-14. As everyone in the 

Assembly — my colleagues, members opposite — they heard 

me for almost an hour back last Wednesday and I’m glad to see 

that there is a time limit, Mr. Speaker, and that you will shut me 

down long before 20 minutes probably but at least . . . 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, I do want to just wrap up with a couple of 

comments. First of all, as I indicated on budget day and the 

Premier has indicated and many in this House have indicated, to 

be able to introduce a budget on behalf of a growing province, 

on behalf of so many initiatives that are presented by members, 

by individual MLAs and ministers, it takes a lot of time and it 

takes a lot of initiatives. And I want to thank all of the staff, 

first of all in my office here in the Legislative Building, but also 

over in the finance building. My deputy minister, Clare Isman, 

this is the first opportunity I have had as Minister of Finance to 

work with her on this first budget, and I want to thank her and 

all of those individuals, and I’m not going to name them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank all of my colleagues, not only 

on this side of the House but also on the other side of the 

House, for entering into the debate, putting forward positions 

that are somewhat contradictory because, Mr. Speaker, I think 

on this side of the House we’ve indicated very clearly how the 

people of the province have reacted, have reacted to a very 

positive budget. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for a few minutes I just want to enter into 

the record comments by a few people. Now there are literally 

dozens and dozens and dozens of reactions by individuals and 

companies across Saskatchewan and across all of Canada for 

that matter. But I want to enter into the record a few comments. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, from Shantel Lipp, the Saskatchewan 

Heavy Construction Association, I quote: 

 

Today’s budget announcement shows the government is 

listening. Infrastructure investment tops the list of public 

priorities. 

 

Second one, Mr. Speaker, from Christian Braid, the Greater 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce: 

Achieving a balanced budget and continuing on a path 

towards a productive agenda is remarkable compared to 

other Canadian provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from Colin Craig from the Canadian Taxpayers 

Federation: “. . . [Saskatchewan’s] budget released today — 

you’re not going to find a better one in Canada this year.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, from CIBC: 

 

Saskatchewan’s relatively strong fiscal position means 

that social programs will likely see proportionately larger 

investments than in some provinces still in the red. 

Saskatchewan will also enjoy a fiscal benefit in the form 

of declining debt charges — a dividend linked to both 

earlier debt paydowns and an extremely low interest rate 

environment . . . 

 

That’s from the CIBC. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from Marilyn Braun-Pollon, the vice-president of 

CFIB . . . And I also indicated this morning, Mr. Speaker, in 

question period, that today CFIB across all of Canada has 

indicated that Saskatchewan businesses are the most optimistic 

in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. But in reference to CFIB’s 

comment about the Saskatchewan budget, and I quote, “While 

other provinces face massive deficits, we’re pleased the . . . 

Saskatchewan budget is balanced, holds the line on education 

property taxes, invests in roads/infrastructure, training 

opportunities . . .” That’s the quote from CFIB. 

 

From the president of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology]: 

 

That’s great news for us for sure. The new budget and the 

announcement fits very well with the province’s growth 

plan. SIAST supports that growth plan, particularly its 

focus on students and Aboriginal people, which resonates 

with SIAST. That’s what we’re all about so we’re very 

pleased with the budget and the announcement of 3.1 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from Swift Current, from the CEO [chief 

executive officer] of Great Plains College: 

 

I was pleasantly surprised at the way the Ministry of 

Advanced Education and the Economy stepped up with 

2.1% for the regional colleges. Frankly I was expecting 

the news to be worse but it was not . . . A lot of provinces 

are cutting in post secondary education, including Alberta 

and B.C., and Saskatchewan is not one of them and that is 

noteworthy. 

 

The end of the quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many, but I’m going to conclude with 

one quote and that’s from the CEO of Habitat for Humanity. 

Habitat for Humanity has been moving forward, you know, just 

literally project after project after project, in communities right 

across the province, Mr. Speaker. And we decided this year that 

the $1 million that government provided to Habitat for 

Humanity for the construction of 20 homes on average per year 

wasn’t sufficient, so we doubled that money, Mr. Speaker. We 



3040 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

doubled it from 1 million to 2 million. And this is the quote 

from the CEO of Habitat for Humanity, Dennis Coutts: 

 

We are the envy of the country . . . I applaud the 

Government of Saskatchewan for keeping their 

commitment for more housing to help low-income, 

hard-working Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in light of all of those comments and many, 

many more that have been in the press, including some 

comments by the journalist Murray Mandryk who made some 

comments . . . I won’t put those on the record, but they were 

very, very positive, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank him for 

that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the question has to be asked. If that’s the 

reaction by dozens and dozens of people, so what was in the 

budget then? Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, when the 

revenue was projected to be at $11.61 billion and expenses are 

estimated to be $11.54 billion, that means you have a surplus, 

Mr. Speaker. That means you have a surplus of $64.8 million 

and it is balanced. And, Mr. Speaker, it is also balanced on the 

summary financial statements. And I’m going to talk a little bit 

about that right away because, Mr. Speaker, when you 

introduce all of the different agencies, the different boards, the 

different things that are going on in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we too have a summary financial surplus and 

that is going to be $149.8 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues have highlighted the 

specific things that will be done by different ministries that will 

assist people in constituencies. And the Premier today, just 

before I am up on my feet, I think did a tremendous review. 

And I want to thank him for the leadership that he’s provided to 

me, to our cabinet, and to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. You have to take a look at the current premiers across 

the province and you note, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan continues to be the leader in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think that’s a great compliment to him as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very quickly, we focused on many areas in our 

budget but some critical ones are dealing with the labour force. 

Who will make up the labour force of the future? The students 

that are currently either in our grade K to 12 system or in our 

post-secondary system. And I’ve already read to you how, you 

know, the SIAST has reacted. Well what we did, Mr. Speaker, 

is we allocated $20 million more, or in other words 20 per cent 

more, to raise the total now to $117.4 million. This money is 

direct support to student programs. 

 

One of the programs that we introduced when we became 

government and we weren’t sure whether or not this was going 

to be the program that would meet with the successes that it 

has, and that’s the graduate retention program. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that it is meeting with tremendous 

success because this year we had to add $12.2 million for a total 

now of $63.9 million to the graduate retention program. What 

does that do, Mr. Speaker? That provides any student in the 

province of Saskatchewan who gains employment in this 

province the opportunity to be able to receive, by way of refund 

and rebate, $20,000 of their tuition monies, $63.9 million, Mr. 

Speaker. And as they would say in Telemiracle, it’s only going 

higher, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, in health, we know that health over the last 

number of years has taken up a very significant amount of the 

budget. In fact this year the health budget is $4.8 billion, which 

is about 42 per cent of the budget. Mr. Speaker, again an 

increase of 4.5 per cent to regional health authorities — $131.8 

million more to the 12 regional health authorities. So it’s 

interesting listening to the members opposite talk about cuts. 

Mr. Speaker, there were no cuts. There were additional dollars 

provided to those institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the area of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 

in the last six years, over 90 per cent more dollars to the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. An increase this year, very 

significant increase. And we know that that’s an agency that’s 

going to continue to be a focus for our government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talked about housing. We talked about the fact 

that in Saskatchewan we do need . . . At the University of 

Regina, we do need a new housing complex and that’s why $10 

million to make sure that that project gets under way. $17 

million for enrolment pressures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my days of course, or many of my days in my 

previous life were spent in education, Mr. Speaker. And I used 

to, as a member of a school board, have to deal with declining 

enrolments year after year after year. You know, the 

government, when the NDP were in government, their plan was 

for decline and non-growth. Mr. Speaker, our plan is to ensure 

that we grow this province. That’s why our population now, 

1,089,807 call Saskatchewan home, Mr. Speaker. They call it 

home because 82,000 people have moved in. We have, for the 

first time in a long time, enrolment pressure. It’s a challenge. 

It’s a challenge of growth, but it’s a great challenge to have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s why there’s 20.2 million spent on 301 

pre-kindergarten programs. Fifteen more than we had last year, 

Mr. Speaker. That is why we’re spending $120 million — 120, 

Mr. Speaker — in this year alone. That’s the kinds of numbers 

the NDP opposite can not fathom, because of course their 

commitment to capital in their final four or five years was 

extremely small, Mr. Speaker — 23 million, 26 million per 

year. This year alone, 120 million to ensure that the schools that 

were announced last year, the new schools in Gravelbourg and 

Langenburg, are going to move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a quick comment about highways. As the Premier 

indicated and the Minister of Highways, a very significant 

budget. But I do want to talk about one component of that and 

that’s called the economic corridor program — 63.6 million for 

economic corridors. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see the 

completion of the twinning of Highway 11. We’re going to see 

the passing lanes that are going to be built on Highway 10 

between Balgonie and Fort Qu’Appelle. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to see the Estevan bypass move forward and we’re going 

to see the Regina west bypass move forward as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, has been something, as the 

Premier talked about, has been something that municipalities 

have looked forward to for years. And now they’re finally 

seeing the result of that formula we have in place. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not too long ago we had property tax revolts in this 

province because there was a significant impact on property 



March 28, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3041 

owners, that the former government, the NDP, downloaded, 

downloaded, and downloaded onto the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan expecting that that was just an endless pot that 

they could rely on. Mr. Speaker, we didn’t do that. And that’s 

why this year alone, 11 per cent increase to municipal revenue 

sharing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things we did this year is we have 

something called the municipal roads for the economy program, 

MREP. MREP has had an increase of $2 million, increasing it 

from 23.5 to $25.5 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of my final comments I’d like to make, Mr. 

Speaker, is in the area of debt. On page 53 of this document, 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about two kinds of debt. I want to very 

quickly put on the record when it says this: “Crown corporation 

debt is divided into two components: Crown corporation 

general debt and government business enterprise specific debt.” 

Mr. Speaker, our Crowns are going to continue to borrow 

money, continue to meet the challenge of a growing province, 

continuing to ensure that there are hookups, not only SaskTel 

hookups, but SaskPower and SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing that the government 

members opposite don’t recognize is that government business 

enterprises are self-sufficient government organizations that 

have the financial and operating authority to sell goods and 

services to individuals and organizations outside government as 

their principle activity. Amounts borrowed specifically for 

these enterprises are disclosed separately from other 

government debt because they are expected to be repaid from 

cash flows generated by these business enterprises, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last year, the last year of the NDP, the last full 

year, 2006-2007, I’m going to give you a couple of numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. And this is the ratio, this is the public debt ratio 

and it’s for the government general public debt. As I’ve 

indicated, it is down from 6.8 to 3.8. And of course we talk 

about Crown corporation debt. In 2006-07 the total amount was 

23.8 per cent; government general debt, 15.9; Crown 

corporation public debt, 7.9 per cent. Mr. Speaker, projected for 

this year, the total amount of debt, 12.6. That compares to 23.8. 

 

In the area of government debt, as I indicated, that old number 

back in the NDP days was 15.9. Today it’s 4.8 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. And on the Crown side, because the member opposite, 

the critic rises often in this Assembly to criticize the fact that 

Crowns indeed are growing in the amount of monies that they 

need to meet. As I indicated, in 2006-07, 7.9 per cent of the 

GDP [gross domestic product] was for Crown corporation 

public debt; today 7.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. In fact smaller 

number in comparison to the growth of this province. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I make no apology for the fact that the Crowns are 

going to continue to move forward, that the Crowns are going 

to continue to deliver the kinds of services that they’re expected 

to deliver, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue to ensure that 

that of course continues to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, the summary financial statement, 

which is included in the budget, indicates that on a basis where 

we introduce the not-for-profit insurance groups — the 

Workers’ Compensation Board, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, 

the auto fund, all of the Crown corporations, the regional health 

authorities, the school boards, regional colleges, Mr. Speaker 

— and I could go on and on and on about the two pages of 

information that’s there, we will have a surplus, Mr. Speaker, in 

the summary financial statement. 

 

[12:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that I will be 

supporting the budget. And I want to thank all the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan for encouraging not only our 

government but encouraging one another, encouraging the 

businesses, the entrepreneurs in this province to move forward, 

ignore the NDP, and build Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment to the budget motion moved by the member for 

Regina Rosemont, seconded by the member for Athabasca: 

 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

disagrees with the government for tabling a credit card 

budget that pushes costs on future generations, hurts 

health care, fails students and schools, rolls back the 

clock on environmental progress, denies transparency, 

and relies on short-sighted privatization schemes. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The nays have it. The question before the 

Assembly is that, moved by the Minister of Finance, seconded 

by the member for Saskatoon Greystone: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:33 until 12:34.] 

 



3042 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2013 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 46] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Harpauer Toth 

Huyghebaert Doherty Marchuk 

Reiter McMillan Heppner 

Harrison Wyant Tell 

Weekes Elhard Hart 

Bjornerud Brkich Hutchinson 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Campeau 

Wilson Norris Ross 

Kirsch Michelson Doke 

Cox Merriman Jurgens 

Steinley Hickie Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Parent 

Docherty   

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 8] 

 

Broten Belanger Wotherspoon 

McCall Forbes Chartier 

Sproule Nilson  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the budget motion, 46; 

those opposed, 8. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. The motion is carried. 

 

I wish to inform the House that there will be a photographer 

present. As well, the Administrator, the Chief Justice John Klebuc 

is here for Royal Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 12:38 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 

took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 

following bill.] 

 

His Honour the Administrator: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly at its present session has passed a bill which in the 

name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to which 

bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the bill is as follows: 

 

Bill No. 88 - The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2013 

 

His Honour the Administrator: — In Her Majesty’s name, I 

assent to this bill. 

 

[His Honour the Administrator retired from the Chamber at 

12:40.] 

 

The Speaker: — You may be seated. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m., April the 8th. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:41.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3017 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3017 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3024 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3024 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3017 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3017 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Passover and Easter Celebrations 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3017 

 World Autism Day 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3018 

 Abe Apesis Memorial Hockey Tournament 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3018 

 Saskatchewan Athletes Attend National Assessment Camp 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3018 

 Heritage Architecture Excellence Awards 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3018 

 Regina Resident Named Citizen of the Year 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3019 

 A Time for Reflection, Celebration, and Forgiveness 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3019 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Surgical Wait Times 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3019 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3019 

 Potential Spring Flooding 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3020 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3021 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3021 

 Decision Regarding Film Employment Tax Credit 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3021 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3021 

 Provincial Budget and Financial Management 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3022 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3023 

 Performance of Government 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3023 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3024 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3024 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3025 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3031 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3039 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 3042 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3042 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


