




















































Hansard: November 25, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 18B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2013, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4199 

 November 25, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, adjourned debates 

will resume. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 100 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to stand again and continue my remarks on Bill No. 

100, An Act to Amend The Assessment Management Agency 

Act, and I appreciate the opportunity. I may repeat some of the 

things I wanted to say because there’s some things that I want 

to really reinforce. And I think that it’s important, as I said, that 

assessment is one of those things that eyes may glaze over when 

we start to talk about this. This may be one of the more difficult 

ones, so we don’t nod off, fall out of our chair. But it’s an 

important one. It’s critically important because this is how we 

get things done. Maybe if I talk long enough about this we’ll all 

fall . . . [inaudible] . . . but I don’t know. 

 

But at any rate, this is an important topic, Mr. Speaker. I do 

want to say that because this is how we get . . . this is one of the 

most important vehicles that we have in terms of getting the 

work that we want to see done in our province. And whether it’s 

in the education system or with the municipal level, it’s critical 

that the job gets done and we have the resources to do it. 

 

And people have high expectations, and rightfully so. We 

should have a high expectation of our education system and 

work that gets done in the schools and our province. And that’s 

only reasonable throughout the 100-plus years of our history of 

Saskatchewan that we’ve come to expect that. We’ve come to 

expect that, and we’ve evolved to a state where we rely heavily 

on the Assessment Management Agency, often referred to as 

SAMA, the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency. 

 

I wonder why that’s left out of the Act title, actually when it 

probably should have been called the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency Act. I’m not sure why they left that out 

because we do refer to SAMA and SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities]. They all have the S in it, 

so I’m not sure why that’s not there. 

 

But at any rate, we have work to do at our municipal level. And 

whether that’s roads . . . We know how important roads are in 

Saskatchewan when it comes to transportation, both in terms of 

recreation or our personal use, whether it’s going to the library, 

going to the rink, going to our work. Roads are critically 

important, critically important when it comes to getting our 

goods to market. And we know that. I mean we know that on all 

our roads, but particularly in rural Saskatchewan, roads are 

huge, huge issues. 

 

Roads, health care, the other goods and services that 

municipalities deliver — whether that includes police service, 

protective services, fire services — all of these things have to 

be paid for. And there are other things we just take for granted, 

whether that be library services, recreational services, our rinks, 

our baseball diamonds. All of those things we just take for 

granted. 

 

So all of this happens because we have to pay property taxes. 

But I’ll get to the point . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You 

know, I did that, Mr. Speaker. There were people in the 

audience earlier, before 5, said it didn’t seem people were 

listening to you. And I said, I think maybe they were hanging 

on every word I was saying, particularly when . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And they said I know they’re listening to me. 

They’re acting like they’re not. They’ll read about it later. Or 

maybe if I just say one thing, all of a sudden, things will flare 

up. Obviously sometimes people do listen to the most 

interesting parts, I guess, the things that really matter in the 

speech at hand. 

 

And so that’s why this Act is so critically important. And I 

know it’s also important, so when we talk about the levels of 

government, whether it be municipal or the education sector 

who receive the funding, but it’s critically important to those 

people who actually pay the taxes, pay the property taxes, that 

their assessments are fair, they’re done well, they’re done 

professionally, and there’s some reasonable way to question 

how the assessment’s done. And so that’s why it’s important the 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency or SAMA has 

the resources to do it. 

 

So as the minister talked about he had several reasons to do the 

bill. The first of course was that the “. . . repeal provisions 

relating to the 65/35 per cent split sharing of SAMA funding 

responsibility between the province and municipalities.” So this 

will be interesting to see how that plays out. 

 

“Second, to make related financial amendments that provide 

SAMA greater flexibility respecting increases to municipal 

requisitions, provide timelines that are achievable . . .” and 

making sure the agency is properly funded and that it’s 

efficient. That’s straightforward. 

 

“Third, to make miscellaneous amendments of non-financial 

nature.” And of course that’s to “. . . better reflect the agency’s 

present roles, responsibilities, practices, and respond to the 

change in responsibilities of the ministries of Government 

Relations and Education respecting the education funding 

system.” 

 

And we’ve had . . . I made comments earlier because we were 

curious if there were flags going up that there’s more to come 

down the line in terms of those kind of changes. And we’d be 

curious about that and need to know how significant they are. 



4200 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

Are they tweaking the system or are there major overhauls in 

the works? I don’t know. We need to be aware of that. And so 

we’ll have questions about that in terms of the changing 

responsibilities that he alluded to. What does he mean by them? 

 

And of course then he talks about the government having a 

direct interest in the delivery of the services in a timely, 

accurate, professional, consistent way and ensuring public 

confidence is there in the property assessment taxation system. 

 

So I think that’s very accurate. That’s very true. But not only 

does the government have that, so do the people who are paying 

the taxes, people who’ve been here for many years, many 

generations, and those who are just coming now and those who 

are maybe buying a home for the first time. And, of course, 

assessment is something that they may or may not ask about or 

may or may not understand. And it’s important that this kind of 

work be done in a way that’s clear and understandable. And as I 

said earlier today, it’d be interesting to take a plain language or 

plain English approach to some of this stuff so that people can 

understand this because these are some of the highest taxes that 

people will pay. And many people talk about how this is 

probably one of the most visible taxes that you pay. 

 

And particularly now, when we’re having more and more of our 

wages being — and any kind of income — put directly into our 

banks, and we’re not really as aware maybe as we used to be 

when we would get our cheques and our banks and our 

statements and we would know what our deductions were. That 

may not be the case with a lot of people now. Their wages go 

directly into their bank accounts and they’re not aware, whereas 

property taxes is something I think a lot of people, a lot of 

people think about. 

 

I do want to take one moment to talk about the . . . And I’m not 

sure about this and whether this will provide some conversation 

in committee. I think it’s an important area, and it’s one that 

we’ve been hearing a lot about when we know that there are 

stakeholders that take a look at what’s happening across 

Canada. And they look at other jurisdictions where they’re able 

to do their assessments much more quickly sometimes. 

 

I understand Alberta may be even doing it once a year. And 

they are much more flexible and on top of the growth of the 

property values, and they do it in a much more transparent, 

accountable way. People know what their properties are worth 

and how much they’re paying for taxes, whereas we do it every 

four years. And then sometimes you’re faced with very large 

property tax increases or the potential for that. Sometimes it’s 

interesting because you think you’re going to get a big property 

tax increase because you’ve read your assessment, but there’s 

another step in between and it adds more confusion. 

 

And so I think this is going to be an interesting conversation 

because this Act is open. And I know that there are stakeholders 

that would be very interested in having some input in this. So I 

think over the next few months as we do our job as the 

opposition, asking those questions and casting our net among 

the stakeholders, and I can think of one. The chamber of 

commerce has often raised this issue about doing annual 

property assessments and how they could be facilitated and 

what that might mean in a Saskatchewan context. I think that’s 

something that we should be looking at, taking a look at the 

pros and cons. What would be the cost implications? How 

efficient would this be? What would be the impact on the 

taxpayer, the property owner, and in the implications of that? 

 

I think that’s something we need to do. And so when I looked 

through the explanation notes and it wasn’t as clear . . . Okay, 

there you go, I’m on. Okay. My voice was fading there. Thank 

you . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The aerial people cutting me 

off, no. 

 

I think that it’s critically important that we take a look at that, 

and when we have the discussion in the spring about this bill, 

that we take some time to discuss those issues. And I wouldn’t 

be surprised if we get some correspondence back saying that 

this is something we should be raising in the House because 

with The Assessment Management Agency Act open, this would 

be the time to have that conversation, I think. Now it may be 

that the Minister of Government Relations can correct me on 

that and say that no, there’s a better time and it’s actually in the 

works. Maybe they have a plan for that. We don’t know, but I 

think this is really critically important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that many of my colleagues will want 

to have a chance to enter into the debate on this. There will be 

comments that they will want to make. We want to make sure 

that there is proper consultation and that the government is 

actually listening to them. They did say, they referenced it as 

the SARM and SUMA had no objections. Our question is, did 

they have other suggestions? Maybe they had other suggestions. 

And how were they dealt with or were they dismissed in a 

summary fashion? That happens way too often, Mr. Speaker. 

And we need to make sure that their concerns are dealt with and 

that’s really, really important. 

 

You know and, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that our leader 

has said if it makes sense to do this we will support it, and if it’s 

the common sense thing to do, then we’re there. But the goal 

will be to make sure it’s open, transparent, and accountable. 

Unfortunately we haven’t seen that an awful lot from this 

government, and we’ve seen them be secretive and dismissive. 

 

And as I said earlier, the biggest concerns we have, we’ve been 

talking a lot about the P3s [public–private partnership] and the 

funding of that, how that will be played out. And how that, you 

know, connects with property taxes because we do not want to 

see future generations saddled with a bill that really we should 

be paying for ourselves. The province is doing well. This is a 

time to get the job done, and we think we have the resources to 

do that if we set the priorities right. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, people are doing their part. They’re working 

hard to buy their first home, that kind of thing, but we need to 

make sure that the process is going to work for people, the 

process is going to work for people. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move Bill No. 100, 

An Act to Amend the Assessment Management Agency Act. I’d 

like to adjourn that debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4201 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 101 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to clarify. I understood the Clerk to say Bill 111, but I 

thought it was Bill 101. So just want to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It is. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — 101? All right. Thank you. A little heart attack 

there. Just checking to see if I’m awake, I think. Thank you. 

 

All right then, therefore it is my pleasure to rise and speak to 

Bill No. 101, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 

2013. This is another example of this legislative agenda for the 

fall, Mr. Speaker, that seems a little light on substance but 

certainly doesn’t take away from the work of the good people 

over at the University of Saskatchewan to just clarify and 

rectify a couple of things in their Act that deals with the senate, 

particularly the senate of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:15] 

 

It’s interesting, I was just looking at a list of the members of the 

senate, and it looks like there’s over 50 names on there. So it’s a 

very large body, and representation on the university senate 

comes from all sorts of sources. And I think that’s important to 

ensure that it’s representative of the community that it’s 

serving, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these kinds of . . . Much of what’s in the explanatory notes 

suggest that these are housekeeping-style amendments, and 

certainly that’s in keeping with the comments that the minister 

made as well. There’s not earth-shattering changes of any sort 

in this legislation, but it is some necessary housekeeping, and 

certainly we’re not opposed to looking after those small items 

as well. Certainly we’re looking for more leadership from this 

government in terms of the big items, but when we see the 

members of the university coming forward and asking for these 

types of changes, makes total sense. And certainly I think this is 

an example of that type of legislation. 

 

As the ministry indicated, there’s a number of amendments that 

are being proposed, five or six types of amendments that deal 

with requests coming from the university. And I’ll go through 

those in a little bit of detail in a minute or so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s not a lot of explanation, even though this is a fairly 

straightforward style of amendments, in the minister’s 

comments. So we’ll have to dig into them a little bit and make 

sure that the public understands what’s being proposed here. 

 

The first one he indicated, and it’s certainly as explained in the 

explanatory notes, is an amendment to section 11 of the existing 

University of Saskatchewan Act which talks about the ability of 

what convocation can do. And in this case they’re talking about 

the authority of convocation to confer degrees and certificates 

and honorary degrees and to also admit graduands to the 

convocation. And certainly any of us who have had the 

opportunity to go to the University of Saskatchewan and taken 

in part of the convocation ceremonies knows how special those 

moments are, Mr. Speaker, when you’re able to put on the 

gown of your college and receive your degree from the 

chancellor of the university. It’s a very special day for a lot of 

people every year. 

 

And so in this case the change that’s being suggested is one 

where we are going to add diplomas to the list of what the 

powers of the convocation are. Now the minister hasn’t given 

us any indication why that’s necessary, although it does indicate 

in the explanatory notes that under the existing Act, under 

section 5(c), there’s the ability to award diplomas. So I believe 

the intent of the amendment here is to bring section 11 into 

conformity with section 5. And that’s something that we don’t 

have any issue with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next section that’s being changed . . . And this I believe is 

to help ensure that members of the senate are actually graduates 

of the university. So it’s just a clarity to make sure that we 

wouldn’t be nominating senate members who are not graduates 

of the ceremony. I think that’s what it’s intended to do. 

 

So if you look at the existing section in terms of the makeup of 

the senate — that’s section 24 of the Act — there’s a long list 

of all those many people who represent various constituencies 

within the university. And the one that we’re talking about right 

now is sections (b) and (c) of section 24(1). And currently those 

two sections talk about 14 members elected by convocation to 

represent electoral districts established by the senate, and then 

part (c) is just 14 additional members elected by the 

convocation. And I’m assuming these are the members at large, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the amendment is doing, it’s just adding a couple of 

words after members, and it’s saying, members of convocation. 

So clearly the senate . . . I think this is to provide clarity, that 

the senate would be composed of members of convocation. 

 

So these aren’t just members of senate appointed from the 

public at large, but that they do need to be graduands of the 

University of Saskatchewan. And that’s what’s pointed out in 

the housekeeping or in the explanatory notes that were 

provided, that the amendment clarifies that elected members of 

senate in 24(1)(b) are members of convocation, and also that in 

24(1)(c). And the only difference there is the (b) section refers 

to senators representing electoral districts, and I believe (c) 

would be members that are members at large. So again a very 

straightforward, simple amendment that seems to provide some 

clarity to ensure that senate members are actually graduands of 

the university and a member of convocation. 

 

The next change that’s being added is about students. The 

minister indicated it’s to clarify the process by which student 

members of the senate are elected. 

 



4202 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

And we look at sections 29 and 32, a couple of changes there. 

Under 29(2) there’s a clarity being added so that the 

convocation list is to be used for purposes of electing the 

members of the senate mentioned in clauses 24(1)(b) and (c). 

And those are the two that I just referred to earlier. 

 

So 29 is the way the secretary of the university will prepare the 

list of convocation. So that’s a responsibility to the secretary 

and this is to provide clarity that that’s the list that’s to be used 

when we’re nominating these members, as I described earlier, 

for representing electoral districts and the members at large. So 

it’s just providing clarity under the existing section 29(2). 

 

There’s a new subsection that’s being added to this clause and 

it’s subsection (4). And in that case it’s providing direction to 

the secretary, and actually it’s a mandatory thing the secretary 

must do. And it reads as follows: 

 

The secretary shall oversee the election of the members of 

senate mentioned in clauses 24(1)(b) and (c). 

 

This is a little bit curious to me, Mr. Speaker. I just wonder 

what discussions within the senate led to this requirement for 

the secretary to oversee the election. There may have been some 

serious issues internally that have provided some angst for the 

senate members and certainly for the secretary who has the 

responsibilities to prepare the list. So there must have been a 

question at some point about, if the secretary prepares the list, 

who oversees it? So this makes sure now that it’s very clear to 

everybody that the role of the university secretary is now also 

not just preparing a list, but she or he is in charge of overseeing 

the election of those particular members of the senate we’ve 

been discussing. 

 

Another further clarification in relation to those two sets of 

senators under clause 24(1)(b) and (c) is in section 32. Now the 

existing . . . This is the nomination section of the Act, and the 

existing provision doesn’t make reference to those two 

subclauses. So it just currently reads, “No person is eligible to 

be elected as a member of the senate unless that person has been 

nominated in accordance with this Act.” 

 

And of course it can only refer to those two clauses 24(1)(b) 

and 24(1)(c) because those are the ones that are elected. The 

other ones are different types of nominations to the senate. For 

example there are nominations by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. We have automatics, a lot of automatic members of 

the senate, so they obviously can’t be elected. And there’s other 

ones that are nominated through other processes. So this section 

32 has to be fixed in order to be clear, and I think this is an 

appropriate amendment to make sure that the elected part of 

senate is those under 24(1)(b) and 24(1)(c). So that’s an 

appropriate change. 

 

The next clause that’s being proposed to be amended is section 

45 of The University of Saskatchewan Act, 1995, and that deals 

with the terms of office. So I think what’s being proposed here 

is . . . We’re now looking at a different section of the Act, and 

that’s the members of the board, and that’s found in section 42 

of the Act. It would have been helpful in the explanatory notes 

if that section had been provided as well because it’s hard when 

you’re looking at the explanatory notes to go from one clause 

that’s referring to another clause that isn’t even printed in the 

explanatory notes. So just as a note to the minister’s staff, it 

would be more helpful I think for members of the public 

certainly to understand the intent of the changes by providing 

the clause that’s being referred to. 

 

So when I looked at section 42, I saw that that is the list of all 

the members of the board. And there’s again some automatic 

members of the board. There’s also under 42(b) it’s five 

members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. So 

there are five members of the board of the University of 

Saskatchewan that are appointed by this government. There are 

two members, and this is in section (c), that are elected by the 

senate, so the senate themselves propose two members for the 

board. And then the faculty association under (d) can also elect 

a senate or a board member. 

 

Now what this clause change is proposing to do, it deals with 

the terms of two of those groups of people. One is the members 

that are elected by the senate, and the other is the ones that are 

nominated by the faculty. And it’s curious. It used to be the 

members elected by senate served two-year terms and so would 

the members of the faculty, the faculty member. But for some 

reason, this is going to change and the members elected by the 

senate are now going to be provided a three-year term. And the 

explanatory note says that this is in order to bring these 

members in line with the appointees by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. 

 

And we know that that may or may not make sense, and we’re 

not given the reasoning for that. What’s interesting here is that 

the faculty member is not being offered the same extension of 

their term, that it’s being held back to two years and it’s not 

really clear why the distinction is being made this way. And 

there’s certainly no indication from the minister about that 

change. It just says . . . He indicated that the senate nominees to 

the boards are allowing them to serve a three-year, a third 

three-year term, in section 45. 

 

So it’s not clear to me why this isn’t being afforded to the 

faculty member as well and it would . . . I don’t know that I 

have any particular view one way or the other, but it’s 

interesting when these changes are brought forward and it’s not 

indicated in the explanatory notes or in the minister’s comments 

why the distinction is being made here. So that’s a question we 

have. And whether or not there’s an answer for it, we may never 

find out but certainly I think other of my colleagues may ask 

that question as well or we might have an opportunity when the 

bill is put before the committee to find out more about that 

particular point. 

 

There are some changes also being made to section 61, and it’s 

merely housekeeping. It’s just to make some clarity around 

subsection (s) to make sure that it’s subject to 61(2). So that’s 

just a very, very small housekeeping item. 

 

Then we look at section 98, and this is the last change that’s 

being proposed. And this is to, as the minister indicated, the 

amendments will change the powers of the council to facilitate 

the appointment of student members on hearing boards. Oh 

sorry, that’s section 61. What I was talking about, section 98, 

the changes there and all we’re doing in 98, according to the 

suggested amendments, is to remove the requirement of a 

corporate seal when the university executes documents. 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4203 

And I think I understand. You know, the use of the corporate 

seal has maybe waned or the need for a corporate seal certainly 

seems to be of less importance nowadays then it would’ve been 

many years ago. And in fact, back in the old, old days when the 

seal was imprinted, it was done with wax and there was sealing 

wax and all of those things that you hear about in lore of days 

past. Since then it’s evolved to now what you could call just the 

rubber seal, and it’s just stamped with ink. And I think the 

importance of it, of the real seal where the embossment was 

made is no longer relevant. 

 

I know one of the things that was interesting about the corporate 

seal when I did some work at Information Services Corporation 

is that the embossed seals don’t scan very well in this modern 

age so you actually can’t see them at all. And there was a whole 

bunch of changes when ISC [Information Services Corporation 

of Saskatchewan] came on board that required people to start 

using the ink rubber stamp instead of the embossed seal. And I 

just think we’re losing something as a result of that. But I guess 

I better get with the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at any rate, the university has decided that you no longer 

require a corporate seal when you execute documents. Used to 

be when you had the corporate seal, it showed the authority of 

the people signing the document on behalf of the particular 

contractor, whoever that might be, and now I guess it’s just on 

the strength of your name and your signature which, good or 

bad, it is what it is. So I guess the university has requested that 

that be afforded to them as well. And so this government has 

agreed to amend the section or proposed to amend this section 

to remove the requirement of a corporate seal. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated at the onset, these are some very 

minor, minor changes, although I think they’re important to the 

University of Saskatchewan on an operational basis and it 

makes things a little more clear for how senate members are 

nominated and who’s responsible for overseeing their election 

and those types of daily, or not daily, but housekeeping types of 

items that are important to the organization. 

 

Again I think it’s an example of a number of the bills that we 

see on the slate this fall that are ones that are being brought 

forward properly from community members with needs in their 

particular legislation but it isn’t really showing any kind of I 

think legislative agenda or leadership on the part of this 

government that’s going to take our province forward. So in 

that sense, it’s a bit disappointing to speak to these 

housekeeping bills. But certainly we know that for the folks that 

the bills are requested by, it’s important to them. 

 

At this point I don’t think I want to add anything further to the 

discussion. I know my other colleagues will. So I’d like to 

move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 101, the Act to amend 

The University of Saskatchewan Act, 1995. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 101, The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 107 — The 

Wildfire Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into discussion here this afternoon on Bill No. 

107, An Act respecting the Prevention, Management, Control 

and Extinguishing of Fires. This is Bill No. 107, The Wildfire 

Act, and I’m pleased to enter into discussion on this Act. 

 

Certainly I recognize that this Act replaces the former prairie 

and forest fires Act, an Act that had been developed in the 

1950s and had been refined in 1982. And I understand that it 

shifts responsibility towards industrial and commercial 

developments. We’re wanting to make sure that, as we engage 

in our discussion and analysis of this legislation, that we engage 

in full consultation with all those that are impacted by this 

legislation and ensure that they have been heard through the 

process of developing this Act. Because certainly it’s an 

important Act in its purpose of protecting communities, 

business, economic enterprise, recreational opportunities all 

through our North. 

 

We know as well that this government has rammed forward in 

far too many circumstances without listening to the voices of 

stakeholders, with those that know best on the ground, and have 

moved forward with their own agenda to the detriment of many. 

Far too often we see that in education, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

wanting to make sure that this legislation has been derived in a 

thoughtful way and an even-handed way with all those that 

could and would be impacted. 

 

We know that it was just last spring that this government had 

pushed forward with changes on this front to The Wildfire Act 

and I guess who would pay the bill to pay for protection and to 

address wildfires. And there was a significant off-loading of 

costs onto rural municipalities contemplated at that time, 

something that our critic, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, 

spoke up at that point in time, and who had been listening 

directly to the rural municipalities who were sharing that they 

didn’t feel it was appropriate to have this level of off-loading 

onto their ratepayers, onto their rural municipalities. 

 

We agreed and we took up that cause. We worked with the rural 

municipalities, and the rural municipalities shared their voice. 

And I understand that this legislation that’s now brought 

forward has addressed this in some way. We want to make sure, 

dealing with the rural municipalities, that that in fact is the case 

because we know for certain that downloading costs onto these 

municipalities, onto these communities, onto these ratepayers, 

taxpayers, families, and businesses simply isn’t appropriate. 

 

Looking at the minister’s comments, or before I get into some 

of the minister’s comments, certainly I would recognize that 

certainly the prevalence of wildfires is a cause for concern. We 

see that through right across North America really. We’ve seen 

that occur in Kelowna just a few years ago with hundreds of 



4204 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

homes that were impacted or destroyed. We saw that in Slave 

Lake a couple years ago. We see it in recent years in California. 

 

And we know that we’re not immune to these significant risks 

as well that cause significant challenge for communities. I 

believe it was 1999 that La Ronge was impacted in a significant 

way. And we need to make sure we’re doing all we can as a 

province and that government’s doing all they can to protect 

these communities, to mitigate risk, and to prevent, prevent fire 

but also to respond effectively in the case of fire. 

 

And of course this is about protection of our timber assets. It’s 

protection of the communities, protection of homes, business 

enterprises, mines, and operations of outfitters that exist right 

across the North. So we’re going to be looking for clarity from 

this government as to who was engaged in the consultation 

towards this bill, and then we’re going to be engaged with those 

stakeholders, those partners, to make sure that this legislation is 

as strong as it can be, that it’s as effective as it can be. 

 

When we look at some of the changes, we know that the 

minister’s suggesting there’s going to be changes to building 

construction measures in place as well as vegetation 

management to better enhance the potential of survivability of a 

wildfire. But there’s nothing more said on that point, and we 

want to look to the minister to explain what specifically he’s 

bringing forward on that front, potential range of costs and 

options on that front. And we want to understand from those 

throughout the vicinity of regions impacted by wildfires, 

primarily in through the North, what this means for them. 

 

We understand that there is some updating of terminology in 

clarifying administrative responsibility, clarifying responsibility 

for wildfire and liability for causing wildfire, and defining 

ministry responsibility and liability. We want to make sure that 

this balance is struck in an appropriate way. We want to make 

sure that it balances the realities of I guess managing a 

sustainable environment in through the North and balancing the 

protection needed to homes and economic enterprise throughout 

the North. 

 

I understand that this legislation shifts a responsibility on to 

provincial utilities, I suspect our provincial Crown corporations. 

We want to understand what the scope of that liability is from 

an actuarial perspective, what’s the potential cost of that 

liability, and making sure that all are entering into this with 

eyes wide open just the same as where, when the minister’s 

stating that he’s putting a larger burden of responsibility or onus 

onto industry, that we want to make sure that that balance is an 

appropriate one. We want to make sure that they’ve been able to 

contribute and share their perspective as to, as I say, the 

actuarial value of that liability or the risk that’s being discussed. 

Certainly we know that the wildfires themselves are a 

significant risk, when not addressed properly, to life, to 

families, to communities, and that’s important. We also know 

that it can cause economic disruption — damage to property, 

damage to provincial assets, damage to municipal assets. And 

so ensuring a fair and just balance of responsibility is crucial in 

this area. 

 

So this is a bill that is one that should not be rushed along. We 

need to make sure we’re engaging all the stakeholders in this 

process. And certainly the broad platitudes of the minister 

aren’t going to be good enough to justify the significant change 

that’s here. Certainly the points that he’s made are valid points 

and points that in general we would concur in. But we need to 

know the detail and who’s going to be bearing the cost and 

who’s going to be bearing the risk, what this means for 

communities, what this means for commercial enterprise, what 

this means for industry, what this means for the provincial 

government and our Crown corporations. 

 

We want to as well make sure we fully understand the wild land 

interface area, which I understand government is suggesting 

we’ll continue to expand. That would make sense. But there’s 

specific risks in that interface area and we want to make sure 

that government is doing all they can to effectively mitigate 

those risks. And that’s where, on the front end of planning, 

there’s some opportunities, from community design to building 

design to management of vegetation and all factors that can 

make it more likely for a community and for a home, for a 

business to survive a wildfire, but also make it less likely for 

wildfires to begin in the first place. 

 

We look here as well . . . There’s new changes being brought 

forward, I understand, with a greater emphasis on prevention 

and preparedness. As I’ve said, certainly we support those 

platitudes. What we want to see now is what the plan is, what 

the detail is, who’s contributed to that, what it means for them. 

We also see that the, as I say, that we pushed . . . We as the 

official opposition listened and worked with the rural 

municipalities who made the case that they were being 

off-loaded onto in an unfair way. We made that case in this 

Legislative Assembly. It seems that there’s recognition in this 

legislation now, a retreat from government on that heavy 

burden they were going to be placing onto rural municipalities, 

primarily rural municipalities in the forest fringe that were 

going to be impacted in a big way. 

 

We now want to make sure that the way this legislation is built 

reflects that, and that there’s not a way for the minister or 

government to skirt around that at a time of an emergency or 

time of need; there’s not a quick or easy way for government to 

download costs onto municipalities as that government had 

planned to do just a few months ago. So we need to make sure 

that municipalities, particularly those forest fringe 

municipalities that are directly impacted by this legislation, we 

want to make sure that they are confident with the legislation 

that’s brought forward and the protection it brings to them. 

 

It says here, and I quote the minister: 

 

It also provides assurance to all municipalities that the 

minister will determine if costs for firefighting assistance 

provided by the ministry constitute an excessive financial 

burden on a municipality. 

 

So it seems to me that there’s some statement that the ministry 

or government might step up if there’s an excessive financial 

burden. My concern is that this seems to leave an awful lot of 

discretion up to the minister, that this isn’t a very objective 

statement, that this is incredibly subjective and it leaves it 

possibly into the hands of government or the minister or the 

Premier to decide if there is an excessive cost for a rural 

municipality. And for that government that pushed forward 

changes just last spring that were going to be an excessive 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4205 

burden onto rural municipalities, it may not be good enough for 

those municipalities now to hear from government that it’s 

going to be the minister that’s going to be determining in a 

subjective way what’s excessive for their ratepayers or for their 

municipality. 

 

I think that we’ll be fleshing, calling that government out to 

flesh out the detail of that plan and laying out the detail and 

commitments to municipalities about what excessive cost is and 

just what kind of support is that government willing to provide. 

Because we know with the prevalence of wildfires we certainly 

cannot leave an undue, unfair burden on the backs of forest 

fringe communities and rural municipalities, ratepayers, and 

businesses. We need to go at this challenge in a fair and 

balanced way, and government has some rightful responsibility 

on this front, and responsibility that, with all due respect, Mr. 

Speaker, shouldn’t be shirked onto the backs of municipalities 

and hard-working, taxpaying public within those respective 

regions. 

 

So we’ll continue to follow up on that front. That’s been an 

important point. I certainly commend the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana for working together with RMs [rural 

municipality] in through the forest fringe region and through 

Prince Albert when they couldn’t get any action from that 

government to hear the concerns, and to raise those concerns 

with government to push the unfair circumstance that was being 

pushed on to government. I think in many ways it’s one of those 

examples again, Mr. Speaker, and I hate to say it, a reflection of 

a government that barely knows where the North is in this 

province and barely knows where the other half of the province 

is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see that just in the allocation of where the members 

opposite are from as it relates to cabinet. And you know, so it’s 

. . . And I know that’s a, that’s a . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

One of the members is rather worked up there. 

 

But it’s of concern to northern communities in the central part 

of the province and all the way north that there’s not a member 

from, barely a member from cabinet, member elected in that 

region in cabinet, and barely a voice. And of course we see it in 

this Assembly all the time where government dismisses the 

need for a second bridge in Prince Albert or dismisses the 

opportunities for economic development in the region or, as 

we’re speaking about The Wildfire Act here, where that 

government was all too willing, all too willing to place a direct 

and heavy burden, a cost onto the backs of forest fringe 

municipalities in that region. So I know that that’s a concern. 

 

[19:45] 

 

But we’re willing to speak up for the North. We’re willing to 

speak up for an entire province. We’re willing to speak up for 

Prince Albert and the entire region. Certainly we will do so, as 

we have on this legislation. We’ll continue those sort of 

consultations and making sure that we consult with all those 

members on the other half of the province, Mr. Speaker, that, as 

I say, I know that many question whether or not that 

government knows exists in many cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when we look to this piece of legislation, we see in many 

ways some refinements of legislation that certainly needed to be 

refined. Certainly the principles and platitudes brought forward 

by the minister seem to be reasonable. Now we need to make 

sure that the balance is appropriate, that the plan respects the 

needs within communities, respects the challenges of the 

region, making sure it respects and has consulted with industry 

stakeholders. And that’s the kind of consultation we’ll be 

moving forward with, and we’ll be seeking more detail from 

this government on this plan. But as it relates at this point in 

time to Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act, I will adjourn debate. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 111 — The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on debate 

of Bill 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

I guess initially I want to give some comments about showing 

what’s going on for our seniors’ care in this province and the 

lack of care for seniors in our province, the pioneers, you know, 

of the province. We talk about respect, and you’re supposed to 

respect our elders and our seniors. And currently I’ll be 

speaking about the bill and the amendments of the personal care 

home for seniors. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to see some of the stories and some of the 

challenges families are facing when trying to place their loved 

one in long-term care . . . And I think about the North, and I 

look at the shortage and the critical code red, you know. If you 

look at the incidents of families trying to get their loved one in a 

long-term care facility, not just 10 minutes, 15 minutes, 30 

minutes away from their community, but we’re talking placing 

them, having to place them, you know, up to hours, somewhere 

from two, three, seven, eight hours, eleven hours away from 

their community. 

 

What they’re used to, our seniors are used to the culture. 

They’re used to being around their community, their family. 

And sometimes you’ll see the challenges. You see loved ones 

being sent away and not that the loved one wants to. 

 

You know, we heard some of the stories. It was interesting, you 

know. I just want to give an example of La Ronge had a large 

meeting, a public meeting for long-term care, but to have one of 

the elders get up and talk about his family and his personal 

story he shared with the group. And you know, he talked about 

his loved one having to be sent away from La Ronge and area, 

and they had to go down south. Large family, but they couldn’t 

all get down to see their mother or father, whichever one was in 



4206 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

the long-term care down south. And it was sad to listen to the 

story. 

 

That elder, that community member, that grandma, that parent 

of that family made it very clear, it was heartbreaking to not 

able to be there all the time. So certain family members could 

get down. Some couldn’t get down to visit. We’re talking about 

the care and understand the language which is, you know, 

they’re very proud of the language and the culture and even if 

you look at the food that they’re used to, as an elder who lives 

in the North. So when I listened to the story and we shared the 

story of the struggle that their loved one had, he said that it was 

tough on the whole family. It was tough on their mother. 

 

But when they came back later on, years when their father 

needed long-term care, they happened to find, you know, under 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] they built the facility in La 

Ronge with 16 beds — 14 for long term care, 2 for respite. 

They got a chance to have their loved one there and to be with 

their loved one and making sure the family was close so they 

can go and visit at the hospital at the long-term care, to spend 

time and make sure that loved one wasn’t left alone and isolated 

and feeling, you know, not within the culture. 

 

So it was good. They could spare the time and show the love 

and the caring that that family member needed and that elder 

needed. And they did that. And he talked about that, the 

difference; he showed the difference. And he said it was sure 

tough, but it was nice having him at home, close to the 

community where, you know, they’re with their family and 

loved ones, what they’re used to. So these are some of the sad 

stories we’re hearing. There’s many more of them when you go 

into it. 

 

But having said that, I just wanted to go back to talking about 

the good work that they’re doing in La Ronge and area. And 

they’re going to continue to work hard and try to make this 

government understand the needs. 

 

It isn’t that we’re talking about replacing a facility for seniors. 

And we talk about seniors have so many challenges, and this 

government’s not responding. And they’re going to pay a price 

for that. You know, those seniors and families that are coming 

into this Legislative Assembly that are telling the stories, 

they’re not making this up. There’s no reason for them to make 

this up. It’s their loved one. Their hearts are being torn by what 

they’re having to deal with and watching their loved ones being 

in a facility. 

 

And they’re not saying that it isn’t the staff that’s there doing 

the good work. They say that. They are doing, the staff that’s 

there is doing a great job. They’re saying obviously there’s a 

shortage of staff. There isn’t someone to feed them, bath, toilet. 

You look at it and, you know, it’s sad to see the challenges. 

 

But having said that, I just want to give credit to the group in La 

Ronge for coming together. It’s a large group, and they’re doing 

their best for seniors’ care. And we’re going to make sure. 

 

It isn’t that we’re trying to say, don’t announce facilities or 

replace facilities that are there. And there may be challenges. I 

understand that. But we’re talking about communities where we 

don’t even have the proper number of facility, of beds. Like 

we’re talking, you know, going from 14 to 48. That to me, a 

code red. That’s a shame. In 2009 a report came out that 

showed that. So it’s about taking care of our seniors, making 

sure that they’re a priority. And under this government it 

doesn’t seem like they’re a priority, and that’s sad. 

 

Now let’s hope that group and everyone else and the good work 

that we can do in opposition to bring it to the government’s 

attention as a priority to say, you have to make sure that you 

take care of the needs of our seniors all over the province. This 

is a province that we should be proud of. We talk about the 

growth and we hear that. 

 

So when we talk about seniors and all the challenges, you 

know, here I want to show that personal story and some of the 

challenges that people in northern Saskatchewan and the rural 

areas. Yes, it’s definitely there’s struggles all over. We’re 

hearing it. So having said that, I hope the government will look 

at those priorities and say, not only is it to replace existing 

facilities that maybe need . . . We don’t have enough beds. 

Never mind. It’s code red. It’s been for four years. They’ve had 

years to address it and they haven’t. We’re hoping they will. 

 

And we’re hoping the good work of that committee will come 

together of community members, leader, whoever wants to sit 

on there to bring the cause forward and work with government 

in a meaningful way and show them the need is there through 

the Croft report, working with the health region, working with 

the leaders, working with community members, working with 

families to say, let’s work together. Let’s do what’s right for 

northern residents. Let’s make sure what’s right for 

Saskatchewan seniors. 

 

So I want to get into, you know, the bill and talk about seniors’ 

care. And we see that. We see all over there’s a need. And yes, 

there are . . . [inaudible] . . . Some people will look at going in a 

personal care home. You might put your loved one in there. But 

you want to make sure that your loved one is being taken care 

of. There’s nothing more that we want for our loved ones, 

whether it’s our mom or dad or grandparents, you know, 

whether . . . It doesn’t matter who you are. When it comes to 

seniors we want that. And we want to make sure seniors are 

taken care of. 

 

And they have a right, you know. They’ve done the hard work. 

Many of them are veterans. Many of them are, you know. They 

did the hard work. They’re the entrepreneurs. They’re the 

individuals that put the tough job in, the tough work. They 

worked the land. They worked the farms. They did the hard 

work that was asked of them to do. They didn’t complain about 

it. They did it. 

 

But they came back and, you know, they get older, and they’re 

ready to retire. And they go through a process, and they think 

their government will take care of them. They know their 

family will do their best to take care of them and advocate for 

them, will bring forward . . . But they want their government to 

do that. 

 

And you talk about economy. And you know, we talk about the 

growth and all the good things in the province. And we’re 

happy for that, and so are Saskatchewan people. They’re all 

saying that. It’s good. Right on. But when you see the 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4207 

challenges that our seniors are faced with, and you see some of 

the conditions. And we talk about the inspections, and you talk 

about our personal care homes and the reports that have gone 

on, and they look at the facilities. And now they come back, and 

they’re talking about the challenges at some of the care homes. 

 

So now they’re going to try to improve accountability. They’re 

going to make sure before they get licensed they’re going to 

have to meet certain standards. Well you would’ve thought that 

would’ve happened before. But they’re talking about making it 

public so that if you are in a position where you can afford a 

personal care home or if that’s the only place you have because 

in your community you do not have a provincially funded 

long-term care facility, then you go. And the minister talked 

about that in his, you know, when he talks in second response to 

the bill, second reading. He talks about that. 

 

You know, I want to make it clear. They’re different. Personal 

care homes are different than . . . You know what? Yes, they 

might be different because one is funded by government, run by 

a hospital, and people refer to them as your government care 

home versus the private. And people see that. And the minister 

wants to make note of that, that they’re different. Well yes they 

are, but they’re having many problems. 

 

Seniors are having the problems. Families are dealing with it. 

That’s who’s dealing with it. They’re making sure that they’re 

there, making sure their loved ones are getting fed, that they’re 

getting to the toilet, that they don’t have to lay in bed. Those are 

the challenges. When you have to deal with a loved one who’s 

in that situation, you want to make sure they’re fed. They don’t 

want a cold meal, you know. And families are going through 

that right now in this province. They’re struggling with that. So 

they want what’s best for their loved one. And we don’t see 

some of the situations going on. 

 

And the government’s saying, well we’re going to allow maybe 

with the provision and this amendment and the Act to actually 

have it, the report, put on public or notice so they’re posted 

somewhere. So if you’re looking at different care homes, 

personal care homes, you can look at one and say, well the 

report . . . And you can look and see, how is this personal care 

home doing? How have the reports been in the last three, five 

years? So you can look at it and see what kind of care, what 

were the challenges when the inspections were done? Were 

there any incidents or issues that needed to be cleared up? So 

they can look at that as families when they’re making that 

decision about a personal care home for their loved one. A 

government agency that does the inspections can make sure that 

they’re doing the work that they have to do so the families can 

make those choices. 

 

And that’s important, and that’s a good start. Right there is a 

good start. And no one’s going to say that it’s not going to be. It 

is. It gives a person, when you’re looking at personal care 

homes . . . Well what’s this one rated? I’ll be honest with you; if 

I see one that’s struggling in a report, I definitely don’t want my 

mother, my grandma and grandpa in there. I wouldn’t want to 

put them in a care home that’s not taking and doing the best 

care. And if there’s challenges that need to be addressed, it’s 

good to know that. And I think it’s important. 

 

And I think we owe that to Saskatchewan people. We owe that 

to our seniors, to do what’s best for them. They have done the 

hard job. They did the work that we’ve asked them to do. 

They’ve done their part. The family’s doing their part. The 

workers in long-term are doing their part. It’s time for the 

government to do their part. And they have an obligation here 

as well to take care of our seniors, especially when a province is 

doing as well as our province is doing and we talk about. 

 

And it’s fine. You know, if they want to pat themselves on the 

back for everything and take all the credit for the province, the 

way it’s doing, that’s fine. Pat yourselves on the back all you 

want. But when you see seniors struggling and families 

struggling and there’re heartbreaking stories of what’s going on 

in this province, and our seniors expect better, then, you know, 

when you correct those problems, then give yourselves a pat on 

the back. Deal with that issue first, and let’s deal with that our 

seniors are important to us. 

 

We care about them. We want to make sure that they have a 

place to go and it’s close to their community. And it should be 

in their community. And we have areas where, you know, 

they’re dealing with the challenges. And I, you know, we talk 

about the staffing, front-line, and is staff an issue? We’re 

hearing a lot of that is staffing when you hear families’ stories 

talk about the staffing. And they’re covering up those areas. 

 

So when we talk about these amendments, will that improve the 

personal care home? I don’t know that it will. But at least it’ll 

show families they can look at it. Will it give them more 

staffing? Well government will say, well it’s different. It was a 

provincially funded one. It’s different. So we’ll have to look at 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to make it clear, you know, we have an obligation. 

All of us do in this legislative . . . We have an obligation to our 

seniors as well as our children, our working families, the people 

of this province, to take care. And we need to do a better job as 

a government. 

 

And before anyone gives themselves a pat on the back, they 

should be dealing with those issues throughout this province. 

Then when we’ve dealt with the chance . . . When we’ve given 

people  a fair opportunity, a job, a fair opportunity at training, 

fair opportunity at being a respected elder, senior giving the 

quality of life they deserve, then give yourselves a pat. All of us 

give yourselves a pat on the back when that happens. But until 

that day happens, don’t be patting yourselves on the backs 

because I’ll tell you, you don’t deserve it. There’s a lot of work 

that needs to be done. You keep saying that. We hear that. Well 

it’s time for action because our seniors deserve better in this 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at this point I know the provisions are in 

here. My colleagues will want to have more conversations 

about it, but at this time I’m prepared to adjourn debate on the 

bill. 

 

[20:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 



4208 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 108 — The 

Athletics Commission Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter discussion as it relates to Bill No. 108, The 

Athletics Commission Act, an Act respecting the Athletics 

Commission, professional boxing, mixed martial arts contests, 

and exhibitions. 

 

This Act itself works to enable the establishment of an athletics 

commission that would have the authority to sanction 

professional combative sports including mixed martial arts. 

This move follows a move by the House of Commons that 

passed a bill in June legalizing contact sports such as mixed 

martial arts. And this legislation makes professional boxing and 

MMA [mixed martial arts] contests legal in Canada when they 

have the authorization of a provincial athletics commission. 

 

I understand that this piece of legislation and the establishment 

of an athletics commission was called for by the cities’ mayors 

caucus across the province, also called for by the city of 

Saskatoon. Certainly we recognize that this would leave 

opportunities for many other sports to sanction and compete, to 

hold events, bring together athletes, bring together 

communities, and bring together new sporting opportunities. 

 

In looking at the bill, it seems that the proposed commission 

would consist of five people: an athletics commissioner — I 

believe appointed by that government; we’ll seek some further 

clarification from that government at committee on that front — 

and an advisory committee comprised of three subject matter 

experts, as well as an adjudicator. So we’ll be seeking further 

information, more detail on that front. 

 

The commission itself I understand would be in charge of 

approving events for the province and would also be 

responsible for making sure that competitors participate in 

appropriate pre- and post-fight medical exams, and that would 

include, as I understand, eye tests and blood tests. And certainly 

all of those provisions provide a level of confidence, from my 

perspective, that these are actions that are there to provide some 

concern and some regard for the safety of the participants as 

well. 

 

And certainly that’s what the goal of legislation like this should 

be aimed towards: making sure that the proper protections are 

in place; the organization of events; the athletes themself, 

making sure that they are in appropriate and fair condition to 

compete; making sure that there’s safety provisions in place; 

making sure there’s proper regulation and oversight of an event; 

making sure that the appropriate medical staff that should be 

retained for an event are retained for an event; and making sure 

that the consequences of the event are contemplated and that 

risks are mitigated. 

Certainly we understand that other provinces have made 

changes on these fronts. They’ve started or have developed 

sporting commissions on these fronts for this very purpose. 

Certainly we want to ensure what . . . and learn from 

government what they’ve learned from other jurisdictions. We 

know that some municipalities have taken this space. We’d call 

on government to provide what experiences they’ve learned 

from those municipalities. 

 

Of course we want to ensure that it’s understood who’s liable 

from a financial perspective for potential injury or damage as a 

result of one of these events. And what role does the province 

have in that? Who’s financially liable and responsible? So those 

are questions for government and just questions that we’ll 

certainly flesh out around the safety of the participants, of the 

athletes.  

 

Certainly we recognize that many of these sports, whether it’s 

karate or whether it’s different martial arts or different mixed 

martial arts, we need to make sure that we’re providing 

opportunities for our athletes but also protecting them. And I 

believe that’s the purpose of this legislation. Certainly it will or 

could provide good opportunities for communities and for 

athletes to come together. It could provide some economic 

opportunities within a region. But we do need to make sure that 

this is done in a way that’s going to be safe and going to protect 

participants and really, as I say, contemplate all of the 

consequences. 

 

Certainly worth this . . . The benefit of this legislation is that it 

would provide a body to be providing some of these 

considerations and then approval potentially of certain events or 

sanctioning of events. And that certainly could add a level of 

safety to these events where currently those events may be 

illegal, where they may be non-sanctioned, where they may be 

quite dangerous. So we certainly need to recognize the I guess 

evolving world of sport and making sure that we as a 

jurisdiction keep pace and that in doing so we’re protecting 

those participants, those exceptional athletes across our 

province. 

 

So as we move forward as the official opposition, we’ll be 

consulting with all those impacted. We’ll be seeking from 

government some detail on their plan. We’ll be seeking a list of 

who’s been consulted to date and the various consequences and 

concerns that may have been shared to date. But on the whole 

we look forward to that discussion. I think there’s a lot of 

promise in the opportunities of sanctioning these events and 

bringing a level of safety and protection to participants in doing 

so and creating good opportunities for those that want to come 

together in these sorts of events. 

 

With that being said, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have much else to say 

at this point in time as it relates to Bill No. 108, The Athletics 

Commission Act, and I’ll adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4209 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 102 — The 

Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was very 

much looking forward to joining the debate tonight on The 

Builders’ Lien Act. I was interested to see what ways this 

government was seeking to introduce lean management 

techniques into the whole concept of building. Then upon 

listening to the second reading speech from the minister and 

looking over the legislation, it becomes apparent that lean 

management is not in fact part of this. 

 

But The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013, again in terms of 

keeping up with the provisions, the safeguards that are there for 

not just the construction industry itself but for certainly people 

that are getting homes built for them or properties, or pardon 

me, getting some construction built for them, it’s important to 

make sure that we’ve got legislation that’s keeping up with the 

times and certainly, looking over the minister’s remarks, in 

terms of the balance that this attempts to strike between the 

rights and obligations of landowners and the building trades and 

the professions that assist in construction projects. 

 

Again we think that’s, on the face of it, a reasonable balance to 

be seeking in terms of the protections that are offered through 

the Act being available to the trades and the professions that 

perform the services included under the definition of 

improvement or improvement holdings or construction, the 

services of a land surveyor such as the preparation of a survey 

plan and the placement of boundary markers in describing what 

happens with land surveyors often working alongside other 

tradespeople, and professionals that perform the services that 

are recognized as improvements under the Act such as 

architects and engineers. Again, refining and amending the 

definition of improvement to provide that land surveyors and 

professional surveyors can utilize the process under the Act to 

recover unpaid fees for their services. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, as these processes evolve and experience 

accrues, again it’s certainly right that we entertain a bill such as 

this here today. 

 

Again when the minister introduced the bill talking about 

increasing the limitation period applicable to trust claims from 

one to two years: 

 

The Act currently provides that a trustee is discharged 

from its obligations on the expiry of one year after the 

contract is completed or abandoned. The limitation period 

is at odds with the general two-year limitation period in 

The Limitations Act. Additionally it often catches 

claimants by surprise, as a trust claim is usually brought at 

the same time as a lien claim, to which a two-year 

limitation period applies. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, bringing it in line with The Limitations 

Act, again that’s fine and good providing for proper discharging 

of trustees. Again, fine and good. 

 

And then the Bill updates: 

 

. . . the section in the Act that determines when a contract 

is deemed to be complete. The current wording of the Act 

provides that a contract is deemed to be complete when the 

price of completion is not more than 1 per cent of the 

contract price or $1,000, whichever is less. The reference 

to $1,000, which was established in 1986, no longer 

reflects current construction costs. By repealing the $1,000 

figure, a contract will deem to be complete when the price 

of completion is not more than 1 per cent of the contract 

price. This is viewed as a flexible benchmark that will 

adjust automatically with the scale of construction projects. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, a fairly reasonable suggestion on the face 

of it, and we’ll be very interested to see, perhaps in committee 

find this out from the minister, what they project the volume of 

this, of these dollars involved will be, whether or not it will be 

that much more than $1,000, what sort of dollar figures they 

think will be involved. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to have these provisions 

there and to maintain that balance between both the people 

doing the construction and the various services that are brought 

to bear on a given construction project and the people that are 

buying the service or buying the work, paying for the work, and 

making sure that that balance is there; making sure that your 

safeguards are keeping up with the times, again modernizing 

and refining the definitions and the recognitions entailed in the 

Act. Again we were glad to see the land surveyors join us here 

at the legislature last week to better acquaint members of the 

legislature with the work land surveyors are doing and how they 

are impacted by this particular Act. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, as different of my colleagues have said 

and as I’ve said myself concerning the legislation, this one’s not 

just . . . This is fair enough legislation. It’s good legislation in 

and of itself but definitely seems to fall under the heading of 

housekeeping, although in this one it would perhaps fall under 

the heading of home construction and then some housekeeping 

on top of that. But this is a fairly fine piece of legislation in and 

of itself. But in terms of the legislative agenda as a whole, you 

know, it’s nothing against the Uniform Law Conference, Mr. 

Speaker, but again it sort of points to the housekeeping nature 

of this legislation. 

 

All that being said, we’ll be interested to see what sort of 

consultation has taken place on this, what sort of work has been 

done with the surveyors, what sort of work has been done with 

the architects, what sort of work has been done with the 

construction and trades generally, and what sort of cause is 

there evident around actions that have been moved under the 

existing legislation and how that is perceived to be impacted by 

the proposed amendments here today. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got certainly a little more 

consideration to undertake. We’re not going to be sending it off 

to committee tonight, no matter how much they try to lean on 

us, Mr. Speaker. But this one we’ll consider a bit more. I know 

that I’ve got other of my colleagues that would like to 

participate in the debate on it at this stage and with that I would 



4210 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

move adjournment of Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien 

Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 102, The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 103 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

pleased to wade into the debate tonight on this bill, Bill 103, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

This is yet again another example of the housekeeping order of 

bills that we’re seeing a lot of in this session. And this is one 

that comes from the maintenance enforcement office, Mr. 

Speaker, who have requested some updates to the legislation 

that it’s responsible to. And there’s one particular . . . There’s 

one piece that’s being offered in this bill at the request of the 

maintenance enforcement office, and I’ll get into that in a 

couple of seconds. 

 

But just to give a word of thanks and support to the work that’s 

done, this is a very important office here in Saskatchewan that 

helps a lot of people in some pretty dire circumstances. And we 

know that, I think it was introduced in 1986 when this type of 

measure started coming into legislatures across Canada. And 

until that time there were a lot of parents, single parents who 

were left with the sole financial responsibility of looking after 

their children, and there were parents who were not meeting 

their responsibilities. So this is a way for government to assist 

those parents who are raising the children, to ensure that the 

other parent is helping as they should be, as much as they can. 

 

So there’s a number of tools right now that the director of the 

office could put on a non-paying parent. There’s things like 

garnishment on their wages or other income, which is a huge 

support for those parents that are needing the support. They can 

suspend a driver’s licence. You can apply for a denial of federal 

licences and a number of other things. 

 

The tool that’s being added to the toolkit, to the office today or 

being proposed under this amendment, it’s an interesting one, 

Mr. Speaker. And I’m not sure of its applicability to a large 

majority of the parents who aren’t making their obligations to 

their children, but it’s an interesting one. And what’s being 

proposed here is that the minister responsible, the director of the 

maintenance enforcement office, can direct ministers to prohibit 

hunting or angling licences from being issued. 

 

So we’re talking about taking away the ability of these deadbeat 

parents to get an angling licence or a hunting licence. And 

again, I’m not sure how many of these parents are actually ones 

that use this type of service and actually get hunting licences or 

angling licences, but it is a tool I guess that the maintenance 

enforcement office feels that might help them in providing the 

services and the supports to the single parents that they are 

working with, where parents are refusing to pay timely payment 

for the support of their children. 

 

So it’s an interesting one. The one issue I think, and I’m not 

sure how far this has been canvassed by the minister or his staff, 

is the impact of this type of legislation on treaty First Nations 

who exercise their rights to hunt and fish in the treaty areas in 

northern Saskatchewan, particularly Treaty 10, Treaty 6 to a 

certain extent . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And yes, the 

member opposite is quite correct in saying that they require a 

licence in order to exercise those rights, or that they don’t if 

they’re on-reserve. My understanding, if they’re on-reserve they 

don’t require a licence, but if they’re off-reserve . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Okay, then the news report that I read was 

misleading in that sense. So I thank the members opposite for 

the clarification on that. 

 

Certainly there would be concerns if First Nations weren’t able 

to exercise their treaty rights. But I’m assured by the members 

opposite that that’s not the case, so no consultation would be 

required for this one if they’re not required to get licences. If 

they are required to get licences outside their treaty area, that 

might be another issue, but apparently that’s not the case either 

in Saskatchewan. So that would be the one concern that would 

need to be attended to. 

 

So in terms of the actual changes themself, it’s pretty 

straightforward. We have — first of all because these two types 

of licences are managed by other ministers; in this case I think 

it’s the Minister of Environment for both angling and hunting 

licences — there has to be a change in the definition of minister 

under this Act because obviously in those sections where we’re 

including hunting and angling licences, there is another minister 

that’s being referred to. So that’s the first change that’s made is 

the definition of a minister, which basically adds an exception 

to the new sections that deal with the licensing for angling and 

hunting. 

 

Then they go on to add, well a whole new subsection 43.01. 

And under 43.01 there’s a few definitions of licence and then 

the minister that’s responsible for those licences. And then 

43.01(2) provides that the director can apply . . . This is 

interesting, we have a director that tells a minister what to do. 

So that’s an interesting opportunity for a director of an office in 

the Government of Saskatchewan. And so what they will be 

able to do is direct the minister to not issue those licences. And 

it seems like a very straightforward tool, and it’s something I 

think that will be effective on those individuals for whom 

angling licences and hunting licences are of particular 

importance. 

 

Again I’m not sure and we weren’t provided any indication by 

the minister in terms of how many of these deadbeat parents are 

going to be impacted by this enforcement tool. But I think any 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4211 

tool that helps . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That’s exactly, 

the member opposite is thinking what I’m thinking. We’re not 

sure how many of them are fishers and hunters, but if there are 

a few of them and that helps the parents that are looking after 

the children, then so be it. I think that’s something that would 

be helpful. 

 

So we know that section 43 changes, talks about the hunting 

licences, and that’s under The Wildlife Act. So when these 

amendments to The Wildlife Act, angling licences of course, Mr. 

Speaker, are managed pursuant to the fisheries Act, so there we 

would need an amendment to the fisheries Act as well. 

 

So I think these are pretty straightforward changes, as I 

indicated earlier. This is a review by the maintenance 

enforcement office and a request on their part that the 

government consider these changes — straightforward small 

change to an effective piece of legislation. And as such I don’t 

think that there’s any particular concerns. But we will look 

forward to hearing from the public and especially from First 

Nations whether it will have any impact on them and then take 

it forward from there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m sure that many of my colleagues are going to want to 

comment on this bill at some point as well. And at this point, I 

would like to adjourn the debate on Bill 103, The Enforcement 

of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 103, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 104 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 

indicated in my comments recently on the previous bill, there 

will be some changes required, consequential amendments to 

the fisheries Act in order to ensure that The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act is kosher and in proper 

order. 

 

So there’s a change being proposed here to the fisheries Act that 

indicates that the minister . . . It’s a new section, new section 

27.1 that says: 

 

The minister shall prohibit a person from applying for or 

obtaining a licence if the Director of Maintenance 

Enforcement has directed the minister to suspend the 

person’s ability to secure a licence pursuant to . . . [the 

proposed] 43.04(2) of The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act, 1997. 

 

So that seems entirely in order, and again this is another 

example of the housekeeping sort of bills that are being 

proposed. So at this point, I will move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 104, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 105 — The 

Informal Public Appeals Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to enter into discussion as it relates to Bill No. 105, 

The Informal Public Appeals Act. 

 

The changes that are brought forward seem to make some 

sense, Mr. Speaker. We certainly do look forward to getting 

some of the detail from the minister in committee. Certainly I 

would like to put on the record of course something that we all 

know well, and that’s the spirit of Saskatchewan people and the 

ability of Saskatchewan people and communities and families 

to rally together and support one another and support 

neighbours. We know this in our pioneering history, and we 

know this to be the case here today. 

 

And that’s very much what this bill is all about. This is those 

spontaneous fundraising efforts that pop up within a community 

or because of a pressure or strain or need that’s placed on 

someone within the community or a neighbour or sometimes 

because of flood or fire. And it’s those local efforts that come 

together to raise some dollars for a very specific need in an 

informal way. 

 

And I know many of us would be quite familiar with these sorts 

of efforts. I know on a weekly basis I probably attend one or 

two of these spontaneous fundraising events, where there’s 

sometimes a steak night or other times they’re coming together, 

sharing some food and raising some dollars for someone that’s 

dealing with a traumatic challenge in their life, sometimes by 

way of health and loss and strain within their own life, other 

times as I say because of fire or costs that they’re incurring that 

simply they can’t manage. 

 

So legislation on this front may seem to make sense. What I 

want to get from the minister is, what are some of the 

circumstances and challenges that have arisen that make this 

bill necessary? So we’ll be looking for some of those cases. 

What are the specifics that have driven the need for this 

legislation? Certainly it seems to be reasonable legislation. 



4212 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

We do want to make sure though that there’s not undue hurdles 

or undue red tape placed upon the spontaneous efforts and 

goodwill of Saskatchewan people and communities. That being 

said, the minister seems to reflect some concern in that regard 

and seems to be working to establish a piece of legislation that 

reflects those challenges. 

 

I understand that the minister’s made some commitments to 

ensure that this is user-friendly legislation, ensuring that there 

are tools available in the community, possibly through financial 

institutions or lenders in community locations, so that those 

engaging in these spontaneous, informal fundraising efforts are 

able to have some structure that will assist them. That seems to 

make sense. 

 

I understand that part of the legislation relates to the disposal 

. . . of a disposal mechanism of funds that are held in trust, if 

you will, Mr. Speaker. And that seems to make sense as well. 

But certainly we’re looking forward to ensuring that the 

legislation that’s being brought forward is flexible enough to 

meet the needs of communities and families engaged in these 

efforts. And we want to just get further detail about the trustees 

and duties of trustees and the responsibilities and the authorities 

as it relates to governance of these funds or disposal of these 

funds, application of this legislation, and so on. 

 

So we’ll continue to do some consultation on this front. We 

look forward to putting some questions to the minister, seeking 

some answers, moving forward. Certainly I just want to, you 

know, reflect that we recognize that it’s in the Saskatchewan 

DNA, the Saskatchewan spirit to help out when challenges exist 

for a fellow neighbour, for family, for a community. We see 

those stories within our own lives. We see those in our 

neighbourhoods. We see those across our province.  

 

And certainly we want to make sure that we’re enabling those 

opportunities moving forward, of course making sure that 

where there’s government’s responsibility to step up to the 

plate, that government takes that responsibility, that certainly 

we . . . But where there’s needs for people to step up and 

support one another, that they’re able to do so and not 

encumbered by legislation that isn’t, I guess, doesn’t reflect 

their needs. 

 

But it seems that the minister’s looking at that balance and 

aiming to ensure just that. But we’ll engage in consultation 

moving forward, and we’ll look forward to questions with the 

minister. At this point in time, I would adjourn debate as it 

relates to Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 105, The Informal Public Appeals Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Bill No. 106 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 106 — The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill No. 106, An Act to 

Amend the Legal Profession Act, 1990. And it sounds like 

there’s some common sense points in this. Again, the question 

is around the consultation. We’ll have to get on . . . talk to some 

of the folks about, does this meet the needs of the public?  

 

And the reason I ask that, the reason I ask that — Mr. Speaker, 

there is a reason — is because the new section 3.2. Section 3.2 

is very important — the protection of the public. So it’s ironic 

that they didn’t do any public consultations when they’re 

protecting the public. 

 

And in fact, it says: 

 

3.2 In any exercise of the society’s powers or discharge of 

its responsibilities or in any proceeding pursuant to this 

Act, the protection of the public and ethical and competent 

practice take priority over the interests of the member. 

 

And the member, of course, I assume is the lawyer. So I’m 

wondering what public consultations they’ve done about this 

because if the public take priority, then were they consulted on 

this? It would only make logical sense that they do that but I 

don’t know. 

 

Now I’m hearing I should read the Act. I should read the Act. 

It’s very encouraging. We should read the Act. I wonder if 

that’s what the minister says to anybody in the public when they 

come in. When they walk in the door: have you read the Act? 

Have you read the Act? You know, I’ve got to tell you, we’ve 

got to be more friendly to the public here, Mr. Speaker, more 

friendly to the public. No setting up those barriers like, have 

you done your homework? Have you done your homework? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have done my homework and I have seen this 

and I do have questions . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . But now 

the Minister of Education, I do have something to say to the 

Minister of Education about this. I do have something to say. I 

have something to say here, Mr. Speaker, and what I want to 

say is I find it somewhat ironic that they are doing an 

amendment to the Law Society or The Legal Profession Act. 

Now have they consulted with, say, the dentists or the teachers 

or the social workers? Any professional organization? 

 

Because that’s what they’re doing to the teachers, Mr. Speaker, 

when they talk about the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] Act and the disciplinary Act. They’ve gone out and 

they’ve got a medical doctor to review the teachers’ Act. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic and I think it is interesting that 

the member who is the Minister of Education is a lawyer by 

trade and understands probably much better The Legal 

Profession Act than I do. But I find that in this day and age . . . 

And we’ve seen it in The StarPhoenix and the Leader-Post in 

June about the need to keep the teachers’ Act current and how 

are their disciplinary procedures the best that they can be and 

how they went out of the usual process of doing this in terms of 

consultation with the teachers and government and the public 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4213 

about how we can improve that or is it working or is it not 

working. 

 

But in this case we’re just going to the Law Society for their 

recommendations. So I’m thinking, this is a very good example 

of how we should cast the net further and seek opinions about 

how is this working when lawyers aren’t up to snuff. And so 

how are we going to do that and does this meet the standard? 

Now maybe the Law Society’s already done that. I don’t know 

if they did that. And maybe they’ve passed the test that the 

minister has set out and say, this is the bar. This is what we 

want you to demonstrate. This is how we will have confidence 

in the lawyers that work in the province and that they are up, 

that they will live up to section 3.2, and that “. . . the protection 

of the public and the ethical and competent practice takes 

priorities over the interests of the member.” So we’ll have lots 

of questions about, what does that mean in reality? I mean have 

they . . . How do they actually carry that out in their day-to-day 

business? 

 

Now there are, and I would just take a minute to review this, 

five, I think there’s five points the minister has set out that 

there’s first, the reasons for this Act and he talks about the 

course, request of the Law Society providing “. . . provision 

clarifying that in regulating the profession, the public interest is 

paramount over the interests of the members being disciplined.” 

 

Second, the society will be given more control over the number 

of elected members to accommodate demographic changes and 

improve governance. Now what I understand, Mr. Speaker, is 

that there was set out apparently in legislation percentage that 

are from Saskatoon and so many from Regina, and they’re 

going to allow that to be more flexible. And that sounds 

reasonable. It would be interesting to see how that plays out 

over the course of the years. And will we be back changing 

that? And I think that will be interesting. 

 

As well, “. . . the ability to recruit persons who are not members 

of council or lawyers to assist with investigations and 

hearings.” And that will be interesting to see who those folks 

are and how they carry out these investigations and hearings 

and what the process is and, of course, I do want to . . . Because 

we’ve talked and I’ve raised the issue of other professions and 

how they carry out their disciplinary processes, and we do hear 

in the press about lawyers who’ve gone astray and how some of 

the consequences are. I don’t know if that’s a consistent 

practice or is that only in high-profile cases. So this will be 

interesting for us to ask in committee. Is this a typical process 

or is this just a, you know, the exception? Is it the exception? I 

don’t know. 

 

So will they do something to increase the public profile of these 

proceedings? Because that’s what they’re asking in other 

professions, that they become much more public, and it seems 

that’s what this government is intent on doing for some 

professions. And so is this what’s going to happen right across 

the board? And if not, why not? And if so, how’s it going to 

work? 

 

It talks about time limits being removed, so more flexibility. 

And hopefully that’s fair enough. I’m not sure if that’s a good 

thing or what, but we’ll see. And it talked about the Law 

Foundation and the increase in the statutory exemption from 

liability for good faith decisions being extended so that so they 

can help encourage volunteers to undertake this worthwhile 

activity. 

 

So there’s lots here. There’s lots here, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 

have a lot more to talk about. I know that my colleagues will 

want to talk about this. 

 

But as I said that it is interesting, this new section 3.2 and what 

that means and what that will mean in reality. I mean it’s one 

thing to say it but it’s another thing to do it, and another thing to 

see that the public actually feels that that’s the case when there 

are disciplinary hearings and proceedings within a profession, 

that the public interest takes priority over those interests of the 

member. What does that really mean? And so we’ll be looking 

forward to have that conversation in committee. 

 

And again, you know, as I conclude my remarks, it’s always a 

question about consultations. You know, who have they 

consulted with and what were the comments made? Was there 

anything left on the table? Who else would have an opinion 

about this kind of thing? 

 

And you know, I did talk about how were the public . . . why 

that comment was made about public interest versus the 

member’s interest. Have there been examples of where the 

member’s interests have taken priority over the public interest, 

and what was the outcome of that? Or is this just something that 

seems to be missing in the Act and is a good idea? 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many of my colleagues will 

have comments to make in the second round, second debates, 

and then questions to follow. But at this point, I’d like to move 

adjournment of Bill No. 106, An Act to amend The Legal 

Profession Act, 1990. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 106, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 113 — The Powers 

of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 modifiant la 

Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to 

join the debate tonight on Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney 

Amendment Act, 2013. Again, Mr. Speaker, this one may be 

from the Uniform Law Conference Christmas wish list, 

perhaps. Perhaps not. But it again would seem to be, on the face 

of it, make some useful clarifications in terms of the powers 

that are there under the existing legislation. 

 

The minister described it as a response to recent consultations 

respecting vulnerable adults. It would be interesting to know, 



4214 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, if this emerged from individuals that are on 

trusteeship or are under the powers of the Public Guardian or 

whether or not it came from the other side of the equation, but 

I’m sure we’ll have some greater insight on that in committee. 

 

Of the matters being clarified under the legislation regards the 

enduring power of attorney’s authority to make gifts from an 

adult’s property being clarified in the bill, there are three 

circumstances outlined as part of the clarification. First, if the 

document creating the power of attorney specifically authorized 

the making of gifts. Secondly, if an amount not to exceed the 

value prescribed in the regulations and if there are sufficient 

funds to make the gift and there are reasonable grounds to 

believe that the adult would have made the gift if he or she had 

that capacity. And third and finally, if the court authorizes the 

gift. 

 

The bill sets up, or will allow regulations to set up a fee 

schedule for someone acting under a power of attorney. It will 

give new powers to the Public Guardian and Trustee to carry 

out investigations to ensure the accuracy of an accounting via 

. . . Regulations will prescribe the form of an accounting. For 

mid-term accounting, the court is given the power to remove an 

attorney if the accounting is not satisfactory. A final accounting 

will occur at the conclusion of the attorney’s powers, such as 

when the donor dies, a property guardian is appointed, or the 

court removes that attorney. And a final accounting, again 

referring to the minister’s second reading speech, a final 

accounting being provided within six months, and the bill 

directs to whom the accounting is provided and gives the court 

the power to order an accounting if it is not voluntarily 

provided. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, as the minister states in the second reading 

speech, these improvements seek to provide protection or better 

the protection of vulnerable adults who have given power of 

attorney. So if this does indeed improve the situation for seniors 

who are under the power of attorney legislation, if it does 

improve the lot of those vulnerable adults under the auspices of 

the Public Guardian and Trustee, then this would be a good 

piece of legislation. 

 

Again not exactly earth-shattering on the face of it, but for those 

individuals who are subject to the circumstances outlined in this 

legislation. It’ll be interesting to see the kind of examples that 

again brings this legislation forward, whether or not it comes 

from one side or the other or both in terms of the authority 

equation outlined in this legislation. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues 

have contributions they’d like to make in this debate. I know 

that we’ll have further questions when this bill arrives at 

committee, and we know that we have questions and 

consultation that we’d like to do on this piece of legislation with 

interested stakeholders. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move 

adjournment of Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney 

Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 113, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 114 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to enter into a discussion as it relates to Bill No. 114, The 

Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 

Makers Amendment Act, 2013. This Act is directly related to 

seniors and seniors in care. And just on that front, there’s few 

things that are more important. This is one of the most 

important things that a government provides to its citizens, that 

being seniors’ care. 

 

And if we look at the context of seniors’ care in Saskatchewan 

right now, we know of the crisis that’s occurring under this 

government. We know the strain. We know the horror stories 

that we’re receiving; the call bells that are going unanswered; 

individuals and seniors or pioneers of our province that have 

been left on toilets for hours; seniors that are woken up I 

understand as early as 5 in the morning; and the lack of space, 

dignified space for our seniors who quite simply deserve better. 

 

And we know seniors deserve much better than this. We’ve 

been pressing this government to wake up to the reality and the 

crisis within seniors’ care and to start to take it seriously. And 

we’ll continue to do so. 

 

But that’s the context for seniors’ care in this province right 

now as it relates to the legislation that’s brought forward. The 

minister suggests that there’s been significant consultation that 

has occurred with individuals and groups. We’ll be following 

up on that, both directly with the minister for a list of those that 

have been consulted, also their perspective that they’ve shared. 

And we’ll be following up directly with those stakeholders — 

those in seniors’ care; those in health care; those advocacy 

groups dealing with seniors and those with mental health and 

individuals, persons with disabilities — all those groups and 

individuals that certainly have on-the-ground, first-hand 

knowledge of what does some of these changes mean. 

 

I understand that this legislation fills some gaps that exist in 

designation of duties and responsibilities, and that this brings 

forward an opportunity for individuals to give advanced health 

care directives, to choose a person known as a . . . sorry, give 

advanced health care directives in the event that down the road 

they might not be in a position to do so, or also gives them the 

opportunity to choose a person known as a proxy to make 

health care decisions on their behalf. 

 

I understand the minister’s identified that this fills a few 

different gaps, which certainly seemed to make sense that they 

need to be addressed. It says that the first gap is the day-to-day 

decisions, if you will, Mr. Speaker. And those are decisions 

where seniors are in care, and who has duties and 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4215 

responsibilities to make those decisions around things possibly 

like dental work? We are interested in ensuring that there’s 

clarity as to what constitutes day-to-day decisions. And 

certainly that’s going to be important to be clear to the public 

and to be built out of consultation with the public as well. 

 

We also want to recognize that there’s another gap here, and 

that’s decisions around admitting a person to care or accepting 

placement. These are important decisions, and I understand that 

there’s currently not clear legislation as to who would have 

authority in these situations. And certainly this Act seems to 

step up to address that. And as I see the way it’s brought 

forward, I believe that the following could make decisions and 

in this order. A personal guardian would be the first and 

primary place decision maker. Then there’d be the proxy that 

would be designated by the individual. Then it would move on 

to a nearest relative and, in a final scenario, would be to 

treatment providers. So we’ll follow up with some consultation 

on this. Certainly that order seems to make some sense. 

 

We are dealing with individuals that have contributed to our 

province throughout their entire lives, in many cases pioneers of 

our province and communities, and are at a stage of their life 

where certainly they deserve dignity, deserve care. And these 

are difficult times for a senior and for a family member, family 

members who are observing a loved one going through these 

scenarios. 

 

The last gap or the final amendment would address power of 

attorneys or a power of attorney. And certainly we’ll be 

pressing the minister for a bit of clarity on that front as well. 

But certainly the three gaps that are identified seem to make 

sense. We will be looking for detail and clarity on day-to-day 

activities. We will be looking for all regulation and clarity to be 

built out in consultation with seniors. 

 

And as I said when I started this address, Mr. Speaker, quite 

simply there’s few jobs more important than ensuring the 

seniors of this province the dignity of care that they deserve. 

This Act itself seems to come from a common sense 

perspective. We’ll be reviewing it. But what we know outside 

of this Act and as it relates more to the Health minister’s 

responsibilities is that seniors’ care is in crisis in this province, 

that seniors aren’t being treated with the dignity they deserve, 

and that we, the official opposition, are going to continue to 

push for better for our seniors in this province. 

 

But as it relates to Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives 

and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 

2013, I’ll adjourn debate at this point. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 114, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 115 — The Public 

Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into this debate on Bill No. 115, An Act to 

amend The Public Guardian and Trustee Act, to repeal The 

Mentally Disordered Persons Act and to make a related 

amendment to another Act. That Act is in the bill. 

 

I think this is a very important piece of legislation. Interestingly 

the minister did not refer to who they consulted in the 

development of this Act in his remarks. Other times they would 

be very proud of who they consulted with, but in this case it 

sounds like they didn’t consult with anybody really, to be quite 

frank. So that will be one of our questions, and clearly we’ll be 

out asking people, particularly seniors’ organizations, what they 

feel about this. 

 

Of course there is the language modernization, and it’s always a 

good thing to make sure the language is appropriate. But we do 

have some questions about making sure that this kind of work 

around Public Guardian and Trustee is the right fix. It’s 

important that we don’t go too far too quick. But at the same 

time, I have to tell you that even within my own riding in the 

last month or so this has become a bit of an issue, the Public 

Guardian, and something I wasn’t aware of before, but I think 

as our society ages that this will be something that will become 

more and more an issue. Our society is aging, but as well some 

seniors, unfortunately, as young people move away — they may 

be in other provinces, other cities in the province — seniors 

don’t have anyone really close at hand. And this becomes a 

situation that causes a lot of problems. 

 

And so while it’s difficult to really comment specifically on 

specific parts because I think you need to have that medical 

background — I’m looking at certificates re in-patient, 

certificates re other patients, other persons, you know, when 

we’re dealing with psychiatrists, that type of thing, physicians 

— I think it would be very interesting, well it is going to be 

interesting for us to get some feedback from the medical 

profession, the seniors, that type of thing, about how this . . . Is 

this a good piece of legislation? How does it compare to other 

provinces? 

 

As I said, this is one . . . It is interesting there were no 

comments whether this is something from the law society or the 

national organization that we often hear from. And so that 

leaves us wondering, where did this come from and what kind 

of background does this come from? Now if it is coming from 

the Public Guardian here in the province, that would be as well 

good to know in terms of that background because clearly that 

part of government has a lot of experience, and we value that. 

And if they’re feeling this is the kind of stuff that we need to 

have, then fair enough. But we need to have that, and we’ll have 

many more questions about that. It is important that we have 

that accountability. 

 

But clearly as I said, it’s always good to have a debate around 

this. And I’m looking forward to this for sure because, as I said, 

it’s becoming more and more of an issue. And I think as MLAs 



4216 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], when we have to go out 

and explain what does the Public Guardian do or what does the 

trustee do, we need to be able to do that, and I think that’s an 

area that we can all polish up a bit on. 

 

So I think this is an important area around seniors and others 

who have come to a point where they need someone to help 

them with their finances or just with their living situation in 

terms of making decisions and that type of thing, so it’s really 

important. 

 

But I have to tell you that we have some concerns in terms of 

this government’s track record, in terms of care of seniors and 

accepting that responsibility. I know that when we see this daily 

in question period, the reluctance to accept responsibility, to do 

a better job, and acknowledge that it’s under this government 

that things are getting . . . There are many serious concerns that 

seniors are expressing about their care. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that we’ll have lots of 

questions and lots of comments in the days ahead about this 

particular bill. And I know this comes out of the Throne 

Speech. I think there is merit in having the debate, and we look 

forward to finding out more about this and making sure the 

people in this province understand the changes that lay ahead. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment 

for Bill No. 115, An Act to amend The Public Guardian and 

Trustee Act, to repeal The Mentally Disordered Persons Act 

and to make a related amendment to another Act. I do so 

adjourn, move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 115, The Public Guardian and Trustee 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:58.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4199 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4201 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4203 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4205 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4208 

 Bill No. 102 — The Builders’ Lien Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4209 

 Bill No. 103 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4210 

 Bill No. 104 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4211 

 Bill No. 105 — The Informal Public Appeals Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4211 

 Bill No. 106 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4212 

 Bill No. 113 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4213 

 Bill No. 114 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4214 

 Bill No. 115 — The Public Guardian and Trustee Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4215 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


