




















































Hansard: April 29, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 54A  MONDAY, APRIL 29, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3383 

 April 29, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like 

to introduce some special guests seated in your gallery. These 

special guests are here representing STARS [Shock Trauma Air 

Rescue Society] as our provincial helicopter emergency 

response organization celebrating one year in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So in your gallery — I’ll ask them to maybe wave when I 

mention their names — Ron Dufresne is the vice-president of 

operations for STARS in Saskatchewan; Cindy Seidl, the base 

operator out of Saskatoon; Kelly Brossart, communications and 

external affairs lead for STARS in the province. As well in the 

blue suits, Mr. Speaker, Jon Antal, flight paramedic; Ryan 

MacMillan, a flight paramedic as well; Darcy McKay, clinical 

operations manager and a paramedic; as well as one other 

special guest, Mr. Speaker, Carrie Derin who’s a STARS VIP, 

which actually stands for very important patient here, from 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. We’ll hear more about them in a 

member’s statement. I’d ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s 

my pleasure to bring to your attention, seated within this 

Chamber are a number of special guests we are pleased to have 

with us today, the Special Olympics Team Canada West and 

coaches from the 2013 Special Olympics World Winter Games. 

 

By leave of this Assembly, I call upon the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport and the sports critic MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] for Cumberland for remarks. And I will 

then recognize the members of the Assembly to introduce their 

constituents. I now recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I am honoured today to welcome the athletes and 

coaches of the Special Olympics floor hockey team, Team 

Canada West. These athletes, Mr. Speaker, and coaches hail 

from Saskatoon, Martensville, Prince Albert, and Debden. They 

range in age from 17 to 47. Sixteen players, three coaches, and 

four training coaches attended the games. 

 

Today we’re celebrating this team’s gold medal win at the 

Special Olympics World Winter Games in Korea this past 

February. We are so proud of them, Mr. Speaker. The people 

who make up this team are excellent athletes, wonderful 

ambassadors for our province, and strong role models. Their 

dedication to health and physical activity inspires all of us. 

These athletes, Mr. Speaker, train year-round, often in more 

than one sport, and compete in numerous events every year. 

 

Unfortunately there are a few players, coaches, and training 

coaches who couldn’t make it here today, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 

like to mention them now. Absentee members include players 

Scott Pocha, Terra Dagenais, and Trevor Fendelet; assistant 

coach Darren Whitehead; and training coaches Ryan Elder, 

Chris Cherepacha, and Will Grant. Although they couldn’t 

attend today, they are all of course important members of this 

team. 

 

I would also like to welcome representatives from 

Saskatchewan Special Olympics, Mr. Speaker. I know they are 

seated in the west gallery — maybe they could just give us a 

wave — Roger Dumont, CEO [chief executive officer]; Darlene 

Macquarrie, director of programs; Faye Matt, director of 

operations; Rick Sanden, community development coordinator; 

Kashmir Bahia, youth development coordinator; and Carissa 

Trenton, administrative and operations coordinator. 

 

We also have Dale Kryzanowski, Sask Sport manager of 

provincial development; and Della Ruopp, communications 

coordinator for Sask Sport. Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to welcome all of the family and friends that have joined the 

athletes and coaches for this special occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the MLAs are keen to introduce each of 

the team members from their constituency. So in closing, 

athletes, coaches, thank you for representing Saskatchewan so 

well. Congratulations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join the 

minister in welcoming the athletes who are here today who won 

gold at the World Winter Games. I would like to thank the 

athletes for the dedication and hard work. You’re truly amazing 

individuals. You truly inspire us. You make us proud to be 

Saskatchewan. You make your families proud. You make the 

whole province proud. So with that, we honour you. 

 

For the athletes that make new friends, renew old friends and 

acquaintances on your way, and you’ve done that, we say that’s 

part of the journey of being athletes. And we want to 

acknowledge that the friendships that truly are made — new 

ones, old ones — that truly is something that we have to say, I 

think, inspires many athletes to go on. So with that, I would say 

that. 

 

But you know, to the coaches and families, to the supporters, 

you know, sometimes the families . . . And I was talking to the 

family, Mr. Speaker, earlier today. The dedication to making 

sure that these athletes get to all the practices and games, it’s so 

important. The time that goes in from the family and supporters 

to make sure these athletes get to what they need to do, to 

inspire and to become the good players that you have become, 

that is truly amazing devotion by family. 

 

To recognize the coaches, you know, the coaches, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s unreal the dedication, the support that you’re giving the 

athletes. Truly from the heart, it’s an honour. In the North we 

say, truly it’s honouring people. It’s individuals like you that 

we need to honour. So thank you to the coaches. I want to say 

that. 



3384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2013 

Now to the organizations and the many volunteers of the 

Special Olympics, when you look at this, I think that’s why the 

Special Olympics is so successful. It’s because of the 

organization, the dedication, and I think truly the awareness of 

what young athletes, older athletes, and just individuals coming 

together can accomplish as a team. And you are truly a team. 

It’s amazing. From my heart I say to you, we are so proud of 

you. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming the athletes, 

coaches, their families, and supporters to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I am pleased to introduce to the members Shawn 

Altenberg. One of the veterans on the team, Shawn has been 

competing with the Special Olympics for more than a decade. 

He has won many gold and silver medals. To prepare for 

competitions, he runs. When not playing sports, he enjoys 

helping out around the house. His mother is his hero because 

she pushes him to work hard and inspires him to stay active. 

Shawn, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, it’s my 

honour to introduce to the members Dean Boechler. Dean is 

one of the team’s many veterans. He has been with Special 

Olympics for two decades. When he’s not playing hockey, 

Dean is outdoors competing on softball and soccer fields. To 

prepare for the games, he spends time bonding with his 

teammates, Mr. Speaker. He works as a cook, and his hero is a 

baseball player, Albert Pujols. Dean, welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I’d like to also introduce 

Colin Brisebois. Colin has been involved with Special 

Olympics for an incredible 32 years. He boasts that he got the 

first penalty in the gold medal game at nationals in 2012. 

Despite this early penalty, his team ended up winning. To 

prepare for the games, Colin listens to music and he dances. He 

works and volunteers at Cosmo Industries, a recycling and 

processing facility. His hero is head coach Ken Snell because 

Ken looks after him well. Colin, welcome to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it’s an honour to introduce to you Kyle Couture. Kyle hails 

from Debden, Saskatchewan. The World Games this past 

February were Kyle’s first. He’s been involved with Special 

Olympics for three years and has already earned an impressive 

amount of hardware — gold and silver medals. 

 

When he isn’t playing floor hockey, Kyle competes in track and 

field and works as a hockey arena scorekeeper. His mom is his 

hero because she motivates him to work hard. Kyle, welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce to you today Ryan 

Darmokid. Ryan has been competing with Special Olympics for 

six years, and he also competes in soccer and has won many 

medals. 

 

When not playing sports, he works at the workshop at the 

Abilities corporation. Alexander Ovechkin is his hero because 

Ryan admires his talent as a hockey player. Ryan, welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, I’m privileged to introduce to the Assembly 

Tyler Gilbert. A veteran athlete, Tyler Gilbert has been with 

Special Olympics for more than 20 years. 

 

In addition to playing floor hockey, and a goalie I might add, he 

competes in softball and works at Home Depot as an associate. 

He listens to music and focuses on all aspects of the game to 

ensure he’s mentally prepared for competitions. His hero, not 

surprisingly, is his dad, the person who first taught him how to 

play sports. 

 

Tyler, welcome to your Legislative Assembly, and 

congratulations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it’s a pleasure to introduce to the members Jamie 

Rezansoff. Jamie has been involved with special Olympics for 

17 years. In addition to floor hockey, he competes in bowling 

and soccer. 

 

When’s he’s not training, he works as a wood shop trainee and 

enjoys going to movies. This year’s Special Olympics world 

games were Jamie’s first. And it’s his one for one, one gold 

medal for one world games, pretty impressive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Jamie, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it’s an honour to introduce to the members Lee Salzl. 

Although Lee has been with the Special Olympics for only 

three years, he has earned a number of gold medals, including 

at the most recent provincial and national games. He keeps busy 

all year round playing softball in the summer and working at 

Safeway as a clerk. His parents are his heroes. They support 

him unconditionally and taught him dedication and 

perseverance. Lee, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 



April 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3385 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, it is my honour to introduce to you today 

Chris Sayers. Chris has been competing with Special Olympics 

for a decade. In addition to floor hockey, he also competes in 

bowling, which he enjoys immensely. 

 

Outside Special Olympics, Chris works as a groundskeeper at 

the University of Saskatchewan. He tends to landscaping and 

keeps the area outside the stately brick buildings of the campus 

looking healthy, tidy, and beautiful. 

 

His hero is head coach Ken Snell because Ken pushes him to 

work his hardest. Chris, welcome to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I am honoured to introduce to you today, Susan Shier. 

Susan is a 14-year veteran of Special Olympics and competes in 

both floor hockey and softball. She prepares for competitions 

by focusing on her play and trying to relax the night before. Her 

hero is head coach Ken Snell. Susan, welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is a pleasure to introduce to you today Mike 

Siwy. For the past 14 years, Mike has been involved with 

Special Olympics. Like many other players on the team, Mike 

is an all-around athlete and competes in softball in the summer 

time. He works at Sarcan Recycle as a baler. His heroes: his 

sister and brother-in-law because they helped him get involved 

with Special Olympics. Mike, welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’m pleased to introduce to the members Mike Snell. Mike 

is one of the team’s veterans. He’s been with Special Olympics 

for nearly two decades. He, like many of the other players as 

part of the hockey team, went and won gold at the nationals in 

2012. A versatile athlete, he also competes in soccer and 10-pin 

bowling. His hero is his dad, head coach Ken Snell, because he 

is such a great mentor to him and his teammates. Mike works at 

the recycling process facility at Cosmo Industries. Mike, 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would like to 

introduce to you and through you, it’s a pleasure to introduce 

the member, John Wickett. John has been a Special Olympics 

athlete for more than 15 years. In addition to playing floor 

hockey, John bowls, golfs, and plays soccer and softball with 

the Special Olympics. 

 

John is a busy man. He also works at three restaurants. He has 

served as a board member on the Saskatchewan alternative 

living and has won many sports awards. John, welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it’s an honour to introduce a friend of mine to the 

members of the Assembly, Mitch Hesson. Mitch is an assistant 

coach with the floor hockey team. She has been involved with 

Special Olympics for over 15 years, but didn’t start coaching 

until being encouraged by most of the team’s mentor, Ken 

Snell. Before coaching she was on the board of Special 

Olympics Saskatchewan and a proud Special Olympian parent. 

The experience in Korea was her first time at an international 

competition. Mitch, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it’s an honour to introduce to you today Ken Snell. Ken is 

the head coach of this great team. He’s been involved with the 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan in various capacities for the 

last 25 years. He’s been coaching the Special Olympics 

Saskatoon floor hockey team for the past 15 years. He 

appreciates the opportunity to mentor these men and women. 

Ken admires his athletes’ passion, their enthusiasm for not only 

floor hockey but for each other. He says these athletes are more 

than players to him; they are members of his family. Ken, 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister’s earlier welcome to the delegation from STARS. 

It’s a pleasure to see you in the Speaker’s gallery today, and I 

look forward to hearing the member’s statement later on this 

afternoon. And thank you so much for the work that you’re 

doing here in Saskatchewan in caring for our citizens. I’d ask 

all members to join me in once again welcoming this group to 

the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to introduce a group of students from the University of 

Saskatchewan Edwards School of Business sitting in the 

Speaker’s gallery today. They are: Cole Thorpe, Mike Vossen, 

Colin Paterson, Hilary Carlson, Brennan Toh, Ryan Wig, Jared 

Fingler, Michael Tastad, Paul Mantyka, Kelsey Heggie, Kent 

Janostin, Landon Grubb, and Ellen Glaze. Also from the 

Edwards School of Business accompanying these students are 

Dr. Daphne Taras, the dean; and Trevor Maber, the JDC [Jeux 

de commerce] West faculty coach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students competed in the JDC West 

competition held this past January at the Sauder School of 

Business at the University of British Columbia. JDC West is 

Western Canada’s largest business school competition, where 

over 600 business school students compete in 10 academic 

disciplines. I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Edwards 



3386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2013 

School of Business took home the highly coveted School of the 

Year trophy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud of these students and want to ensure 

that they work hard and stay in the province. Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask that all members welcome them to their legislature 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the Minister for Advanced Education on behalf of the 

official opposition, welcoming these students from Edwards 

School of Business, faculty as well, and congratulate them for 

the prestigious School of the Year award at the JDC 

competition last year. 

 

While I’m also on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a 

number of individuals seated in your gallery as well. They are 

here today because over the past 10-months-plus they have 

been working and advocating on behalf of Victoria Ordu and 

Favour Amadi. We are joined today, Mr. Speaker, by Kay 

Adebogun, Naomi Beingessner, Emily Eaton, Simon Enoch, 

Tyler Gray, Paige Kezima, Chris Kortright, Vanessa Mathews, 

Michelle Stewart, Sean Tucker. Terri Sleeva has joined us here 

on the floor — good to see you here, Terri; and Helena 

Seiferling as well as Muna Di Ciman. They’re here today to get 

the update from the Minister of Justice in terms of the 

undertaking that was made last week. Please welcome these 

individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to introduce in your gallery Arden Fiala. 

Arden hails from Shaunavon, Saskatchewan, works locally, 

provincially, and nationally for people with autism. Arden was 

recently awarded the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee, recipient for 

her work on behalf of autism throughout Canada. She is the 

mother of an autistic child and she is the current president of 

Saskatchewan FEAT, which stands for Saskatchewan Families 

for Effective Autism Treatment. 

 

Arden, thank you very much for everything that you have done 

and continue to do for people with autism in our communities. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the member opposite and welcome Ms. 

Arden Fiala to her Legislative Assembly. I know Arden to be a 

passionate advocate for those young people and all families that 

are impacted by autism spectrum disorder. I know she’s joined 

here today by her son, Hartley. And I know that she’s 

occupying the role as president of SaskFEAT [Saskatchewan 

Families for Effective Autism Treatment], and I know that 

she’ll be providing leadership and service to all of 

Saskatchewan in that role. 

 

I also know that she knows all too well first-hand the challenges 

and realities of autism as it relates to her daughter. And she’s a 

strong advocate within her community, within her school 

division, and to all within this province with her voice on behalf 

of her daughter. I ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming Ms. Arden Fiala. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly today, some constituents of mine from the 

Melville-Saltcoats constituency. I want to start with Shirley and 

Morley Thorpe from the Spy Hill area. Some may have heard 

Morley; he’s a quite renowned cowboy poet, but also a very 

renowned baseball player. And I’d like to carry on with that. 

They’ve taken the opportunity to come to their legislature today 

to join their son who’s also with the Edwards School of 

Business, a very accomplished young man. And I also want to 

acknowledge at the same time Kaleigh Zerr, who is also from 

Langenburg area in my constituency.  

 

I just want to take a minute because I’ve known Cole, Cole 

Thorpe, since he was a little guy, a lot shorter than I was at that 

time and now he’s a lot taller. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Cole has been in sports for the majority of his life. 

He’s been with the Canadian all-star team in baseball. He’s won 

nationals at Summerside, PEI [Prince Edward Island] with a 

Saskatchewan team. He’s also won bronze at the Western 

Canada Summer Games. He’s also won provincial titles with 

the Yorkton team. So he’s been around. Very accomplished in 

baseball, Mr. Speaker. But it doesn’t stop there. 

 

Cole has also been a member of the Hartung curling rink from 

Langenburg that also won the gold medal in 2008. And it 

doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. Volleyball: 3A high school 

champions with the Langenburg school. So as I mentioned, this 

is a very talented young man. And it shows with the group that 

we have up there today, that the future of Saskatchewan is in 

very good hands. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 

today I would like to introduce two young ladies from my 

constituency. If they just want to give us a wave — Sherri 

Woolridge and Shauna Kadler. 

 

These two ladies are very energetic, busy, and caring people. 

They’re here today on behalf of The Battleford Boys and Girls 

Club. We had a chance to meet with them earlier this morning. 

They were on the road at 5 o’clock this morning from The 

Battlefords to get down here for a 9:30 meeting. And we did 

have an excellent meeting. 

 

The Battleford Boys and Girls Club, Mr. Speaker, provide a 

great program for youth in The Battlefords between the ages of 

6 and 14. They provide mentoring. They help out with 

homework. They provide healthy snacks, cooking classes and, 

among other things, sports opportunities. I would like to ask all 

members of this Assembly to join with me in thanking them 



April 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3387 

and welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a busy day 

with introductions today, and I would be remiss if I didn’t 

through you and to you and to all members of the legislature, 

add my words of welcome to two constituents: Ms. Arden Fiala 

who’s been introduced by the member from Sutherland, and the 

member from Rosemont added some additional information. 

You know, she only lives 20 miles down the road from where 

my office is, and we communicate by email. And unfortunately 

I’ve never actually met her in person. So it’s a pleasure to 

welcome her to her legislature today. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

acknowledge Ryan Wig. Now Ryan’s a very shy young man, 

and when he was introduced, he just kind of gently waved. 

Ryan, I want you to stand up, if you would please. He’s a big 

fellow, but Ryan is a special young man in my life. 

 

He’s served as an intern in my constituency office three 

summers ago, and I was so impressed with this young fellow. 

He came to me and said, I would like to learn what you do in 

this office. And I guess that set the tone because the first day on 

the job when we didn’t have enough for him to do, he kept 

saying, have you got more for me to do? Have you got more for 

me to do? And when I listened to his life plans and what he’s 

got scheduled for not just this summer but many summers 

thereafter, I know that he’s going to be a real success. So, Ryan, 

welcome. Thank you for working with me so diligently and 

good luck in everything you do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, because there’s still a few 

people that we haven’t introduced in the Assembly here today, 

it’s my pleasure to provide a brief welcome to the Southeast 

Saskatchewan Surface Rights Association and members that are 

seated in the west gallery. It’s a pleasure to have you here 

today. I know they’re meeting with government. They’re also 

meeting with opposition. I look forward to that meeting here 

afternoon. And certainly they provide leadership to the entire 

Southeast and to those landowners and to those that have 

surface rights and surface leases, and we look forward to the 

discussion here this afternoon. So I ask all members to welcome 

members of the Southeast Saskatchewan Surface Rights 

Association. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with 

my colleague across the floor to welcome the group from 

southeast Saskatchewan. I had a great meeting with them this 

morning. They represent a terrific part of the province, which is 

one of the most productive parts of our province for both 

agriculture and the oil industry. So it’s great to see the type of 

leadership that they provide. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand up today to present a petition in relation to 

cellphone coverage for the Northwest. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the northern hamlet of Dore Lake, 

located in northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this particular 

petition are from Dore Lake, from Big River, and from all 

throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better support and better seniors 

care here in the province: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 

quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 

more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 

standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 

for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in 

senior care facilities; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 

as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

petition calling for the reconsideration of passing Bill 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we know since the Act 

was introduced in December, literally hundreds of hours of 

study and comparison have been carried out in the interest of 

due diligence. And we know that stable labour relations in all 

sectors run the risk of being thrown into turmoil as a result of 

the sweeping changes that are contained. Thousands of 

represented workers stand to lose their rights to bargain 

collectively and be represented by the union of their choice. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the Government of Saskatchewan 

to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act in 

this current session before the end of May and to place it 

on a much longer legislative track to ensure greater 

understanding and support for this new labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 



3388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2013 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition to the Legislative Assembly on behalf of 

citizens of Saskatchewan. Northern Saskatchewan is being 

targeted by the Nuclear Waste Management Organization to 

become a storage site for millions of used irradiated nuclear 

fuel bundles. These radioactive nuclear bundles would be 

shipped on provincial highways. Some provinces have already 

banned the storage or transport of used nuclear bundles. So the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly pass 

legislation to permanently ban nuclear waste storage and 

transportation of nuclear waste into, out of, and through 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, Beauval, 

Regina, and Montreal Lake and Canoe Lake and Prince Albert. 

I so submit. 

 

[14:00] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Holocaust Memorial Week 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the city 

of Saskatoon proclaimed last week as Holocaust Memorial 

Week. As part of this week of remembrance, last Thursday 

nearly 500 students from across Saskatoon participated in the 

city’s first Holocaust Memorial Walk, which remembered 

victims of the Holocaust and paid tribute to the survivors. 

 

Saskatoon’s march was lead by Holocaust survivor Max Eisen. 

During the Second World War, Mr. Eisen was only 15 years old 

when he and his family were sent to Auschwitz. After the walk 

around Raoul Wallenberg Park, he shared his story with the 

students, inspiring our young people to create a positive change 

in their lives and across our communities. 

 

In addition to last week’s march, yesterday Saskatoon’s 

Congregation Agudas Israel held its annual Holocaust 

Memorial Service. Again Max Eisen was the keynote speaker. 

Citizens of all faiths gather annually at the Jewish Community 

Centre to participate in this moving event. I was honoured to be 

joined by our Attorney General, who spoke eloquently, as well 

as the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, and the 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking 

Max Eisen as well as all of the volunteers behind both events 

for their vital and valued work in Saskatoon marking Holocaust 

Memorial Week. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we proceed I would like to remind our 

guests in the galleries not to participate in events on the floor, 

and that includes applause. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Regina Police Service Half Marathon 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The city was 

alive with energy, packed with runners and spectators, as the 

Regina Police Service held its 10th Annual Half Marathon. The 

RPS [Regina Police Service] Half Marathon displays the 

Regina Police Service members and employees as positive role 

models and leaders in the community. It demonstrates their 

commitment to wellness, physical fitness, and a healthy 

lifestyle. 

 

Several hundred people participated in this year’s event, 

walking or running 21.1 kilometres around Wascana Lake and 

the University of Regina. Runners included Police Chief 

Hagen, many members of the force, as well as those of the 

running community. I’d like to give a special shout-out to the 

impressive runners from A.E. Peacock in Moose Jaw and the 

team of student photographers from Sheldon-Williams in 

Regina. 

 

I was proud to run in the half-marathon, Mr. Speaker, and I 

have the sore legs here today to prove it. It was truly a beautiful 

spring-like morning to run, despite a rather stiff wind. 

Appropriately at the starting line, a moment of silence was held 

in response to the tragic bombing at the Boston Marathon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to all runners and walkers that 

participated, I’d like to thank the Regina Police Service, the 

many volunteers, sponsors, and organizers who donated their 

time and support into making such a great event and such a fine 

spring tradition here in Regina. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Construction Begins on Moose Jaw Hospital 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I was honoured 

and privileged this morning at an exciting event that I attended 

just a few hours ago in Moose Jaw. Along with the Premier, the 

Minister of Health, and the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, 

I was privileged to participate in the ceremony to celebrate the 

start of construction at the new Moose Jaw hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an amazing sight to see the first step and 

the next step in this hospital project, which is a modern, 

state-of-the-art design to put the needs of patients first. This 

hospital will be the first health care facility completed in the 

province to fully integrate the lean methodology in the design, 

operation, and the culture of the facility. The design and care 

model of the new hospital will allow health care providers and 

services to be mobile, which will result in more convenient 

services for patients, operational efficiencies, and 

improvements in safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is contributing 80 per cent toward 

the total estimated project costs of $99.5 million. The Moose 

Jaw Health Foundation will also work in partnership with the 

health region, Ministry of Health, and health care professionals 

to equip the new regional hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a great news story and a first in 

Saskatchewan. The new hospital will provide a great health 



April 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3389 

care experience for patients in the Moose Jaw and the entire 

Five Hills Health Region. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

90th Anniversary of Naval Volunteer Reserve 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Saturday April 27th, Saskatoon's Naval Reserve Division, Her 

Majesty's Canadian Ship Unicorn celebrated its 90th 

anniversary. As their local MLA, I was pleased to attend their 

anniversary dinner along with Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor; the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour; and the member for Wood River. 

 

It was on April 27th, 1923 that the then Saskatoon 

Half-Company was established as one of the first units of the 

three-month old Royal Canadian Naval Volunteer Reserve. 

Commissioned as HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] 

Unicorn in 1941, it became an active recruiting centre for the 

Royal Canadian Navy during the Second World War, enrolling 

and providing initial training to over 3,600 prairie sailors. Many 

of those sailors served in the Battle of the Atlantic, which will 

be remembered this coming Sunday. They served from the 

Arctic to the Mediterranean, from the English Channel off the 

Normandy's beaches, across the North Atlantic to the coast of 

North America. 

 

Unicorn’s personnel also served off the shores of Korea, in the 

former Yugoslavia, the Persian Gulf, and Afghanistan. And 

they continue to serve today in ships off both East and West 

Coasts, as well as responding to emergencies closer to home 

like the Manitoba floods of 1997 and 2011. At all times they 

serve to remind their fellow citizens of the importance of 

Canada's Navy: that the sea is at our gates, even if those gates 

are over the horizon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in wishing a very 

happy anniversary to HMCS Unicorn and the Naval Reserve. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

First Anniversary of Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today to celebrate the one-year 

anniversary of the STARS operation in Saskatchewan. We are 

proud of this province’s long tradition of air ambulance service. 

Adding critical care services by helicopter to the mix of ground 

ambulance, fixed-wing aircraft, emergency services, and first 

responders has increased our ability to respond to emergency 

situations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has enabled us to help us save lives across our 

province. Our government believed in STARS from the 

beginning, providing $6.1 million in the 2011-12 fiscal year, 

$10.5 million last year, and another $10.5 million this fiscal 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province is blessed with wide open spaces 

and many rural and remote areas where people live, work, and 

enjoy our province’s natural beauty through recreational 

activities. As our province experiences economic and 

population growth, it is essential that we make emergency 

medical services even more responsive than they were before. 

To improve access to emergency departments at provincial 

tertiary hospitals, a rooftop heliport will be developed at the 

Regina General Hospital this year, and another is being 

included on the roof of the children’s hospital and the new 

Moose Jaw hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this first anniversary of helicopter air 

emergency services in Saskatchewan, I am pleased to 

acknowledge the dedication of the whole STARS team and the 

strong support the corporate community, individuals, and 

families have shown to allow STARS to fly in our province. 

Thank you all very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday 

evening the 2012 Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 

were held at the Conexus Arts Centre, and the Cypress Hills 

constituency was well-represented among the winners. These 

awards are presented every year by Tourism Saskatchewan and 

were established to recognize excellence in emerging and 

traditional areas of the province’s tourism sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize some of the great 

representation from Cypress Hills in the House today. The 

renowned Cypress Hills Eco-Adventures Ltd. was once again a 

winner after receiving the Rookie of the Year award at last 

year’s event. The president and CEO of the organization, Jori 

Kirk, was presented with the Fred Heal Ambassador Award. 

This award recognizes an individual’s contribution to the 

promotion of Saskatchewan as a tourism destination. His 

company was also a nominee for the Business of the Year 

award this year. 

 

Krista Berg, who is employed by Cypress Hills Eco-Adventures 

and who’s responsible for first impressions, tour safety, and 

operations received the Service Excellence Award. She was 

recognized for her professionalism, leadership, positive attitude, 

and passion about the tourism industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, Saskatchewan 

region, and Royce Pettyjohn with the town of Maple Creek 

were both nominated for awards and have a significant presence 

in the Cypress Hills constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 

congratulating all the award winners who go above and beyond 

to offer superior tourism experiences to visitors and residents 

alike. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Government Supports Habitat for Humanity 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise 

today to recognize last Friday’s Habitat for Humanity ceremony 



3390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2013 

in Saskatoon where five families received keys to their new 

homes. Thanks to a total of 250,000 in funding assistance from 

the province through Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, these 

five families will become homeowners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Friday’s announcement was an important one as it 

provides these five hard-working families a safe and affordable 

place to call home and stability for their children. Since March 

2009, the Government of Saskatchewan has invested $6.5 

million to assist Habitat for Humanity Saskatchewan affiliates, 

and providing a total of 130 homes for low- to 

moderate-income families across the province. 

 

In addition to the $2 million in funding from the provincial 

government, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation provided 

an additional $600,000 to Habitat for Humanity through the 

Summit Action Fund. This funding will create sustainable 

revolving land trusts in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert to 

assist in the development and purchase of land for 39 to 49 

units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

recognizing the Habitat for Humanity ceremony in Saskatoon 

and congratulating each of these five families on their new 

homes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Capacity and Investment in the Health System 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last weeks 

and months, we’ve heard a lot of concerning news about our 

health system, Mr. Speaker, and especially for our care for 

seniors — cuts to home care services, understaffing in seniors’ 

care facilities. We’ve heard stories, Mr. Speaker, of seniors 

being left on toilets unattended for hours, not receiving baths 

for longer than a week at a time. We’ve heard of an overtime 

freeze, an overtime ban and hiring freeze in the Saskatoon 

Health Region, and possible closure of the pediatric intensive 

care unit here in Regina, as well as the pediatric oncology ward. 

 

Absolutely none of that, Mr. Speaker, is what Saskatchewan 

people expect when our economy is doing so well. The Minister 

of Health, Mr. Speaker, says this isn’t cause for alarm, and the 

Premier has dismissed these real life issues, Mr. Speaker, 

affecting patients here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Perhaps this issue, Mr. Speaker, will receive the Sask Party’s 

attention. My office has received an internal report showing 

that last Thursday, St. Paul’s Hospital was over capacity by 47 

patients. My question to the Premier: does he think it’s 

acceptable that St. Paul’s Hospital is so crowded that 47 

patients are left in the hallways? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 

the Leader of the Opposition for the question. There have been 

a number of questions raised by the opposition on health care, 

as it should be in this particular Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has been responding to health 

care issues, not just this year or the year before, but over the life 

of the government since we were elected in 2007 when we took 

over a situation where we were short 1,000 nurses working in 

the system, where there weren’t enough doctors practising in 

the system, where we didn’t have appropriate emergency care 

like we do now, complementing good road ambulance and good 

air ambulance now with STARS, Mr. Speaker, and where the 

government never had any objectives or goals as we do now 

around, for example, the surgical wait times initiative which has 

now seen, I think in its fourth year, the gradual reduction of 

wait times for surgery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are pressure points in the system. The government 

addresses those pressure points in part through the efforts of the 

regions but also, Mr. Speaker — and this is important — 

through significant increases in resources to the regions like the 

Saskatoon Health Region. Mr. Speaker, in this particular 

budget, a 4.5 per cent increase for those regional budgets. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the report that shows last 

Thursday 47 individuals were receiving care in the hallways of 

St. Paul’s Hospital, Mr. Speaker, is not an isolated incident. 

Front-line health care workers, Mr. Speaker, tell me that this is 

the situation in other hospitals throughout the province. 

 

Earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, a media outlet reported on a 

death of a 49-year-old patient who was in a makeshift unit due 

to overcrowding at Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. We 

know that last year, Mr. Speaker, there were cancellations of 

surgeries here in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region because of 

hospital overcrowding. 

 

We know this has been an issue for some time. My question to 

the Premier: how many other hospitals in our province are 

currently overcrowded and having to deliver hallway medicine? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that certainly our tertiary centres in 

Regina and Saskatoon are facing issues, Mr. Speaker, because 

of growing population. More people into the system is causing 

some concern for those regions in terms of being able to deliver 

service, Mr. Speaker. That’s why in this budget, in order to help 

regions address overpopulation, growing population, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget invests $29 million into our health regions, 

largely to go to Regina and Saskatoon because we do know that 

this is — today, as opposed to under the members opposite — 

this is a growing province. 

 

We have more people in this province, the highest population 

that we’ve ever seen in this province, Mr. Speaker, and we are 

providing additional support for regional health authorities to 

provide additional services for these additional clients, Mr. 

Speaker, and patients in the system. And we’ll continue to 

provide that support. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



April 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3391 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My specific question 

to the Premier was, how many hospitals are facing an 

overcrowding situation similar to what we saw last week at St. 

Paul’s Hospital where they were over capacity by 47 

individuals? 

 

The vice-president of the Saskatoon Health Region said that in 

overcapacity situations they have had “several or a few critical 

incidents.” The official went on to say, “A critical incident is 

defined as when death or harm is caused that is not anticipated 

or planned.” So we have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where a 

patient dies unexpectedly in January, and we know that there 

are questions around that. We know, Mr. Speaker, there are 

media reports in which a senior health official acknowledges 

that they have had several incidents in which unexpected harm 

or death has occurred in overcapacity situations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this ought to be alarming for all of us, especially 

to the Health minister and the Premier, Mr. Speaker. But we 

question the urgency and the seriousness this has taken, Mr. 

Speaker, because we know, despite this occurring months ago, 

that as of Thursday there was a situation in St. Paul’s where 

overcapacity occurred by 47 individuals. 

 

My question to the Premier: how many critical incidents have 

occurred during overcapacity situations when hallway medicine 

is being delivered here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will provide that 

information to the Leader of the Opposition, but I will tell the 

member opposite this, and all members of the House: on a 

quarterly basis I receive a report of all critical incidences that 

are reported within the system, and I take every single one of 

them serious, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the work that we’re doing with our health 

regions and within the health system, we are doing a better job I 

think than ever before in tracking critical incidences, tracking 

measurements that we never used to track in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and publicly identifying those within the walls of 

health regions and health facilities all across this province so 

that not only employees see this, Mr. Speaker, so that the 

general public at large and that patients and their families can 

see how well we are doing, and frankly, Mr. Speaker, in areas 

that we need to do a better job. Mr. Speaker, this is a part of the 

work that we’re doing to transform the health care system in 

Saskatchewan. And we have been recognized for the work that 

we’re doing in accountability and transparency, knowing that 

more needs to be done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s concerning to Saskatchewan 

people when they hear of a situation where there’s overcapacity 

in a hospital by 47 individuals. And we’ve asked, Mr. Speaker, 

where else this has occurred and how many critical incidents 

there have been when this situation is happening here in 

Saskatchewan. And people in the province, Mr. Speaker, are 

wondering how this situation will improve, given the budget 

decisions by the Sask Party government as it relates to for 

example the Saskatoon Health Region where we see a funding 

gap of $25 million, Mr. Speaker, and we see an accumulated 

deficit of nearly $70 million. 

 

They can’t understand why we’re seeing cuts to home care; 

why we’re seeing poor staffing levels, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to seniors’ care here in the province; why we’re hearing 

about possible closure of the pediatric intensive care unit, 

pediatric oncology ward, Mr. Speaker. All of this doesn’t make 

sense to Saskatchewan people when the economy in 

Saskatchewan is doing well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how is it that when 

the economy is doing well, we hear these increasing stories of 

individuals who are personally affected, their loved ones are 

personally affected by the decisions that the Sask Party 

government has made? At a time when our economy is doing 

well, why is the Sask Party government struggling to deliver 

high-quality health care here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the record is this: in 

successive budgets implemented by this side of the House in 

government, we have seen huge increases and investment in 

health care in the province, huge increases in health care 

operating. We see a 4.5 per cent lift in this budget for the 

regions that the Leader of the Opposition’s talking about. Huge 

increases in capital, Mr. Speaker. An expansion to emergency 

response system. Millions of dollars invested in the surgical 

wait times initiative. Millions more invested in having the right 

complement of nurses and doctors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister has acknowledged that there’s more work to be 

done. He’s also highlighted the fact that we are better tracking 

and reporting on incidents, Mr. Speaker. It’s part explanation 

for that member opposite for his questions. 

 

But here’s what we haven’t heard from the member. When he 

ran for the NDP [New Democratic Party] leadership, he said 

unequivocally in his platform that were he to be elected, he 

would find efficiencies in the health care system. Well he sort 

of shrugs his shoulder. That’s exactly what he said. 

 

When those efficiencies are sought in the budget, he opposes 

them, Mr. Speaker. He’s going to have to get on one side of the 

issue or the other, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have to look at the financial 

reality the Saskatoon Health Region has been placed in by the 

Sask Party government. We see a budget shortfall, Mr. Speaker, 

of $25 million. We see an accumulated deficit, Mr. Speaker, of 

nearly $70 million. We see a freeze on hiring, Mr. Speaker. We 

see elimination of overtime and, Mr. Speaker, we see large 

overcrowding in facilities like at St. Paul’s with 47 individuals, 

last Thursday, over capacity in the hospital. 

 

My question to the Premier: why will he not take this issue 

seriously? These are real issues affecting real people here in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And does he not see the connection 

between the decisions of his Sask Party government and the 

reality that patients and families are now experiencing in the 



3392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2013 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, again it’s important to correct 

some of the preamble we hear from the Leader of the 

Opposition. It’s important for us, for example, to put on the 

record that since our government was elected to power, we have 

increased funding to the health regions by a cumulative total of 

$1 billion in five years, Mr. Speaker. We have increased the 

operating budget in this particular budget, a budget that was 

balanced — the only balanced budget in the country — we’ve 

increased operating to the regions by 4.5 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also reported back to this House and 

answered some questions from the Leader of the Opposition of 

all the strategic investments we’ve made in health care that 

frankly are delivering better results for people — with more 

work to be done, but better results in terms of wait times, better 

results in terms of leaning out the system, in terms of a 

patient-first approach — than we ever had under the NDP. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I do think it’s reasonable, first of all, for 

the Opposition Leader to ask questions of the government. 

That’s part of his job. But there’s another part of his job and 

that’s to prescribe what he would do. We saw a glimpse of it in 

his leadership campaign when he said if he were the Premier 

there would be efficiencies in the health care system. Mr. 

Speaker, yes or no: is that his position today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Immigration Issue 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today marks the end of the 

academic semester at the University of Regina. It means that 

Victoria Ordu and Favour Amadi, two young international 

students, have lost a year of their studies. This has happened 

because Victoria and Favour made an honest mistake and 

worked a couple of weeks at Wal-Mart. 

 

In response, the federal government invoked one of the harshest 

punishments possible and placed deportation orders on these 

two young women. Favour and Victoria have been taking 

sanctuary at local churches ever since, and we are joined here 

today by citizens who have been steadfastly working and 

advocating on their behalf. 

 

These individuals and Victoria and Favour heard the 

undertaking from the Minister of Justice last week to raise this 

case with the federal government. Can the Minister of Justice 

inform this Assembly as to his actions in this matter, and can he 

inform the public as to the federal government’s response? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I did 

provide an undertaking to the House that I would speak to the 

federal Minister of Public Safety, and I did that last 

Wednesday. I was in Ottawa discussing issues of cyberbullying 

and victims’ rights. I did raise the matter with the minister. He 

agreed that he would raise the matter with the Minister of 

Immigration. We did point out to him that we thought that the 

transgressions were relatively minor in the greater scheme of 

things, Mr. Speaker. He took that position, and he will take that 

forward to the Minister of Immigration. And we hope to hear 

further from the minister in due course. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank that minister for his 

action and I thank him for that response. 

 

But his answer underlies one of the challenges that has faced 

this case from the start. The Saskatchewan Minister of Justice 

raises the case with federal Minister Vic Toews, and Toews 

says that he will raise it with Citizenship and Immigration 

Minister Kenney. In March of this year, this issue was raised 

again with Minister Kenney’s office, only to have an official 

state that the concern should be addressed to Minister Toews. 

While this federal buck-passing has gone on, two young women 

have lost their academic year, and Saskatchewan’s reputation 

for being a welcoming place for international students has been 

damaged. 

 

To restate, we are thankful for the action of the Justice minister 

on this matter. But will this government also press the matter 

through the Minister of the Economy to the federal Immigration 

minister? Or better yet, will the Premier endeavour to bring the 

federal buck-passing to an end and take the matter up directly 

with Prime Minister Stephen Harper? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I will remind the House that 

this matter is a matter of federal responsibility, and it’s housed 

within the Minister of Immigration. I said we’ve raised the 

issue with the minister. We have agreed that we’ll follow up 

with him on the matter. 

 

It will be of some interest to see whether or not the member 

opposite has raised this issue with his federal counterparts in 

Ottawa. Any correspondence that they provided would be very 

helpful. We can provide that on to the minister as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Plans for School Gymnasium 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sacred Heart 

Community School has a vital place in the community. But the 

students of the school here in Regina have no access to the 

gymnasium for physical activity. The school’s gym has been 

ruled off limits as the lights fell off the ceiling and the 

scoreboard fell off the wall. Now the foundation is heaving and 

the walls are crumbling and, as a result, the school staff has 

scrambled to come up with activities for the students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the school pushed for repairs for years, but no one 

in the Sask Party government seems to be listening. In the 

meantime, students sit idling as they await access to their 

gymnasium. To the minister: how could the Sask Party 



April 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3393 

government stand by as the school’s gymnasium literally falls 

apart? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite for the question. I have been apprised of 

the situation at Sacred Heart Community School. Our officials 

are in contact with the Catholic School Board officials, Mr. 

Speaker. As a matter of fact, I met with the chairwoman of the 

Sacred Heart Community School this morning. We have 

elevated the situation from the critical space category to the 

health and safety priority, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue to 

work with the Sacred Heart staff and the Catholic School Board 

to mitigate that situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Regina Catholic 

superintendent of facilities told the local media last week that 

the wall in the gymnasium has major damage. And as the 

school sincerely, sincerely focuses on improving grades and 

literacy, the lack of physical activity this spring and into the 

week’s muddy season will even put more pressure on the staff 

and administrators of the school. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the school and the division have put in 

continual requests for improvements for the provincial 

government. But they say this is the first time, this is the first 

time they’ve heard it’s been a health and safety concern. This is 

a serious matter, Mr. Speaker. And in the words of the 

superintendent, this isn’t just something they’ve stumbled 

across. And yet the Sask Party leaves the school gym’s 

replacement on its waiting list indefinitely. 

 

Why has the Sask Party government denied these students 

access to the renewal of their school, and does no one in the 

government benches understand the negative effect it has on 

students when they don’t have access to their gym? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker, and 

again thank the member opposite for the question. I’m very 

aware of the importance of physical activity in student 

achievement, Mr. Speaker. And we are working, as I said, with 

the separate school board to do everything we can to alleviate 

that situation. 

 

I do want to remind the member opposite that in this year’s 

budget, we have again increased spending for capital by $7.2 

million, Mr. Speaker, for a total of $119 million. And included 

in that amount, Mr. Speaker, is an amount for preventative 

maintenance and renewal. 

 

We are working with the school board to mitigate the 

circumstances so that our children do have access to quality 

physical education activities, Mr. Speaker. I fully realize the 

importance of that, and we’re doing everything we can to 

alleviate that stress. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the school’s principal says 

there’s been a noticeable change amongst the students because 

they’re not getting enough gym time that they need to stay 

healthy. And the school’s had to bus students to other schools 

so that they get their physical education. And the staff have 

gone above and beyond to ensure the health and well-being of 

their students. 

 

And as a community school, that is all the more important. And 

that’s why it makes absolutely no sense this provincial 

government’s spokesperson told the media that there would be 

no decision, no decision of the situation until next spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that the Sask Party’s official answer? That 

they’re going to expect the community school to operate 

without a gymnasium for an entire school year? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I can’t . . . A third 

time, we are working with the school division to address the 

physical education needs of the students at Sacred Heart 

Community School. I realize that physical education is a very 

important part of student achievement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can’t emphasize enough, Mr. Speaker, in the Sask Party’s 

six years of government, we’ve invested $600 million in capital 

compared to the NDP’s six years of 165, Mr. Speaker. As well, 

Mr. Speaker, in our six years, renovations have increased by 

228 per cent, Mr. Speaker, $450 million from the members 

opposite . . . or from our government, Mr. Speaker, and 137 

million from ours, Mr. Speaker. We’ve invested in 43 major 

school capital projects, over 900 additional projects, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ll continue to invest in our education 

infrastructure. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Highway Conditions 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

results are in and while there are many to choose from, the 

people of Saskatchewan have voted on this year’s worst roads 

in the province. And after nearly 3,000 votes, the top 10 list 

includes roads from across the province, north to south, rural to 

urban. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the poll and the voting should tell the 

Saskatchewan Party government is, for all their bluster, they 

just can’t get the job done to fix the roads and highways of 

Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the budget they actually 

cut funding while the costs to fix our roads keep going up and 

up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Highways, is the Minister of 

Highways planning on a spring pothole tour to check out these 

goat paths, moose tracks, and pothole-ridden roads across the 

province? Will he take that tour, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 



3394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2013 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have to correct the 

member opposite. He said at his preamble that the results are in. 

Actually they’re not in. They’re going for two more weeks, Mr. 

Speaker. So maybe those results will change a little bit. I’m not 

thinking so. I think they’re still going to have the 10 worst 

roads in Saskatchewan like they’ve had in every other year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We certainly know that CAA [Canadian Automobile 

Association] is a membership-based organization. But having 

said that, we look at the results that people are saying 

anecdotally, what they see as some of the poorer roads in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And when you look at some of the ones 

that we’ll be fixing into the future, it addresses a few of them. 

Some of them will no doubt be put off into other years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I can say that I’ll take no counsel from the member 

opposite when he talks about spending on highways, Mr. 

Speaker. This government has record spending this year alone, 

combined with last year — so I guess that would be the last two 

years, Mr. Speaker — a total of over $1.1 billion, Mr. Speaker, 

well on the way to meeting our campaign commitment of 2.2 

million, Mr. Speaker. People of rural Saskatchewan and people 

all over the province like that commitment, Mr. Speaker — not 

willy-nilly promises at the end of the election cycle like the 

former Dwain Lingenfelter. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Unsurprisingly to the residents of the North, the worst road in 

the province is Highway No. 123 near Cumberland House. And 

while this great community grows, Mr. Speaker, the roads keep 

getting worse. Competing with Highway 123 is Highway 42 

near Dinsmore, Highway 908 at Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Highway 

No. 2 near Earl Grey makes a comeback. And, Mr. Speaker, 

last year Highway 22 was on the list and yet the Sask Party 

chose to ignore this very public survey and didn’t get that road 

fixed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rounding out the top five is Pasture Road near 

Rosetown. From the Northeast to the west side of our province 

and everywhere in between, the roads are crumbling. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, instead of a luxury hardwood flooring for the 

Premier’s office, why can’t the Sask Party focus on a hard 

packed pavement on all the roads for the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would hope the 

member opposite — he spent a little bit of time as the minister 

of Highways, Mr. Speaker — would know that to fix a 

kilometre of highway, Mr. Speaker, is extremely expensive. He 

tries to take political shots, Mr. Speaker. We understand that, 

coming from that member, Mr. Speaker. But certainly this 

government has taken highway safety and construction, Mr. 

Speaker, as a major priority. And you can see it in the 

investment that is done across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are years where we don’t get all the 

construction done because of weather, inclement weather. 

Highway 22 was worked on last year; it will be completed this 

year, Mr. Speaker. Highway 123, which was on the list, will 

have some work done on it, Mr. Speaker. A number of those 

highways will, as well as many other highways across the 

province. 

 

I will say though, Mr. Speaker, that — I said in the interview 

last Friday — that the vast majority that carry the heaviest 

traffic and by far the most volume traffic never made it on the 

list, Mr. Speaker. Not that there isn’t work to do, but people are 

pretty happy with the majority of the highways in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister should know 

that the roadwork in the province of Saskatchewan should be 

their top priority. Once again, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, the 

roads across the province need fixing and the Sask Party 

government stubbornly refuses to do anything about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people want to see their potholes fixed, the gravel 

replaced, and the safety of their loved ones and their vehicle 

protected. Mr. Speaker, the economy and the businesses want to 

see the growing province that puts a priority on the safe 

transportation of all goods, Mr. Speaker. It’s good for the 

economy. It’s good for communities. It’s good for people. 

 

Why is this concept so foreign to this minister and that 

government, Mr. Speaker? So once again, Mr. Speaker, why 

does the Sask Party government neglect to fix the roads of 

Saskatchewan? Why, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you can look at the 

investment of our government in the four years after we first 

became government, and these first two budget years. 

Absolutely record amounts of spending, Mr. Speaker, far 

outweighing what the members opposite did when they were in 

power. Mr. Speaker, we know that there is more work to do, but 

that’s why we put the budget forward. 

 

I’d be very interested . . . As the Premier challenged the Leader 

of the Opposition, I’d say to the critic: what would the budget 

under the NDP look like right now, Mr. Speaker? It would be 

way up. That’s what he’s saying. Absolutely, it would be way, 

way, up just like the way Lingenfelter said, Mr. Speaker. He 

was promising four-lane highways to Yorkton to try and get a 

few more votes. He was promising highways all over this 

province, just like that member is doing right now, Mr. 

Speaker. Oh, away more spending, you bet; you can trust us 

because we’re the NDP. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

 



April 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3395 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has . . . The chairman has 

moved, has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks 

Act, 2012. I’m just promoting him. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister is . . . Parks. I recognize 

the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. The minister has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to grant leave? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 — this is a bilingual bill 

— without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 

and that the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 64, The 

Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 and that 

the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport that Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m further 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 89, The Creative 

Saskatchewan Act without amendment. 

 



3396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 89, The 

Creative Saskatchewan Act and that the bill now be read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport that Bill No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan 

Act be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairperson for the Private 

Bills Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills to report private Bill No. 

901, The Orange Benevolent Society Repeal Act without 

amendment and private Bill No. 902, The Lutheran Sunset 

Home of Saskatoon Amendment Act, 2013 without amendment 

and to present its second report. I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 901, The 

Orange Benevolent Society Repeal Act and that the bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 901, The 

Orange Benevolent Society Repeal Act and that the bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 901 — The Orange Benevolent Society Repeal Act 

 

Mr. Hart: — I move that this bill be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member that Bill 

No. 901, The Orange Benevolent Society Repeal Act be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — I move that this now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Waive leave. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — I waive leave for the bill to be read a second 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 902, The Lutheran Sunset 



April 29, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3397 

Home of Saskatoon Amendment Act, 2013 and that the bill now 

be read the third time. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 902, The 

Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon Amendment Act, 2013 and 

that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

Bill No. 902 — The Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

Mr. Kirsch: — I move that this bill now be read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member that Bill 

No. 902, The Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon Amendment 

Act, 2013 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order 

the answers to questions 422 through 425. 

 

The Speaker: — Did you say, or 425 or 429? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — 425. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions . . . ordered questions 422 to 425. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers of questions 426 through 429. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 426 to 429. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this afternoon and this 

evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Tuesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:47.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3383 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3383 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3383 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3383 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3384 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3384 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3384 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3384 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3384 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3384 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3385 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3385 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3385 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3386 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3386 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3386 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3386 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3387 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3387 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3387 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3387 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3387 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3388 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Holocaust Memorial Week 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3388 

 Regina Police Service Half Marathon 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3388 

 Construction Begins on Moose Jaw Hospital 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3388 

 90th Anniversary of Naval Volunteer Reserve 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3389 

 First Anniversary of Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3389 

 Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3389 

 Government Supports Habitat for Humanity 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3389 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Capacity and Investment in the Health System 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3390 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3390 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3390 

 Immigration Issue 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3392 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3392 

 Plans for School Gymnasium 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3392 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3393 

 Highway Conditions 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3393 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3394 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3395 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3396 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3395 



 

 Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 portant modifications 

 corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3395 

 Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3396 

 Bill No. 901 — The Orange Benevolent Society Repeal Act 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3396 

 Bill No. 902 — The Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon Amendment Act, 2013 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3397 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3397 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


