




















































Hansard: April 08, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 42A  MONDAY, APRIL 8, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3043 

 April 8, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave of 

the Assembly for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave of the 

Assembly for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

today to introduce some very special guests seated in your 

gallery. His Excellency Tuncay Babali, the ambassador of the 

Republic of Turkey to Canada, has joined us. Ambassador 

Babali took up his posting in Canada last December and is 

making his first visit to Saskatchewan. His Excellency is 

accompanied today by Mr. Ali Reza Guney, Turkey’s consul 

general in Toronto, and Mr. Omer Al-Katib, honorary consul 

general in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while in the province, the ambassador will meet 

with representatives from the government, from the business 

community, and from the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Turkey is a flourishing democracy. As we well 

know, it boasts one of the world’s fastest growing economies. 

And our province has very strong commercial ties, a strong 

commercial relationship with the republic, particularly in the 

area of agriculture. Over the last five years, Turkey has been 

Saskatchewan’s number one market, number one market for 

lentils and chickpeas, and a very important market as well for 

Saskatchewan durum wheat. Between 2008 and 2012, 

Saskatchewan has on average exported more than $168 million 

worth of goods annually to Turkey. And investment has flowed 

the other way, as I’ll mention in a moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our success in building strong economic ties with 

Turkey is due in no small part to the very entrepreneurial drive 

of Saskatchewan’s Turkish community. That community is 

represented well by Omer Al-Katib today, the pride of 

Davidson, Saskatchewan. He is the director of investor relations 

with Alliance Grain Traders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Alliance Grain Traders is now the largest 

exporters of lentils and peas in the world. Alliance is a true 

Saskatchewan success story. The company has seen gross sales 

increase from 1 million to $855 million in the last 12 years. The 

company now has 29 production facilities in six countries, 

including nine facilities in Turkey where it operates the largest 

pasta production line in the world. 

 

Alliance is headed up of course by Mr. Al-Katib’s brother 

Murad, one of Saskatchewan’s top entrepreneurs and a man 

who has been once dubbed Canada’s prince of pulses, which 

would make Omer a prince too, I expect — part of that royal 

family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t also mention that 

Turkey has been Canada’s close NATO [North Atlantic Treaty 

Organization] ally now for 60 years. Soldiers from our country, 

indeed soldiers from this province, more than likely were 

shoulder to shoulder with soldiers from Turkey during the 

conflict in Afghanistan, fighting to secure the protection and the 

freedom of the Afghan people. 

 

So the connection between our countries goes beyond 

commerce. It goes beyond trade. It is about a partnership. It is 

about a friendship. We welcome the ambassador here today and 

look forward to meetings with him a little bit later on. And I ask 

all members to join me in welcoming the delegation to the 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming Ambassador Babali and Mr. 

Al-Katib, echoing the Premier’s comments about the 

importance of Turkey as a trading partner, recognizing that it is 

a destination for many of the things that are grown here in the 

province. We appreciate that relationship and look forward to it 

growing in the years ahead. So I’d join all members in 

welcoming this important delegation to the Assembly today. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce and welcome 

two very special guests to our House today: Mr. Hermann Sitz, 

the consul general of Germany based in Vancouver; and Mr. 

Harald Leibrecht, a member of the German Bundestag and the 

coordinator for transatlantic intersocietal cooperation of the 

German government. 

 

These two gentlemen are visiting Saskatchewan for a couple of 

days and our Legislative Building this afternoon. We’d like to 

welcome again, Mrs. Barbara Hoggard-Lulay the honorary 

consul of Germany located in Saskatoon. While in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Sitz and Mr. Leibrecht have met with the 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, with SaskPower, 

and with various representatives of our government. I would 

like to ask all members of the House to join me in welcoming 

Mr. Sitz and Mr. Leibrecht and Ms. Hoggard-Lulay to the 

Legislative Assembly this afternoon. Please make them 

welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming this important 

delegation: Mr. Sitz, Mr. Leibrecht, and Ms. Barbara 

Hoggard-Lulay. As everyone knows, in Saskatchewan our 

historical roots with Germany run deep. And there are many 

people here in the province who trace our ancestry to Germany, 



3044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

but we also know the contemporary relationship is also very 

important, especially when it comes to trade. 

 

So we’re happy to see you here today, and we’re happy also to 

see Ms. Barbara Hoggard-Lulay who is very active around the 

province working for the republic and always representing the 

people of Germany very well. So I’d ask all members to join me 

in welcoming this delegation to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my pleasure to introduce and welcome a very special guest 

seated in your gallery, Ms. Marilyn Braun-Pollon, who is the 

vice-president of agri-business with the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business] in Saskatchewan is over 5,250 members and over 

7,200 agri-business members across Canada. In Saskatchewan 

the CFIB has been instrumental in bringing ideas and solutions 

forward that build confidence in the provincial economy. Ms. 

Braun-Pollon was also very supportive and encouraged our 

government to implement pooled registered pension plans, 

which will be introduced later on this afternoon. Ms. 

Braun-Pollon is also joined by Ms. Shannon Lussier who is a 

business counsellor with CFIB here in Regina. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d ask all members to welcome Ms. Braun-Pollon and Ms. 

Lussier to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce six guests sitting in your gallery, all from First 

Nations University of Canada. They’re students and staff, and 

I’ll introduce them — if you can give us all a little wave when I 

say your name — Rena Littlepine, Annie Charles, Chasity 

Delorme, Roman Young, Janelle Mandes, and Cadmus 

Delorme. 

 

I had the pleasure last Tuesday to go to First Nations University 

of Canada and celebrate with them the Awareness Day for 

World Autism Day. And they put together a fabulous, fabulous 

event, and it was my pleasure to be there. And we’re hoping 

next year we can do something absolutely similar and maybe 

Light It Up Blue here. So thanks again and welcome to your 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

rise and join the member opposite in welcoming these students 

and staff from First Nations University of Canada to their 

Legislative Assembly, to thank them for that great work they 

did on last Tuesday that the members referred to, but also to 

draw attention to the fact that I’d just joined some of these folks 

not minutes ago in honouring their friend and our friend Tony 

Cote as he received the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee Medal, in 

attendance with the Minister of Advanced Education at that 

affair. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, the master of ceremonies for that event 

was one Cadmus Delorme, doing a great job as ever. But it’s 

always good to see students and staff from First Nations 

University of Canada here at their Legislative Assembly. Ta 

wow. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and 

through you, Mr. Patrick Boyle. He’s sitting in your gallery. 

Thanks for giving us a wave there, Patrick. 

 

Patrick is the manager of corporate communications for the 

Water Security Agency. Patrick juggles a hectic schedule, being 

a dad to three young children and he was recently elected to the 

Moose Jaw City Council. He was instrumental in the creation of 

the Water Security Agency’s mobile website that provides news 

and advisories and will be very beneficial to Saskatchewan 

residents during the spring runoff. 

 

Patrick was born and raised on a farm near Moose Jaw. He left 

our province to Alberta in 2001 but, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 

to say that Patrick made the decision to move back to Moose 

Jaw in 2009 as he wanted to live, work, and raise his family in a 

prospering province. I ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Patrick to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure today to introduce four young people and their mothers 

from the Moosomin and Cannington ridings. We have with us 

today Sharon Barbour and her daughter Sarah, and Bonnie 

Szakacs and her children Heidi and Meka and Alonzo. They’re 

all home-schooled children, and their parents make an extra 

effort to bring their children to the Legislative Assembly just to 

learn about how our legislative process works. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you’re looking for some entertainment, the 

Szakacs girls are just superb on their violins. So at any time, 

feel free to invite them to come and entertain you. 

 

They’re also joined today and have taken the time to meet with 

representatives of the House of Prayer. I’d invite members to 

join me in welcoming these guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Ladies and gentlemen, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and to 

welcome to Saskatchewan and to our Legislative Building a 

delegation from the Free State of South Africa. Visiting us for 

this week are six members of their provincial legislature. And I 

would ask them to rise when I call out their name. Head of the 

delegation is Peter Maloka, Sibongile Makae, Jonas 

Ramokhoase, Sindiswa Magwandana, Casca Mokitlane, and 

Roy Jankielsohn. Also with us today is staff deputy secretary 

Leonard Mofokeng, and researcher Hein Viljoen. 

 

Their main objective for being here in Saskatchewan is to gain 

insight into our committee structures. I would ask the members 

to welcome our guests to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, as members so often say and 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3045 

surprise me, I would like to also welcome the guests from 

Cannington. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition in reference to cellphone coverage 

for northwestern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First 

Nations, also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of 

Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nations and the 

community of Turnor Lake, including all the 

neighbouring communities in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most impressive thing about this petition 

is people have signed the petition from all throughout 

Saskatchewan — great support from the people of 

Saskatchewan. And this particular page, Mr. Speaker, the 

people that have signed this petition are primarily from Dillon, 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know the proposed Saskatchewan employment Act, introduced 

in December 2012, is a sweeping rewrite of our labour laws, 

including but not limited to The Labour Standards Act, The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, The Health Labour 

Relations Reorganization Act, and The Trade Union Act. And 

since it was introduced, literally hundreds of hours of study and 

comparison have been carried out in the interest of due 

diligence. But we know there is no labour relations crisis to fix 

and no necessity to rush this omnibus through that will likely 

govern workplace relations for decades to come. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Shaunavon Badgers Win Championship 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

2013 is proving to be a year for celebration in Shaunavon. 

During this summer, the town of Shaunavon is celebrating its 

100th anniversary. However on a Sunday late in March, there 

was an early reason to celebrate. The Shaunavon Badgers men’s 

hockey long-awaited effort to secure a provincial B senior 

championship was finally realized. 

 

The final game was played in the Crescent Point Wickenheiser 

Centre which was packed to the rafters with excited fans 

cheering on the Badgers as the team won their first-ever senior 

provincial title in 100 years. After earning a birth to the SHA 

[Saskatchewan Hockey Association] finals for five straight 

years and winning silver in the past four, the Badgers emerged 

the victors against the Esterhazy Flyers 7 to 6. Although the 

Badgers found themselves trailing by three goals twice, the 

team was not to be denied again. During the final minute of the 

third period, Esterhazy scored to tie, which resulted in the battle 

being decided in overtime. And when the winning goal went in 

the net, the building erupted as players, coaches, and fans joined 

in the celebration. 

 

Many of the current players have been with the team for all five 

championship appearances, and it seemed appropriate that the 

winning goal would be scored by the team’s oldest player. Mr. 

Speaker and all colleagues, please join me in congratulating the 

Shaunavon Badgers, the coaches, and their fans on this 

history-making achievement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

2013 Global Citizen Award 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a particular 

pleasure for me to bring mention today to Denise Kouri, an 

extraordinary member of our Saskatchewan community and my 

constituency, Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Denise is the recipient of the 2013 Global Citizen Award. This 

award is sponsored by the Saskatchewan Council for 

International Cooperation, recognizing individuals who make a 

distinguished contribution to international development, 

co-operation, peace, and justice. Mr. Speaker, last week SCIC 

[Saskatchewan Council for International Cooperation] 

showcased their programs here, and we all had a chance to learn 

more about what they do. 

 

Denise Kouri works as a public policy consultant, focusing on 

health, social policy, leadership, and governance. She’s spent 

the better part of her life actively committed to social justice 

issues at home and internationally. Since 1999 she’s been part 

of the training for health renewal program at the University of 

Saskatchewan, a partnership with the Mozambican Health 

ministry. In fact, Mr. Speaker, she’s going to Mozambique this 

week to continue her work there. Hundreds of health care 

workers have been trained under this program, fanning out to 

rural areas to conduct vaccinations, malaria and HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] awareness programs, basic maternal 



3046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

and infant care, and many other duties. 

 

Denise is active in other international social justice work 

initiatives, including anti-apartheid and feminist movements. 

Denise knows that injustices occur everywhere and that the 

Canadian community cannot be isolated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that my fellow members of the House 

join with me in congratulating Denise for this well-deserved 

recognition. Denise is an inspiration for me and a remarkable 

role model for all of us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Recognizing the Saskatchewan Fire Commissioner 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 

today to celebrate and congratulate a public servant who has 

done an incredible amount to keep the people, their property, 

and the communities of this province safe and secure. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m referring to Mr. Duane McKay, the commissioner 

responsible for emergency management and fire safety and the 

fire commissioner for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

His career in protective services and public safety has spanned 

30 years. As a member of the Council of Canadian Fire 

Marshalls and Fire Commissioners, he has been a leader, a 

spokesman, and an unfaltering supporter of fire services. With 

85 per cent of the fire services in Canada being volunteer 

positions, Mr. Speaker, it takes a special person to rally and 

motivate volunteer fire teams. And I’m proud to say that 

Commissioner McKay is such a person, standing as an example 

to others. 

 

Commissioner McKay is a recipient of the Premier’s Award for 

Excellence in the Public Service, and in recognition of all that 

Commissioner McKay has done for the people of this province, 

he has recently been awarded with Queen’s Diamond Jubilee 

Medal for his unwavering commitment, dedication, and service 

to the safety of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the House to join with me 

in thanking Commissioner McKay for all his great work. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

National Poetry Month 

 

Mr. Nilson: — 

 

In mama’s garden 

Remember hiding in the peas 

And the buzz of the sun 

And how the wood fence 

Crawled with little bugs 

We sat and shelled peas 

And hucked them at 

Jane on the swing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was an excerpt from “Fred, It’s Still All 

Right” written by Saskatchewan’s poet laureate, Don Kerr. It’s 

from Number One Northern, an anthology of Saskatchewan 

writing published in 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, April is National Poetry Month in Canada. Poetry 

can transport us to a time and place. It can challenge us while 

bringing a sense of peace. Poetry can reference a shared 

experience. Very few of us would not remember playing 

outside in the summer while teasing an older neighbour, cousin, 

or sibling. 

 

In honour of National Poetry Month, the Saskatchewan Writers’ 

Guild will be hosting a reading this Wednesday, April 10th at 

Government House. There will be readings by Don Kerr, Glen 

Sorestad, and Robert Currie. The Saskatchewan Writers’ Guild 

has fostered and supported writers in this province since 1969. 

It provides educational opportunities as well as promoting the 

work of Saskatchewan authors and writers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage each member to take advantage 

of National Poetry Month to explore Saskatchewan’s poets and 

to search out the works of the poets that live in their ridings. 

The stories poets share strengthen our communities and 

contribute to the vibrancy and diversity of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Holocaust Memorial Day 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today marks Yom HaShoah or Holocaust Memorial 

Day. This is a day that the world remembers and reflects upon 

the atrocities of the Holocaust which will never be forgotten. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is critical that the world continues to remember 

and mourn the 6 million people who died at the hands of the 

Nazis during the Holocaust. It is also necessary that we resolve 

to never forget the pain, suffering, and strength of an entire 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although the horrific events at the concentration 

camps leading up to and during World War II are nearly 

unspeakable, the world cannot afford to not talk about the 

abhorrent consequences of hatred and anti-Semitism. The 

concentration camps at Auschwitz, Treblinka, and Dachau still 

stand as eerie reminders of the cruelty that humanity is capable 

of and the consequences of allowing hatred to guide human 

actions. It is imperative that we continue to consider what we 

can do and what we can teach our own children so that this 

never happens again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

remembering those who suffered and were lost during the 

extremely dark times of the Holocaust. And let us resolve to 

never forget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Paragon Business Excellence Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I 

had the pleasure of attending the annual Regina and District 

Chamber of Commerce Paragon Business Excellence Awards at 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3047 

the Queensbury Convention Centre here in Regina. The 

Paragon Awards represents the recognition of members of the 

business community that have demonstrated exceptional 

performance in a number of specific areas. 

 

The categories and their award recipients for this year are: 

Young Entrepreneur, Tyler Boyd. Community Involvement, 

MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman. Community Alliance, 25th 

annual Z99 radiothon and Hospitals of Regina Foundation. 

Export Achievement, Koenders Water Solutions. Customer 

Service Excellence, East Side Mario’s. Marketing and 

Promotional Achievement, Fries Tallman Lumber Ltd. 

Diversity was Knight Archer Insurance. Environmental 

Excellence, the University of Regina. New Business Venture, 

Canadian Thermal Solutions. Business of the Year was awarded 

to Alliance Energy Ltd. Congratulations to all the nominees and 

recipients for their hard work and innovation. 

 

Saskatchewan is currently enjoying unprecedented growth and 

success on a global scale, and these businesses are an essential 

part of this success. Their commitment to business excellence 

serves to strengthen not only Regina but all of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Regina and District Chamber of Commerce and all the 

deserving recipients of the 2013 Paragon Awards. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Job Numbers for March 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise in 

this Assembly today to speak about Saskatchewan’s impressive 

March job numbers released by Stats Canada last Friday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were 547,700 people working in 

Saskatchewan in March, an increase of over 25,000 people 

since March 2012, an increase of over 50,000 since March of 

2007. That’s the strongest rate of employment growth in all of 

Canada and the most people ever working in Saskatchewan in 

the month of March. Off-reserve Aboriginal employment was 

up by 2,200 and Aboriginal unemployment dropped by 1,600 

people for the sixth month in a row of year-over-year declines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan also has the lowest seasonally 

adjusted unemployment rate in Canada at 3.9 per cent, which is 

well below the 7.2 per cent national unemployment rate. Two of 

our fastest growing cities also had impressive job numbers, with 

Regina’s seasonally adjusted unemployment rate of 3.5 per cent 

being the lowest among all major cities in Canada and 

Saskatoon’s unemployment rate of 4 per cent being the second 

lowest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

recognizing these impressive job numbers which demonstrate 

that this great province is moving forward. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Payment to Contractor 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Phil Froese is a 

hard-working small-business person who owns Visonary 

Concepts Inc. His company did much of the demolition and 

boiler removal at the St. Mary’s Villa project in Humboldt. 

 

When a company does work on a public facility here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, under the Sask Party government’s 

authority, they expect to be paid. This is only fair, Mr. Speaker, 

but it has not occurred for Phil Froese who is still owed about 

$43,000 for his work. My question to the Premier: why has his 

government failed to ensure that Phil Froese has been treated 

fairly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Leader 

of the Opposition for the question. I do not know the details 

around this particular case, Mr. Speaker, but I assure the 

member and the guest visiting today that we’ll look into the 

matter. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the Premier 

may not specifically know about this now, members of his front 

bench certainly do, Mr. Speaker. Phil was a subcontractor 

working for another company on the project, which is normal 

for big projects. And because it’s common practice, the onus is 

on the health region to ensure that the subtrades have been paid 

prior to the final disbursement of payment. I’m told, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s standard practice for a 10 per cent holdback of the 

contract until it is proven that the subtrades have in fact 

received payment. Contractors are also supposed to put a bond 

upfront, Mr. Speaker, in order to cover off situations like this 

where the subcontractors need to be paid. This obviously did 

not occur, Mr. Speaker, or else Phil Froese would not be here in 

the Assembly today bringing his concerns to the legislature. 

 

My question to the Health minister: why did the Ministry of 

Health not ensure that Phil Froese, an honest, hard-working 

small-business person here in Saskatchewan, has been treated 

fairly while working on St. Mary’s Villa? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

understanding is, from the Leader of the Opposition’s question, 

is that this individual was a subcontractor underneath the 

general contractor. Those dollars that would have been paid out 

by Saskatoon Health Region would have been paid out to the 

general contractor, Mr. Speaker. But I would certainly be happy 

to follow up with the individual after question period. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a promise to meet simply isn’t 

enough because the minister has already received, the minister 

has already received correspondence on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

The minister and the Sask Party government have already 

punted this problem on to the health region, even though they 

have a responsibility to ensure that due process has in fact been 



3048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

followed here. 

 

Mr. Froese has pursued many avenues to receive payment, Mr. 

Speaker. He has written to the Health minister. He has 

contacted the member from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. And none 

of them have admitted, Mr. Speaker, that this is part of the Sask 

Party’s track record of poorly managing the St. Mary’s Villa 

renovation that occurred over the past year and a half. Mr. 

Speaker, Phil even placed a builder’s lien on the project through 

ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] so 

that he could receive payment, but the Sask Party government 

ordered that that lien be discharged. 

 

My question to the minister: why has the Sask Party 

government, why has the Ministry of Health not ensured that 

Phil Froese has received payment for work done? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a facility that is operated and owned by 

Saskatoon Health Region. It was certainly under their purview 

as how they would go about doing remediation work and how 

that work would be tendered out to contractors and 

subcontractors, Mr. Speaker. While I certainly won’t comment 

specifically on the individual’s concerns and why those weren’t 

paid out here on the floor of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I’d be 

certainly willing to meet with the individual after the 

proceedings end today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this issue’s been brought to the 

minister’s attention. It has been brought to the Sask Party 

government’s attention at a much earlier date. They’ve had an 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that this small-business 

person is treated fairly, an individual who’s owed over $40,000. 

 

And this the string of mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, when we 

look at the St. Mary’s Villa issue. First we learned of seniors, 

some in their 90s, being forced to move out of St. Mary’s Villa 

with just days notice. Then we learn, Mr. Speaker, while those 

seniors are packing their belongings, that the removal of 

asbestos began on the building. Now, Mr. Speaker, we learn 

that a contractor has done work on this project but has not 

received payment and is still owed $40,000. 

 

My question to the minister: why has the Sask Party 

government failed to ensure that the work done at St. Mary’s 

has been done well, done properly, and that all individuals have 

been paid? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it was this government that 

asked the Ombudsman to investigate how the St. Mary’s Villa 

issue was handled. Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman has reported 

back saying that the Saskatoon Health Region who is the 

operator of this facility did the correct thing in making the 

decision to relocate individuals, but does acknowledge that 

there were flaws in the process. And we acknowledge that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In terms of a contractual arrangement between a subcontractor 

and a contractor on a project that has been tendered out by the 

health region, Mr. Speaker, that is certainly something that I 

would not insert myself. If the individual has a concern with 

how he was treated by the contractor, there certainly would be 

legal means that he would be able to avail himself to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Phil Froese has gone through the 

channels in order to try to receive payment. He has brought this 

attention to the Sask Party government, brought this issue to the 

Sask Party government’s attention, and the members opposite 

have had the opportunity to deal with the health region and 

ensure that Phil Froese has been treated fairly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a government that talks about lean 

management in health care, this situation does not sound 

efficient and it certainly doesn’t sound like it’s based on 

common sense. 

 

My question to the minister: when he was alerted to this issue 

— we know he knows about it because a letter has been sent to 

Mr. Froese — what steps did this minister take in order to 

ensure that the situation would be solved? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

What we want to make sure is that Saskatoon Health Region, as 

the owner and the operator of this facility, Mr. Speaker, and as 

the organization that is in charge of the construction and the 

remediation work that had taken place, that they followed all 

their due diligence, Mr. Speaker. Again I’m willing to meet 

with the individual after question period, but this appears to me 

to be a case of a difference of opinion between a subcontractor 

and a contractor. It doesn’t involve the provincial government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Standardized Testing and Student Achievement 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, people have been asking where the priorities are for 

this Saskatchewan Party government when it comes to 

education. Concerned parents, teachers, and educators have 

started a petition now against the Sask Party’s plan to spend 

over $5.9 million this year on standardized testing instead of the 

real pressures facing our classrooms and our students. The 

petition has gathered steam quickly, Mr. Speaker, and now 

there are well over 1,300 signatures already. 

 

Professor Paul Orlowski of the University of Saskatchewan’s 

faculty of Education says the plan for the province would bring 

about the longest period of standardized testing of any place in 

Canada. The minister has yet to articulate why his government 

is moving ahead with this extreme version of standardized 

testing. Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party government 

spending at least $5.9 million on standardized testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3049 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for the question. You know, we 

announced this student achievement initiative last spring. And 

when we made the announcement, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t 

announce a testing program, Mr. Speaker; we announced a 

student achievement initiative. This is a comprehensive, 

balanced approach to assessing where our students are in terms 

of their knowledge of the curriculum, their place in the 

classrooms, and their social well-being, Mr. Speaker. This is the 

not the American, high-stakes model. This is not about ranking 

schools. This is not about ranking teachers. And it’s certainly 

not tied to funding, Mr. Speaker. This is a program that’s 

geared at student success. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to have funding 

implications: $5.9 million worth that could be used for other 

pressures in our classrooms. So, Mr. Speaker, parents and 

teachers do not know why the minister wants to divert precious 

educational resources away from teaching and into testing. 

They don’t know what the minister means when he says it’s 

going to be a made-in-Saskatchewan approach. And what 

educators know is that standardized testing is one-size-fits-all, 

and that doesn’t help individual learning needs of our students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province faces a low graduation rate for all 

students for all backgrounds, but especially low graduation rates 

for First Nations and Métis students. Surely the Sask Party 

government needs a better response to this situation than telling 

the teachers they must do more testing instead of teaching. Mr. 

Speaker, how could the Sask Party government get their 

priorities so mixed up when it comes to education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again 

thanks to the member opposite for the question. You know, 

when our government announced its budget, we announced a 

balanced budget. We didn’t announce an either-or budget, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why, and that’s why for the first time in 

history, $17 million for current year enrolment, Mr. Speaker; 

that’s supports for the classroom. $268 million for supports for 

learning; that’s supports for the classroom, Mr. Speaker. $5.9 

million to drive a student achievement initiative which is 

all-encompassing, Mr. Speaker, not just the testing program. 

More First Nations and Métis initiatives, Mr. Speaker — $3.8 

million for the First Nations and Métis Achievement Fund and 

an additional $3 million to help start the action for the 

recommendations that will come out of the joint task force, Mr. 

Speaker, and I could go on. 50 new pre-kindergarten programs 

that directly affect early learning. 500 more child care spaces, 

Mr. Speaker; that’s supports for learning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, other jurisdictions are walking away from 

standardized testing. In fact, in Texas the architect of George 

W. Bush’s education plan said, “I’ve looked at the evidence and 

I’ve concluded they’re wrong.” She went on to say, “Instead of 

raising standards, this actually lowered standards.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, here in Canada, Alberta is making the 

standardized testing they implemented a thing of the past. Their 

Minister of Education asked his ministry to look at other ways 

to gather data on student achievement instead of using these 

tests. They’re looking to improve everyday assessment teachers 

already do. So, Mr. Speaker, my question: with other 

jurisdictions recognizing standardized testing isn’t the right fit 

for 21st century education, why would the Sask Party 

government take us down the wrong path? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite is flat-out wrong. The province of Alberta is not 

moving away from their provincial achievement tests. In fact, if 

I may quote the Minister of Education, Mr. Johnson, “We don’t 

want to abandon standardized testing; we just want to 

modernize it,” Mr. Speaker, which is exactly what the province 

of Saskatchewan has embarked upon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are embarking on modernizing our student achievement 

initiatives. We’ve had assessment for learning in this province 

for the last 20 years, Mr. Speaker. We intend to modernize it. 

We came up with a new program to deal with it, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s called the student achievement initiative for the 

province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well this 

is the minister that says the evidence is evident. So perhaps he 

should listen to some of the evidence about standardized 

testing. We know standardized testing diverts time and 

important education resources away from student supports and 

real learning. We know students become anxious when their 

standardized tests are looming, and this doesn’t help them 

prepare for everyday learning they need to be ready for. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the evidence is clear. Other provinces and even 

the US [United States] states are walking away from 

standardized testing because it’s just not the right way to help 

students achieve what they need to do in our schools today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan want the minister to 

reconsider his support for standardized testing. Why can’t the 

Sask Party listen to people and do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just a 

testing program. It is a student achievement initiative, Mr. 

Speaker. It involves many facets of a student’s life. 

 

But beyond that, Mr. Speaker, we have examples of success in 

our province. Chinook School Division, for example, is using a 

balanced literacy approach to help improve reading results and 

scores for their children — 21 per cent increase in reading 

scores over the course of four years. Mr. Speaker, Regina 

Public’s using the early years evaluation tool to help assess 

students for readiness to enter the mainstream programming. 

Prairie Valley School Division, Mr. Speaker — 23 of 26 

achievement initiatives showed an increase in student results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s as simple as it’s good for students. Mr. 



3050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

Speaker, we’re going to go down that road. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask 

Party’s IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre for 

geologic storage of CO2] affair has many moving parts but it all 

goes back to the waste of taxpayers’ dollars and the lack of 

accountability for those dollars. Mr. Speaker, that government 

has tried to blame their partners, but the evidence shows they 

haven’t been straight with Saskatchewan people and that they 

failed to protect taxpayers’ dollars from waste. 

 

We’ve recently obtained a memo and a report on IPAC done by 

the Provincial Auditor and it was sent to that government in 

August of 2010, almost three years ago, directly to the Finance 

minister and to the former minister of Advanced Education. The 

auditor explained how the public dollars were not properly 

used. It raised large concerns about $4.3 million of taxpayers’ 

money. Mr. Speaker, why did neither the Finance minister nor 

the Advanced Education minister step in and turn off the tap 

and protect taxpayers’ dollars in August of 2010 when the 

auditor let them know all of the problems with its IPAC affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, in 2010 CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] would not have 

expensed 4-point-some million dollars to IPAC, so I’m not 

exactly sure what funding the member opposite is referencing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister should be more aware of 

the report that’s coming in as it relates to the dollars that she’s 

extending. This went directly to the Finance minister, to the 

minister of Advanced Education as well as many other senior 

officials, highlighting the risk with $4.3 million. 

 

Now that report’s been in the government’s hands since 2010, 

almost three years. It also highlighted significant financial and 

reputational risks, the lack of a signed contract as it related to 

$4.3 million of taxpayers’ money, and it highlighted at that 

point in time that already $2.4 million had already flowed to 

CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.], something that the IPAC CEO 

[chief executive officer] later called mostly waste. But despite 

that report, the dollars kept flowing — another $500,000 to 

CVI. 

 

It could have been stopped. It could have been stopped by the 

Minister of Finance or the minister of Advanced Education. 

They could have stepped in and turned off the tap. Why did the 

Sask Party government allow another $500,000 to flow to CVI 

in its IPAC affair even after the Provincial Auditor raised such 

clear concerns directly with senior officials and ministers, 

including that Finance minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite continues to reference all funding that go to the U of R 

[University of Regina] as IPAC money, and that’s not the case. 

And he doesn’t seem to figure out that there’s differences in 

different services that has been agreed upon with the U of R. 

 

There was issues with a contract that was led into by the U of R 

personnel at the time that they were managing the IPAC file. 

When there was a board formed and CIC had members on that 

board, steps were immediately taken. There was a forensic audit 

done. Mr. Speaker, the contract with CVI was severed at that 

time. The funding control was taken away from the U of R and 

taken into the agency itself so that they were handling their 

money themselves. They also had the equipment that was 

purchased from CVI evaluated by a third party. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we see once again here 

today that no one in that government will take responsibility for 

their failed oversight, their failed management as it relates to its 

IPAC affair. 

 

The Provincial Auditor sent this report to the Finance minister 

and to the minister of Advanced Education because it was so 

concerning. That government’s own board members knew of 

the problems in 2009. I’m sure they had briefed that 

government. And yet, Mr. Speaker, every one of those ministers 

apparently sat on their hands and kept those taxpayers’ dollars 

flowing and did nothing. 

 

The minister told the House that there was a contract when 

there was none. The minister told committees that there was 

value for money when there clearly wasn’t. And the minister 

has pointed fingers at everyone while accepting no 

responsibility. Why will no one in the Sask Party government 

simply admit that they knew of problems in its IPAC affair as it 

had its hands on the taps and were flowing dollars, and that they 

did nothing to correct it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again I will have to repeat. He keeps 

saying they did nothing, they did nothing. They severed the 

contract with CVI, Mr. Speaker. They asked for . . . They got a 

third party forensic audit to be done to follow the money to see 

where the money had been spent. Mr. Speaker, they had a third 

party evaluate the equipment that had been purchased from 

CVI. Mr. Speaker, they took the funding, control of the money 

from the U of R into the newly incorporated agency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was actions taken. I believe they were the 

appropriate actions. Going forward, after the agency had 

become incorporated and was managing its own money, a lot of 

good things were accomplished, Mr. Speaker. It was the things 

that this government was looking for to move forward our 

carbon capture and sequestration agenda. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3051 

Plans to Replace Saskatchewan Hospital 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in The Battlefords, people are 

wondering what the Premier’s commitment is to rebuilding the 

Saskatchewan Hospital. In a big, pre-election PR [public 

relations] event in 2011, the Premier invited the community to 

hear about replacing the hospital with a new $100 million 

facility. He stated then, construction on the hospital would 

begin in the spring of 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s now sort of spring, but it’s spring, but the 

work to break ground has yet to happen because the Sask Party 

government has delayed once again. Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Rural Health is from that area. Surely he knows how 

important the replacement of the Saskatchewan Hospital is to 

the city of North Battleford and area. Why has the Sask Party 

government broken its promise to start building the 

Saskatchewan Hospital this spring? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this government and this Premier’s commitment to a 

new Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford couldn’t be 

more clear. Mr. Speaker, we have forwarded to the health 

region $450,000 for scoping a couple of years ago. We’ve also 

made a commitment of $8 million for detailed planning for this 

new facility. 

 

But we also know, Mr. Speaker, that the existing facility does 

serve other ministries, for instance, Corrections. We know that 

the power plant serves other facilities. And so that we know that 

the future of the existing facility, Mr. Speaker, has an impact on 

other ministries. That’s why we are taking time to make sure 

that when we do get to the point where construction is ready to 

proceed on a new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, 

that, Mr. Speaker, it is a facility that will serve the people of 

this province very well for many years to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is starting to sound like the 

last Premier’s $100 million project, which was a pipeline to 

Montana. And it’s disappeared into thin air. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2011 the plan was for the Sask Hospital to be 

built at a cost of 100 million. Now the health region says the 

costs have risen by 10 more million dollars. So it’s 110. One of 

the reasons for the delay is the so-called efficiency experts that 

the Sask Party government relies on can’t seem to find the time 

to meet with the people in The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the longer the planning takes, the higher the cost 

will be. This impacts the community and the health region, and 

it impacts the patients who are waiting for new facilities. Why 

has the Sask Party delayed the work on the Saskatchewan 

Hospital replacement and in doing so increased the cost by over 

10 million already? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be incorrect 

for that member to say that work has stopped on this project, 

Mr. Speaker, because that work does continue. And we are 

preparing 3P [production, preparation, process] lean work, Mr. 

Speaker, to be able to make sure that this is a facility that is 

state of the art when it is built, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is ironic though coming from that member who presided as 

minister of Health over a review in 2002 which stated that two 

wards needed to be closed because they were unfit for human 

habitation, Mr. Speaker. And then in 2006 they committed $39 

million to the health region but, you know what, Mr. Speaker, 

they never actually sent the money. So work was delayed by the 

previous government, Mr. Speaker. We’ve made a commitment 

that we will replace an over 100-year-old facility in North 

Battleford that will serve the people that suffer from mental 

illness, mental health illnesses, in our province for many years 

to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, if the New Democrats were still in 

government, the hospital would have been built by now. 

There’s no question about that. There’s absolutely no question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the premiers want to use their privatization 

approach of SaskBuilds to develop the Saskatchewan Hospital 

replacement. Instead of a more affordable option, they want to 

use this privatization scheme and it will drive up the costs rather 

than lowering them. This means that the people of 

Saskatchewan will be paying more upfront, and they’ll be 

paying more later down the line, and it won’t even be built in 

the timeline, the most recent timeline, of the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the building of this hospital was promised by the 

Premier to be done, started this spring. It would cost 100 

million. Now both of those promises have been broken. Can the 

minister say now when this project will be completed and what 

will be the cost to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely stunning 

that that member could stand in his place and say that if the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] had only been re-elected in 2007, 

that this hospital would’ve been finished, Mr. Speaker. It is 

absolutely laughable, and the people of this province know it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province know that the members 

opposite made announcements on other facilities, Mr. Speaker, 

like the Academic Health Sciences. And we know what 

happened to that facility, Mr. Speaker — absolutely nothing, 

Mr. Speaker. And now this government’s taking care of that. 

 

We know about facilities like the children’s hospital, Mr. 

Speaker, where the members opposite didn’t get around to that 

one either, Mr. Speaker. And we know about 13 long-term care 

facilities all across this province, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

opposite didn’t get to, Mr. Speaker. And they’re being built as 

we speak, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government stands by its record, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to making commitments on capital infrastructure renewal 

in this province, Mr. Speaker, and we will, Mr. Speaker, when it 



3052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

comes to the North Battleford hospital. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 91, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 

2013 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved Bill No. 

91, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 

2) now be introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

92, The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 92, The Pooled Registered 

Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now introduced and read 

a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans 

(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 

2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 93, The 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved that Bill No. 93, The Pooled Registered Pension 

Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 be 

now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m very pleased to rise today to speak about The Creative 

Saskatchewan Act. This new legislation enables the 

development of a new agency called Creative Saskatchewan. 

This new agent of the Crown is coming into being in order to 

assist the creative industry sector in getting their products to 

market. The creative industries are the businesses and people 

involved in the production, distribution, and marketing of 

commercially viable creative content and experiences such as 

music, publishing, craft, visual arts, film, and digital media, 

theatre, and dance. 

 

The creative industries are represented by hundreds of 

Saskatchewan companies who for the most part are 

micro-enterprises. Creative Saskatchewan will boost the 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan’s creative industries and help 

them to realize their economic potential within and outside of 

the province as well as to global markets, Mr. Speaker. Creative 

Saskatchewan, whose primary purpose will be commercial 

development and marketing, will enable better coordination of 

marketing activities and greater synergies among creative 

businesses. It will deliver an array of business and marketing 

supports and fund sector-specific industry associations such as 

the Saskatchewan publishing group, the Craft Council, 

SaskMusic and others. 

 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3053 

The aim of Creative Saskatchewan is to cultivate an 

environment where Saskatchewan’s creative industries grow 

and develop, where they can become more competitive and 

entrepreneurial. Once it is fully implemented, Mr. Speaker, we 

will have created an environment that will help to drive sales, 

revenue, investment, employment, and business development 

within that sector — the ingredients for a thriving creative 

economy. 

 

We have a wealth of talent in the province, Mr. Speaker. We 

want to make sure our creative entrepreneurs build and grow 

their businesses right here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, by 

way of example, a painter may have a tremendous collection of 

high quality work, and he or she might then wish to 

commercialize that work. That requires a business plan, 

learning how to run a small business, maybe incorporation, 

connection with commercial networks, and the marketing and 

touring of those works. Creative Saskatchewan will be available 

to assist this creative entrepreneur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has advanced commercial 

thinking through Pride of Saskatchewan, our culture policy, and 

through The Arts Professions Act which promotes effective 

business practices and focuses on the business side of making 

artistic endeavours lucrative. Now we are taking the next step 

and positioning the creative industries as part of this province’s 

growth agenda. This agency will increase the recognition of the 

creative industries as a vital element of Saskatchewan’s 

economy and cultural identity. Mr. Speaker, supporting the 

commercial objectives of the creative industries is one of the 

ways in which we will sustain our economic growth and 

continue to improve our quality of life, preparing for an even 

stronger Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan produces world-class music, 

movies, books, visual arts, and crafts that carry the provincial 

signature every time they are consumed and experienced, 

strengthening our identity and brand. Governments worldwide 

recognize creative industries as a significant force in the 

modern economy. As a result, many jurisdictions have issued 

national, regional, and local strategies targeting the creative 

economy. These strategies recognize that creativity fuels 

innovation and drives growth, prosperity, and sustainability. 

 

The trend across the country is a movement toward a single 

product development and marketing agency targeting all of the 

creative industries, Mr. Speaker, including film. The trend was 

led by Ontario with the formation of the Ontario Media 

Development Corporation a number of years ago. Manitoba was 

quick to follow with a similar corporation. British Columbia 

last fall expanded the mandate of the BC [British Columbia] 

Film Commission to include all the creative industries in an 

effort to consolidate resources and streamline service offerings. 

Likewise the province of Nova Scotia introduced legislation 

and received Royal Assent to form a similar agency in 

December 2012. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan creative industry leaders envision a 

product development and marketing agency which operates 

under statute. They expressed a desire for a cohesive 

commercial model to drive development and to deliver relevant 

and responsive programs to support the sales of high-quality 

creative content. This agency will help ensure that all creative 

industries benefit, promoting a fair and common approach to 

industry development. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, it will address the concerns 

raised by the film industry and in doing so position all of the 

creative industries to grow their capacity and extend their 

markets. For the province’s film- and screen-based media 

producers, Creative Saskatchewan will also provide funding for 

both market development and media production for 

Saskatchewan-based producers. Guided by this focus, Creative 

Saskatchewan will provide assistance to all creative industries 

while refraining from duplicating any programming 

opportunities provided by organizations such as the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board. The Saskatchewan Arts Board is 

celebrating its 65th anniversary this year, Mr. Speaker, and it 

continues to deliver relevant programs so Saskatchewan artists 

can pursue their creative works. 

 

Creative Saskatchewan will provide the commercial resources 

needed to assist industry to become more entrepreneurial. They 

need access to national and international markets, which 

requires a high level of market development, marketing 

capability, and access to marketing capital. Creative industries 

look to digital technology to effectively compete. Technology 

affords new opportunities for the distribution of high quality 

content and the monetization of that content. It also gives rise to 

new forms of content, for example, social media and interactive 

digital media. 

 

Creative Saskatchewan will enable a common approach to 

industry growth and development and is designed to reflect 

collaboration of information, innovation resources, both human 

and physical. It will help ensure that all creative industries 

benefit from the kinds of supports and services previously only 

available to the film industry in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

promoting a fair and common approach to industry 

development. At the same time, it will address the significant 

concerns raised by the film industry for a replacement program 

and in doing so, position all the creative industries to grow their 

capacity and extend their markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consultations with Saskatchewan’s creative 

businesses and industry associations has been extensive. We 

called the consultation process Moving Saskatchewan’s 

Creative Industries Forward. Consultations commenced in June 

of 2012, starting with an online discussion paper followed by 

focus groups throughout the fall of 2012. The purpose of the 

consultations was to find ways to help the creative industries 

achieve greater commercialization and economic growth. This 

engagement with the creative industries has been of great 

benefit to this process. Mr. Speaker, my officials continue to 

engage industry leaders through weekly meetings. Discussions 

continue on the key attributes of this proposed agency, 

including its governance structure, organizational mandate, and 

funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan advantage growth plan is served 

well by addressing the creative industries. Creative businesses 

build sustainable, confident, and inclusive communities. These 

communities foster a desirable quality of life, and it is this 

quality of life that enables businesses and communities to grow. 



3054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 

of Bill 89, The Creative Saskatchewan Act. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 89, The Creative 

Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to be able to give the official opposition’s initial 

comments about this particular bill, Bill 89. There’s no question 

from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, that this effort to try and 

stimulate some of the industries and some of the sectors that the 

minister made reference to is an effort to try and do something 

or at least appear to do something to replace the whole issue of 

the film employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s no question in our mind again, as I mentioned at the 

outset, that this effort should have been a complementary effort 

to what the film industry was all about, Mr. Speaker. We can 

see that there’s incredible value in any Saskatchewan person, 

whether you’re a potter, into pottery, or whether you’re into 

music, whether you’re into writing, and whether you’re into 

acting, that Saskatchewan should be the venue. Saskatchewan 

should be the location in which we would attract people from 

all throughout our own land and of course people from across 

the country and people from other countries as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So from our perspective as an official opposition, there’s no 

question that we’d look at the Bill 89 as an effort that should 

have been complementary to what the film employment tax 

credit was all about, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to replacing that 

tax credit which really, really helped a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do quite a bit of travelling as the MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Athabasca, and I 

bump into a lot of people and I talk to them about a lot of 

issues. And the whole notion of the film employment tax credit 

keeps coming up on a continual, consistent basis, Mr. Speaker. 

There are people being impacted by the decision by the Sask 

Party to terminate that tax credit program that really killed this 

particular industry, Mr. Speaker. And when you listen to some 

of those comments of the people that are impacted, it’s really 

disheartening to see that many of them are now leaving 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what I think that I would tell the people of Saskatchewan 

is, quite frankly, is the creative industry that the minister was 

speaking about, the people that do pottery, the people that do 

writing, the people that do music, we would encourage those 

people to continue their particular craft and their skill because 

that’s really important that we send that message forward. 

 

However what is happening, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan 

Party is using these people, the people that are creative in our 

province, to have them become the replacement effort by this 

government over the film employment tax credit value. And 

that’s a real shame. That’s a real shame, Mr. Speaker, because 

as you can see during our sittings here in the Assembly, people 

would come to the Assembly here and they would sit in the 

visitors gallery. And these are people that are moving on. 

They’re moving to Ontario. They’re moving to Quebec, to BC. 

They’re heading out of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And to lose 

those kind of valuable people, people that were involved in the 

film industry, Mr. Speaker, it is really, really a sad day for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And all of a sudden in its haste to try and cover its tracks on a 

very poor choice, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has trotted out 

this Creative Saskatchewan bill, which really I think in the long 

run is something that we ought to be very, very wary of when it 

comes to trying to assess the value and the benefits for all those 

people that are trying to be creative in our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, that the film 

employment tax credit where we had production here in the 

province of Saskatchewan, where we had excitement, where we 

had a lot of economic spinoff, Mr. Speaker, this was a very, 

very exciting time to be in the film industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, since its inception in 1998, 

we had $100 million invested in the film employment tax credit, 

Mr. Speaker, and what it generated was $600 million of 

economic spinoff towards all the parts of our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was the incredible value and the 

incredible genius behind the film employment tax credit, Mr. 

Speaker. Not only was it a good, solid investment into the 

motion picture industry or into the film industry, Mr. Speaker, it 

is also a great value for the economy overall. 

 

And what happens now, the Sask Party turns around without 

admitting that they made any mistake, in their own 

stubbornness trying to not tell the people of Saskatchewan the 

real truth, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that they made this choice 

to kill the film employment tax credit in a very hasty fashion. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve more 

and better answers than that. And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, 

they now have replaced the film employment tax credit with a 

$5 million fund. 

 

Now what’s really important from our perspective, as I 

mentioned, is we’re not going to be critical of the people that 

are going to take advantage of some of the money. But I’ll tell 

the people of Saskatchewan this: you had a film employment 

tax credit that was worth $100 million and since 1998 it 

generated $600 million in spinoff benefits for the people of 

Saskatchewan. The industry was located here, in Saskatoon, and 

Prince Albert, and all throughout the southern parts of our 

province, Mr. Speaker, and they were doing great work. 

 

They were doing great work. There was a lot of effort put in the 

film industry, Mr. Speaker, and you’d bump into people every 

single day that were impacted by this industry. And some of the 

great examples is Corner Gas, as I mentioned a few times, in 

which Saskatchewan was really put on the map. Saskatchewan 

was really put on the map from some of those efforts. And that 

tax credit that the film industry got from the government of the 

day — the NDP government, Mr. Speaker — it really, really 

put Saskatchewan ahead of many, many other jurisdictions. 

 

And it’s an absolute crying shame that the Saskatchewan Party 

government came along and said, look, this thing is going too 

good, it’s really working well, and so now it’s time to end that 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3055 

particular honeymoon. And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve done that. 

Now to add insult to injury, they have $100 million in the film 

employment tax credit generating $600 million, and now the 

minister comes along and saying, we’re putting in $5 million 

into Creative Saskatchewan’s budget to help with those that are 

doing music, those that are doing pottery, and some of the other 

creative industries in our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the point I would make to the people of 

Saskatchewan is this. This particular bill, Bill 89, it should have 

actually been a complementary effort to the money behind the 

film employment tax credit. Wouldn’t it be advantageous for us 

as a province to not only have a burgeoning film industry, to 

have an exciting opportunity in film production and all the jobs 

attached to that, generating $600 million of economic spinoff, 

and add to it this component, Creative Saskatchewan 

component, where not only our writers but the people that do 

pottery, the people that do music, that we had a second 

component, an even more important component added to make 

sure that Saskatchewan became the mecca of all kinds of 

creative industries, Mr. Speaker, that the minister had made 

reference to? 

 

But what we see happening here is they made a decision to kill 

off the film employment tax credit which generated millions of 

dollars in benefits and salaries and millions more towards the 

economic well-being of our province, and they replaced it with 

a $5 million fund that’s going to help a few people in the 

creative sector, Mr. Speaker. And that is the problem with the 

Saskatchewan Party government is that they simply don’t get it. 

They simply want to make a decision and they stubbornly 

refuse to admit that they have made a mistake, Mr. Speaker. 

And the film employment tax credit, the elimination of that 

program which had great value for the province, was a huge, 

huge mistake. 

 

Now I want to talk a bit about the folks that used to come to the 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. And it is almost every second day we’ve 

seen somebody sit in the gallery that was moving on and they’re 

going to leave Saskatchewan as a whole. And these are young, 

exciting, talented people, people that had made a mark in the 

film industry, people that had put Saskatchewan on the map in 

so many ways, Mr. Speaker. And for them to come to the 

Assembly here and say goodbye to us as a government and sit 

here and watch the Saskatchewan Party try and flub its way 

through an explanation as to why they kill that program with no 

solid explanation at all, all the people that done that would 

come here to watch the proceedings. They were just sitting in 

the galleries and they’d shake their head and they would be sad, 

Mr. Speaker. They would be sad. Some of them would be 

angry. Some of them would be angry but most of them were 

sad. And the reason that they’re sad is they’re forced to leave 

Saskatchewan, leave the province that they love, take their 

skills and ability and their youth and their strengths to another 

jurisdiction that would use them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now how does that make sense from a growth perspective at 

all, Mr. Speaker? That’s why we don’t like to use that word, 

because the Saskatchewan Party throw it around like it doesn’t 

mean anything. And, Mr. Speaker, to a lot of people that come 

to the Assembly, that were involved in the film industry, that 

whole message from the Sask Party government was exactly the 

point that I am raising today, that their effort didn’t mean 

anything to the Saskatchewan Party government. And that’s a 

crying shame when you see that kind of a response of a 

government given to its own people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go a bit about the people again that 

came in to the Assembly. The bottom line is the Saskatchewan 

Party government has given the creative entrepreneurs — the 

people involved in the film industry and piles of local 

businesses, people that catered to the creative industries 

businesses and actually were part of the economic benefit that 

the province of Saskatchewan expect from all these 

investments, Mr. Speaker — they were given their pink slips by 

the Saskatchewan Party government. And now there’ll be no 

more film production in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, with 

the end of that credit, the Saskatchewan Party government made 

that decision to end film production in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, when — again I go back to 

sitting here in the Assembly — when we see the people in the 

galleries that are here to say goodbye, it’s a really, really a sad 

day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I look at some of those folks up there in the gallery and I 

go back to my comment that these were very exciting, dynamic, 

creative young people, men and women, that were involved in 

this industry. And all of a sudden the people of Saskatchewan, 

unbeknownst to them, the Saskatchewan Party said, we don’t 

want you here in the province anymore; we’ll see you later. Go 

ply your trade somewhere else because your value to the people 

of Saskatchewan is not of much use to us as a Saskatchewan 

Party government. That was the message that the film industry 

people got when they came to the Assembly hoping that the 

Saskatchewan Party was not stubborn and that they realized the 

error of their ways, Mr. Speaker. And that day did not come. 

That day did not come. 

 

And the only thing I would tell the people of Saskatchewan, 

with this particular bill, it’s a very feeble attempt by the 

Saskatchewan Party to try and deflect from their sorry handling 

of the film employment tax credit and from their stubbornness 

to turn around and admit that they made a mistake and to again 

reinvest in that important industry, Mr. Speaker. And again, as I 

pointed out at the outset, the people of Saskatchewan ought to 

know the errors and the mistakes that they made when it comes 

to the film employment tax credit. 

 

And what they have done, Mr. Speaker, is replace that very 

valuable industry, a very proud industry, a noble industry, an 

industry that was supported for many, many years, and they 

replaced it with a $5 million fund. Now on this side of the 

Assembly we sit and wonder, how does $100 million since 

1989, translate into $600 million for the economy, how does 

that translate into a replacement program of $5 million, that 

where it’s very limited as to who gets this money? And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s kind of the Sask Party map on this whole front, 

that people out there are really confused as to why they would 

hurt an industry that was really putting Saskatchewan on the 

map, but more so earning its dollars and certainly justifying the 

investment that the province was making in their industry 

through the film employment tax credit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that’s, you know, kind of 



3056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

amusing was the fact that after they made the decision, after the 

Sask Party decided to kill off the employment tax credit — they 

said, we had enough of those guys — you know what happened, 

Mr. Speaker, was they commissioned a person to tell the public 

in certain language, and I guess in an appropriate language, as 

to why they made that choice. Now that was what was 

absolutely stunning to us, is you make a decision and not only is 

that decision costing Saskatchewan people jobs, not only is that 

decision costing businesses dollars, but it’s also hurting the 

industry. You have to go somewhere else as a government to 

get somebody else to explain it to you as to how you explain it 

to the people. Now that’s another wasted $5,000, you know, 

Mr. Speaker. And these are all taxpayers’ money and we 

couldn’t understand why they’ve done this, Mr. Speaker. And 

what was the really, really embarrassing part for the 

Saskatchewan Party, they’ve not only done this once, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve done it twice. 

 

So today now as the minister tries to gloss over the value of this 

document in the course of the bill, and saying that Creative 

Saskatchewan will be included, and he made a point, Mr. 

Speaker, that most of the industries . . . And the creative 

industries are micro industries. And really from our perspective 

as a government and as a party, and certainly I think the people 

in general, they wanted to see the creative industries become a 

macro business opportunity for the province of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, again according to the Sask Party rule of 

conduct, we don’t want to see any industry getting to a point 

where it’s very, very strong, so let’s keep them at the micro 

level. And this is why we see the $5 million fund, going from 

$100 million since 1989 to a $5 million fund. No wonder some 

of these industries continue being micro, Mr. Speaker, because 

the Saskatchewan Party want to keep it that way and that’s 

very, very sad to see. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there was a lot of discussion on 

this particular bill from a lot of different folks. And we hear the 

comments. We hear the stories. We watch the news. And I say 

to the people of Saskatchewan that it is a very sad day, a sad 

day when the film employment tax credit was ended. I believe 

this year they’re going to be saving $3 million and next year it’s 

$8 million, Mr. Speaker. But think of the possibilities that, had 

they not done away with the film employment tax credit and 

actually brought Creative Saskatchewan alongside of it to 

mirror the success of the film employment tax credit, imagine 

what a burgeoning industry, a creative industry base that we 

would have here in the province. If you can imagine that for a 

moment, Mr. Speaker, it would really, really . . . It would send 

chills up a lot of people’s spines as to what we could have 

accomplished had it not been for the Sask Party’s 

short-sightedness. And, Mr. Speaker, this $5 million meant to 

stimulate the creative sector in the province of Saskatchewan 

should have been used as a complementary measure, not as a 

replacement measure for the film employment tax credit. 

 

So I say to the people out there that are involved with this 

Creative Saskatchewan opportunity: we would encourage you 

to take advantage of the dollars, the minimal amount of dollars 

that are being put in this particular fund, Mr. Speaker. And 

don’t count on it because the Saskatchewan Party, through time, 

will eventually eliminate this. The moment that they have 

exhausted all the value that they have from this program and 

from the different industries’ endorsement of this program, then 

what they’ll do is they’ll cut the legs out from you in the same 

manner in which they cut the legs out from the film industry, 

Mr. Speaker. You should really expect that at a later date. 

 

So my point to the creative industry people that may be getting 

involved: I would encourage you to hone your skill, to develop 

your craft, to strengthen your business, to become more and 

more independent because in the long run, if you count on any 

support from the Saskatchewan Party government, that’s 

something that you should not count on, second to the first 

point I’d make. 

 

And the second point I would make is that they have a history 

of doing this to the creative industries, and the biggest example 

that we’ve had in the last several years has been the outright 

cancellation of the film employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 

That was really a very sad day for the people of Saskatchewan 

when the Sask Party government done that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are, as I said at the outset, 

there are many film workers and production companies that are 

now leaving or that have plans to leave our province. 

Saskatchewan, once a mecca for a lot of that industry, they are 

now picking up and they’re packing up and they’re leaving, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I read in the news a couple of months ago of how there was a 

plan to do a major production here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the moment the employment tax credit was 

eliminated, then the company that was going to locate here said, 

okay, well we’re looking at other jurisdictions. Saskatchewan is 

out because there’s no support for the film industry. And 

imagine what that particular production would have done for 

our province, Mr. Speaker. It’s an amazing, amazing industry 

and to see it just thrown by, you know, by the wayside by the 

Saskatchewan government is . . . It angers me and it saddens me 

in many ways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And today now the minister tries to put a brave face, and we 

know that’s all he’s doing is putting on a brave face for a paltry 

$5 million replacement program that’s going to impact a few 

people in the creative industries. And those few people, if you 

can imagine, if they could imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, 

if they could have that complementary effort attached to their 

particular craft, if it all became part of a film employment tax 

credit along with this program, imagine how strong 

Saskatchewan would be when it came to the development, 

protection, and enhancement of the creative sector here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. That would’ve been an exciting time 

for us, Mr. Speaker. But alas, it is not to be, because quite 

frankly the Saskatchewan Party government can’t see past their 

noses on this front and it’s a sad, sad thing to see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now some of the other comments I want to make on this 

particular bill is that obviously the fight is not over. I can 

remember one of the guests coming here and bidding farewell 

to the province and for his last time to watch the proceedings of 

the Assembly, and what his point was. He said, what is dead 

shall never die. That was his parting words, Mr. Speaker. And 

quite frankly a lot of people out in Saskatchewanland ought to 

really pay attention to those particular words, as the 

Saskatchewan Party feebly attempt to try and deflect from their 

poor decision, their poor decision to eliminate the film 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3057 

employment tax credit, to bring forward a $5 million fund 

called Creative Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, what is dead 

shall never die. 

 

And the people that are being displaced, the people that now 

have left the province, people have taken their skill level, their 

tax earning ability, their expertise, their youth. As they left the 

province to go ply their trade somewhere else, that is a direct 

loss to our people, to our province, and to our future. And I say 

today, shame on the Saskatchewan Party government. That was 

a very shorted-sighted decision. And what’s even worse, Mr. 

Speaker, is they stubbornly refuse to see the value of that 

program simply because they made a mistake; they don’t want 

to admit it, and now they do a feeble attempt to cover it all up 

with a $5 million Creative Saskatchewan fund, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s not enough. It took away a lot more than what was there 

before. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan 

ought to know that’s the case when it comes to bills of this sort. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a great . . . My colleague, the critic 

for what is being attempted today to deflect from their sorry 

record when it comes to protecting the film industry, has got a 

lot of experience. Certainly from my perspective, I’m pleased 

that the member from Riversdale is on this particular file. I 

know that she has a lot of discussion with a lot of people 

impacted by the film industry. I know that she keeps in contact 

with many of those that have left our province, and she’ll also 

keep in contact with those that may want to take advantage of 

this particular fund.  

 

But I’m sure that she will be explaining to the people that the 

Saskatchewan Party is not to be trusted when it comes to the 

development of the creative industries overall, so to try to make 

sure that if they do have any value from this particular fund, 

that they take full advantage of it. And don’t ever, don’t ever, 

ever let them use you. Don’t let the Saskatchewan Party use you 

to justify the killing of the employment tax credit because that’s 

what they’ll try and do. And that’s not what the intent of 

developing your industry should be about, Mr. Speaker — the 

politics of the Saskatchewan Party versus the camaraderie of 

those people that are involved not only in music but they’re 

involved in production, in drama, in poetry, in pottery, and the 

list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would say to the people out there in Saskatchewan, again 

another feeble attempt of the Saskatchewan Party to try and 

cover up their very ill-advised choice to end the film 

employment tax credit. It’s not enough in any way, shape, form 

— $5 million versus $100 million. It’s only for specific sectors 

of the creative sections of our province and doesn’t include any 

of the film industry or the film production, as those people have 

since left our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that anger nowadays is more towards 

sadness because the Saskatchewan Party’s vision for this 

particular sector is lacking. And there’s no way that anybody in 

Saskatchewan that knew the full and whole truth about how 

they handled this particular file and the creative file overall . . . 

that one of these days, Mr. Speaker, history will judge what the 

Sask Party government has done, and the people of 

Saskatchewan will soon learn about that. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I have other folks that are going 

to be making comments on Bill 89. I hereby move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill 89. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved debate on Bill No. 

89, The Creative Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — To ask for leave to make a statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to make a 

statement. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Energy. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

SaskEnergy Annual Report 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you to my colleagues. I have just been made aware that today 

we tabled the annual report for SaskEnergy, and I’ve just been 

made aware that it inadvertently was put on SaskEnergy’s 

website about an hour and a half before it was tabled here in the 

House. That hasn’t been the practice of our government. It 

hasn’t been the practice of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It 

should have been in front of the members before it was made 

public. For that I apologize to the members and to the 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 90, An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 2007. This bill will introduce amendments 

designed to facilitate the implementation of the Saskatchewan 

plan for growth, particularly where it’s important to have 

effective regional and infrastructure planning to enable 

economic development opportunities. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the provincial growth plan speaks 

to the need for municipalities to work together and overcome 

the challenges of growth. The municipal sector has a key role to 

play in sustaining growth in Saskatchewan and provides most of 

the services and infrastructure needed to support commercial, 

industrial, and residential development. However, continued 

strong growth, particularly after decades of limited or no 

growth in many municipalities, has created challenges. None of 

these challenges is more significant than the need for 

intermunicipal coordination to provide infrastructure and 

manage growth on a regional basis in high-growth areas. 

 



3058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

In most cases, Mr. Speaker, local councils find ways to 

co-operate with their neighbours and solve the issues and 

problems they encounter in a collaborative manner. However, 

in some cases this sort of intermunicipal co-operation does not 

occur, and we see this most often in high-growth areas and in 

particular around our cities where the challenges of economic 

growth are felt most acutely. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Years ago, when growth was more moderate or didn’t exist at 

all, there wasn’t as much at stake as there is now. We cannot 

afford to let problems with intermunicipal co-operation 

endanger the province’s economic growth agenda. 

Saskatchewan needs the ability to put in place collaborative 

regional partnerships between cities and rural municipalities 

that will build capacity, address urgent infrastructure and 

service delivery needs, and create certainty for investment in 

our growing communities and regions. 

 

The intent of Bill 90 is to facilitate planning for growth and to 

overcome difficulties which can arise from growth and 

infrastructure pressures between some cities and rural 

municipalities. To address these areas, these issues specifically 

then, Mr. Speaker, Bill 90 introduces amendments to The 

Planning and Development Act, 2007 that will enable the 

province to respond when required in instances where relations 

between municipalities have deteriorated to the point that 

growth and planning for growth is being seriously 

compromised. 

 

These new authorities will include the authority for the Minister 

of Government Relations to direct cities and surrounding rural 

municipalities by order to establish and participate in a regional 

planning authority and specify its powers, duties, procedures, 

and composition to include both municipal and provincial 

government representatives; direct by order the regional 

planning authority to undertake studies and analysis; prepare 

land use, development, infrastructure and other plans; prepare 

reports or other documents; draft servicing agreements or bylaw 

amendments; and report back to the minister and municipal 

councils within a specified time period; to direct municipal 

councils to adopt or to adopt on their behalf plans and bylaws 

prepared by the regional planning authority; and direct 

municipalities to pay for the costs . . . [inaudible] . . . provincial 

financial assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to give you the impression that the 

situation with respect to intermunicipal co-operation is dire. In 

fact there are great examples of voluntary regional planning all 

around Saskatchewan: 158 municipalities, both urban and rural, 

participating in 22 groups, previously received funding through 

the planning for growth program, showing how municipalities 

see the importance of working together. In these cases, Mr. 

Speaker, where things are working well, the best thing the 

province can do is let the municipalities get on with their work. 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we will do. 

 

We understand that for the province to become this involved in 

local planning is a serious matter. And we don’t intend to use 

the new authorities indiscriminately. However the fact that our 

government is going to introduce these new powers is an 

indication of how seriously we’re taking the issues we see 

around intermunicipal co-operation. Open and respectful 

communication and collaboration between municipalities is 

encouraged through the municipal capacity development 

program, The Planning and Development Act, 2007, and the 

voluntary planning district processes. 

 

However where such communication and collaboration fails, 

this bill provides a mechanism to overcome the challenges and 

build a regional plan for the affected municipalities to work 

within, so that the job of facilitating planning and service 

development is achieved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, creating investment certainty in our growth 

regions requires commitment from our cities and surrounding 

rural municipalities to work together in advancing essential 

infrastructure, services, and development decisions in a timely 

and efficient manner. This is something we have been hearing 

from industry. We’re looking to municipalities to establish a 

coordinated approach to development. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the few cases where it may be necessary, 

we’re prepared to act to ensure the success of the plan for 

growth by providing direction to cities and surrounding rural 

municipalities to work together and build capacity for 

supporting business investment in their region. 

 

From a practical perspective, when we determine the need to 

form a regional planning authority, it will be done by minister’s 

order. The order will set out the membership of the authority 

along with the terms and conditions of its operation. The 

majority of the proposed provisions relating to regional 

planning authorities are based on existing legislation for 

voluntary district planning. Key similarities are regional 

planning authorities or corporate bodies authorized by their 

member councils to make planning decisions on official 

community plans and zoning bylaws, administer the planning 

process, and issue development permits. 

 

A regional planning authority with approving authority status 

would have expanded authority for planning and zoning under 

The Planning and Development Act, 2007 and would have the 

ability to offer expanded centralized and professional planning 

and development services. 

 

Regional planning authorities have the authority to, among 

other things, establish procedures for the conduct of its business 

and administration, the appointment of any consultants or 

employees, and the appointment of any technical advisory 

committees. A regional planning authority must follow the 

provisions of The Planning and Development Act, 2007 when 

preparing a regional plan. And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, a 

regional planning authority is responsible for preparing a 

regional plan for the included municipalities. 

 

The composition of a regional planning authority will be similar 

to that of a district planning authority. The minister will have 

the authority to determine the number of people that will make 

up the regional planning authority. Flexibility is provided to 

allow for individual circumstances, but generally we expect the 

membership of a regional planning authority would include 

representation from each affected municipality and one or more 

representatives from the Government of Saskatchewan. This 

will ensure the interests of the province are considered by the 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3059 

regional planning authority. 

 

Another difference between Bill 90 and existing legislation is 

once a regional plan is approved, all municipalities included in 

a regional planning area will be required to confirm its local 

official community plan and zoning bylaw are in compliance 

with the regional plan. Included municipalities will be 

responsible for adjusting their official community plans and 

zoning bylaws to be consistent with the regional plan as 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2013-14 budget also establishes the regional 

planning authority program that will provide $250,000 in new 

funding to support the creation of regional planning authorities 

and the preparation of land use and infrastructure plans for the 

regional planning area. Matching funds from the municipalities 

will be required, and it will be up to the municipalities involved 

to determine how the costs will be distributed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments will include the authority to 

compel participation and also the implementation of the results 

of the regional planning authority’s work. While some 

consultation on the development of the minister’s order will 

likely be necessary, we do not intend to let that drag on for 

weeks and months. In those cases where it’s necessary, we want 

the regional planning authority to be formed, do its job, report, 

and then let the municipalities get on with their work. 

 

Implementing regional planning in this manner will build local 

government capacity to advance the economic, social, 

environmental, infrastructure, and cultural priorities of 

communities, respond to growing development and 

infrastructure pressures, and include provincial priorities with 

local and regional decisions. I would urge each and every 

member of this House to review and support this bill, and 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 90. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 90, The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There’s no question . . . Again as we give our initial look at this 

particular bill, we thank the minister for his comments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the outset on Bill 90, there’s 

no question that when we hear, in the opposition, when we hear 

the Saskatchewan Party members speak about the supposed 

Saskatchewan plan for growth, Mr. Speaker, we know those are 

just words that they use, that there is no coherent plan that they 

have. It’s just a bunch of buzzwords they throw about and 

bandy about. And they try and convince the people of 

Saskatchewan that they really do have a plan when in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, they do not have a plan. They simply throw out these 

words. 

 

And this is exactly the example that we make reference of when 

we say the Saskatchewan Party government simply don’t have a 

clue as to what they’re doing when it comes to economic 

building of our province. And they throw in buzzwords like a 

Saskatchewan plan for growth, Mr. Speaker, when we know 

that there isn’t any particular plan they have. Those are just 

words that they use. And we hear the Premier bandying about 

these words and backbenchers using these words when in fact 

when you really ask the question of the Sask Party, where is 

your plan? Show us your plan. Show us that these are not just 

buzzwords that you use conveniently whenever you choose to 

do so. And, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing every day more and 

more evidence that this particular government does not have a 

clue.  

 

They don’t have a plan as they make reference to, and they’re 

simply going out from crisis to crisis to try and figure out how 

we can build the future of the people of Saskatchewan in a very 

intelligent manner, Mr. Speaker. And after six years they still 

haven’t got it figured out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I would say on this particular bill at the outset, at our 

first comment and our first look at this particular bill, Bill 90 

. . . You hear the minister talk about buzzwords like 

collaborative partnerships. He’s talking about zoning bylaws. 

He’s talking about minister’s orders. He’s talking about a 

regional planning committee. He’s talking about, let’s plan it 

out amongst ourselves. And he’s talking about how these 

regional planning committees can make a significant difference 

in benefit for the people of Saskatchewan. Then he talked about 

minister’s orders again, Mr. Speaker. And then he talked about 

consultation not being weeks or months, that it has to happen 

very quickly. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, he let it out. For the entire regional 

planning committee effort that they have under their supposed 

Saskatchewan plan for growth, Mr. Speaker, what are they 

committing to all the people of Saskatchewan, the entire area, 

the entire province of Saskatchewan? Well the minister said 

$250,000, is what he said, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly my 

point, Mr. Speaker, on this particular bill. Is $250,000 to work 

toward regional planning committees that will help sustain the 

economy and plan for growth, as they say, for the entire 

province? Come on. Give me a break, Mr. Speaker. Because the 

people of Saskatchewan are not that silly. Two hundred and 

fifty grand for all the regional planning committee work being 

done right across the province of Saskatchewan, it’s an absolute 

joke, Mr. Speaker. In fact, it’s laughable in a sense that the 

minister figures that’s what it’s going to take to get all these 

regional plans in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know, I know, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

buzzwords, when they say collaborative partnership, zoning 

bylaws, and I said, minister’s orders, that’s the language that he 

was using. And I will tell the people that this is our first step, 

the Saskatchewan Party’s first step towards amalgamation. 

 

And there’s no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] ought to be 

concerned and worried about what the Sask Party have in plan 

for them because obviously when you look at who they get 

advice from, who the Sask Party gets advice from, they get 

advice from SARM and they get advice from the chamber of 

commerce. And the chamber of commerce is saying that we’re 

over-governed. We have too many rules and regulations. We 

have overlap in jurisdictions. And all these rules and regulations 

made from one RM [rural municipality] to another, from one 

town to another town, it’s very confusing. It’s perplexing. It has 



3060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

in the industry as a whole in a conundrum because they know 

they want to work in the area, and they want to work with local 

people, but there are too many confusing signals. There’s too 

many overlapping jurisdictions. There’s too many rules and 

regulations. 

 

So at the end of the day, the chamber of commerce is telling the 

Saskatchewan Party government, we need to look at a uniform 

approach to try and figure out how we can be attracting more 

investment and more business opportunities to our province. 

And one of the uniform approaches that I think the chamber 

would like to see happen is a lot more amalgamation of some of 

the RMs and some of the communities that are out there. But, 

Mr. Speaker, the worry that the Saskatchewan Party has, you 

start talking amalgamation with SARM, then all of a sudden 

they’re going to be up in arms and the Sask Party’s got to be 

very careful on this particular front because their supposed plan 

for growth, which doesn’t exist, is trying to address exactly 

what the chamber of commerce is saying: that there is some 

overlap, duplication, needless regulation, and confusing signals 

from different players and different partners and that doesn’t do 

no good for attracting investment. 

 

So what I think Bill 90 is about, Mr. Speaker, under the guise of 

regional planning, I think the Sask Party is taking their first step 

towards amalgamation. I really, truly believe that, Mr. Speaker. 

And the only word that the minister didn’t say too much out 

there was the word efficiency, but I’m sure that word will come 

up somewhere in the sense of this particular bill, that efficiency 

will come up somewhere, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an amazing 

effort I think on their part to simply try again, once again, to 

hide their agenda of amalgamation. And I don’t know why they 

just don’t come out to SARM and say, this is what our plan is, 

this is what our vision is, and these are the problems, and this is 

how we’re going fix it. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to pick apart these little 

areas and they’re going to say, okay we’re going to have a 

regional planning committee here, but not over there. We’re 

going to have a regional planning committee that involves all 

these guys, but we’re going to change the rules on who is going 

to be involved with the regional planning committee for this 

area. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that there is confusion, that there 

is conflict, and that there is no such plan that the Saskatchewan 

Party members keep making reference to, because to do all that 

work, to do all the work that’s necessary to begin to address 

what the chamber of commerce’s concerns are, Mr. Speaker, 

he’s going to commit to this exercise how much? 250,000 

province-wide. Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that’s a paltry 

amount for what is necessary when it comes to regional 

planning committee work. It is not significant in any way and I 

can almost guarantee you one regional planning committee may 

need that entire fund. It’s a lot of work that is necessary. 

 

Now what I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, is the manner in 

which the minister is also saying that as a part of this particular 

bill, Bill 90, we would like you guys to plan it out amongst 

yourselves in how we could stimulate the economy and, as he 

said, to adopt our plan for growth or their supposed plan for 

growth, Mr. Speaker. I can tell the people and the players out 

there, whether it’s chamber of commerce or whether it’s SARM 

delegates or people out there that are thinking about this, don’t 

buy into that because there is no such plan, Mr. Speaker. We 

see the Saskatchewan Party jumping from crisis to crisis. They 

try and use different activities and functions to try and change 

the channel and distract from their poor performance. We’ve 

seen it happen time and time again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the thing that’s really impressive overall is the fact that 

they blame others. They don’t take any responsibility for 

themselves; they say it’s all somebody else’s fault. And when 

they make a mistake, they won’t admit it. They stubbornly, they 

stubbornly stick to their lines and, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good 

government. That’s not government at all. Then when all the 

crises start to mount up, they would say, oh we have this plan 

for growth. Mr. Speaker, they don’t have a plan for growth. 

They’re just jumping from crisis to crisis and from a PR spin 

and to media announcements on a continual basis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would say this. If the Saskatchewan Party 

was serious about growth overall, if they were serious about 

growth overall, Mr. Speaker, would they, would they not have a 

situation figured out? Would they have the P.A. [Prince Albert] 

bridge issue figured out? Would that have been resolved for a 

plan for growth? That’s a solid investment for the future of the 

economy of the P.A. area, which is all part of our province. 

Right, Mr. Speaker? 

 

You look at the Estevan bypass, look at the Estevan routes right 

now that are being threatened to be shut down from four lanes 

to one lane. In Estevan where there’s a booming economy, 

people are working, the city themselves are now considering 

shutting down one of the major roads from a four-lane highway 

to one lane. And what’s the reason on that, Mr. Speaker? 

Potholes, potholes galore on that particular road. It’s hurting the 

economy of Estevan. Well isn’t that a good avenue to begin this 

whole plan for growth buzzword that the Sask Party is actually 

using, Mr. Speaker? That’s my point. If there’s no P.A. bridge, 

Mr. Speaker, if there is no work to help Estevan fix their 

highways so they wouldn’t have all these potholes hurting their 

economy . . . Mr. Speaker, that is a good plan for growth. And 

the reason they won’t do any of that, Mr. Speaker? Because 

they don’t understand it. That’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you look at some of the . . . In North Battleford as an 

example, there is 300 workers laid off at Maple Leaf, 300 

workers. Not a peep from this particular government as to how 

they’re going to help that city cope with that huge job loss at 

Maple Leaf. Not a peep, Mr. Speaker. So I go back to my 

earlier point: well isn’t that part of your economic plan for 

growth, to address these matters and these issues? Well none of 

that is in their budget, none of that is in their thinking, and none 

of that is in their words, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you look at the prosperity this government has wasted, the 

tons of money that they have wasted in places that they should 

have thought everything through, Mr. Speaker. And the 

opportunity lost, the opportunities lost, whether it’s the film 

employment tax credit or whether it’s working with the 

Aboriginal sector, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s really, really 

starting to work with the oil and gas and the mining industries, 

Mr. Speaker. You can’t just say you have this plan. Because all 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3061 

it is to the NDP, all it is to the people of Saskatchewan are just 

silly words that the Saskatchewan Party uses and bandies about 

when they have no answers for things like the Estevan bypass, 

for things like the P.A. bridge, for addressing the 300 jobs lost 

in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. This list goes on and on and 

on as to how this government has not met their obligations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And once again under Bill 90, under Bill 90, Mr. Speaker, the 

buzzword — I’ll tell the people right now — is amalgamation. 

It looks like amalgamation, it smells like amalgamation and, 

Mr. Speaker, I bet you a bottom dollar that is it amalgamation 

that the Government of Saskatchewan has planned for RMs and 

for villages and towns. 

 

Now I say the words again to anybody out there who might be 

listening, the words of collaborative partnership, zoning bylaws, 

minister’s orders, all under the title of regional planning 

committees. And, Mr. Speaker, that would suggest, that would 

suggest to me that amalgamation is being planned by the 

Saskatchewan Party government because there are people out 

there, the chamber of commerce being one of them, that are 

making arguments as to why amalgamation would be good for 

the economy. 

 

And here’s where the Saskatchewan Party has to make a 

decision. They have to make a choice, Mr. Speaker. They can 

either portray themselves as champions of the economy — 

which we don’t buy at all on this side of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker — by listening to the chamber of commerce. Or they 

can listen to SARM, Mr. Speaker, tell them, no, there should be 

no effort to try and amalgamate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where do they go? Who does the Sask Party listen 

to, Mr. Speaker? And that’s the message I have today, is there’s 

massive confusion on that side because their priorities are all 

mixed up and they’re not certain. They have been playing this 

game for a while now where they pretend to listen to both 

groups, but sooner or later both those groups will meet and the 

discussion will happen. And the Saskatchewan Party had better 

make a decision at that time on what side of the bed they’re 

getting out of on that particular issue, Mr. Speaker, because you 

can’t keep that particular marriage happy when you have two 

partners that have differing views on how we can build this 

economy together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I would look at the wording. That is really problematic 

to me. And what’s really problematic, Mr. Speaker, is $250,000 

for all of Saskatchewan to put regional planning committees in 

place. Like, come on. How silly is that? How silly is that, Mr. 

Speaker? So I tell the people of Saskatchewan this, 

Saskatchewan Party plan for growth are just buzzwords that the 

Premier, the entire cabinet, and the backbenchers use to try and 

convince the people of Saskatchewan that there is a plan, and 

there is no plan, Mr. Speaker. There’s absolutely no plan. 

Because if there was a plan then the P.A. bridge would be on 

that list, Mr. Speaker, the Estevan bypass would be on that 

bridge, addressing the 300 workers that lost their jobs in North 

Battleford would be on that list, Mr. Speaker. And not one of 

those important issues that are a direct threat to the economy are 

on that list. 

 

What’s on that list is Bill 90, Bill 90 here talking about regional 

planning committees and giving them 250,000 measly dollars to 

that particular work on a provincial, on a province-wide basis, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s insulting. It’s not intelligent. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it lends credence to our argument, on the opposition 

side, that there was never a plan. It’s all simply buzzwords. And 

they’re bumbling along and fumbling through this crisis, Mr. 

Speaker, and sooner or later that is going to cost the people of 

Saskatchewan dearly. 

 

It’s going to hurt our economy for years to come, Mr. Speaker. 

And that work, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party has undertaken 

now to hurt our economy and hurt our future, has began five 

years ago. And it’ll continue going unless the people of 

Saskatchewan stand up and tell these guys to wake up, smell the 

coffee, and figure out that there’s a lot more challenging issues 

out there that are threatening our economy than simply pushing 

through a regional planning committee and doing this at 

$250,000 province-wide. It’s insulting. It’s not worth the time 

of day to put any kind of effort in trying to understand this bill, 

Mr. Speaker. And I tell the people of Saskatchewan and all the 

people out there that are looking at this particular bill, take the 

time to study it, see what effect, what impact, what value it may 

have to your region. Is there any merit to what is being 

proposed here? 

 

And the word that just keeps jumping out at me under Bill 90, 

Mr. Speaker, is the words minister’s orders, minister’s orders, 

minister’s orders. Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the people 

of Saskatchewan don’t put minister’s orders on how to build 

your regional economy as a tool that this government could use 

because they have made a mess out of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The economy of Saskatchewan is strong, and we want to 

continue seeing that growth happen and that opportunity 

happen. The people of Saskatchewan know this is important. 

The NDP know it’s important. We’re going to continue 

building on that particular work, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 

important message I would share with all the people of 

Saskatchewan. We want to see Saskatchewan be number one, 

but we want to see them make . . . to ensure that while we have 

the opportunity and the monetary resources now, while we have 

the money to make some strategic investments, some solid 

investments that’ll build that economy for years and sustain the 

economy for as long as possible . . . Because rest assured, 

sooner or later the economy will cool down, and how you 

manage the economy now is really important for that future, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s really important for that future . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Now I hear the member from Kindersley chirp 

from his seat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now is he the architect of that planned growth for 

Saskatchewan? I can tell you he probably picked the words. But 

if I challenge him today to say you put a document on my desk 

here that shows that you architected the business plan for 

Saskatchewan’s economy, Mr. Speaker, if he does not produce 

that document, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ll give him a day. Because if 

they say they have it, I’ll give them a day. Guaranteed, Mr. 

Speaker, there’ll not be a document on my desk today because 

that plan doesn’t exist. And the member from Kindersley knows 

very well it doesn’t exist, and he simply uses buzzwords to try 

and confuse the people and pretend that they’re on track to keep 

this economy hot and strong, Mr. Speaker. They’re simply 

chugging along at the best of their ability hoping not to make 



3062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

mistakes. And that’s a crying shame when it comes to the future 

development of our economy overall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I will say this: that when it comes to Bill 90, when it 

reeks of the word amalgamation, it reeks of amalgamation, Mr. 

Speaker. And you look at what they’re trying to do with the Bill 

90. He’s talking about regional planning committee, and they’re 

going to offer $250,000 province wide for this regional 

planning committee. Mr. Speaker, this bill is not worth the 

paper it’s written on primarily because all it is is simply 

buzzwords to qualify their particular facade that they’re 

working on the economy and have a great plan for the 

economy, Mr. Speaker.  

 

To us it is just words, hollow words that simply don’t address 

the issues like the P.A. bridge, like the Estevan bypass, like 

protecting the working people, taking care of the environment, 

addressing 300 job losses in North Battleford. Those are the 

issues, Mr. Speaker. Those are the issues that should be on an 

economic plan, not silly little bills like Bill 90 that talks about 

putting regional planning committees all throughout the 

province. And the grand cost of that scheme? 250,000 measly 

dollars. Like come on, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are a lot more intelligent than that. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more we want to 

say on this particular bill. I hope to be back on this bill to talk 

about what they’re not doing right, Mr. Speaker, and what 

ought to be done to strengthen this economy for years and years 

and years and years, Mr. Speaker. And this bill simply doesn’t 

merit any kind of attention that the minister says it’s going to 

merit when it comes to planning. Because, Mr. Speaker, 

$250,000 province wide to develop regional planning 

committees? Like give us a break, just give us a break, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

Bill 90 is a complete waste of time from my perspective. It’s a 

waste of time because it’s based on the premise that the 

Saskatchewan Party have a grand plan called the Saskatchewan 

plan for growth. Mr. Speaker, that plan doesn’t exist. It never 

has existed. The only premise, purpose they have with this 

particular bill, Bill 90, is the word amalgamation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are going to find that out 

very soon. So on that note, I make a motion that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 90. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 90, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 85 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Today I rise to enter into the debate on Bill No. 85. I usually 

say it’s an honour, but today I feel that this is a sad occasion in 

the sense that we’re probably going to be talking for the last 

time about a bill called labour standards, a bill called The Trade 

Union Act, a bill called . . . an Act called The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act — legislation that served this province 

very well, very well over the past many, many years as labour 

law evolved. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So I’ll just stand and enter into the debate my thoughts on this, 

as I’ve been very involved with this over the last less than a 

year. And I do want to make that point because this has been 

one of the quickest, quickest pieces of legislation that’s gone 

from an idea on May 2nd last year to the point that we’re at 

today, and we have some real concerns about it. 

 

And so I do have some thoughts on it, and I want to talk about 

our main concerns. And I do want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that there’s a phrase that I’ll repeat several times today, is that if 

we don’t learn from history, we are doomed to repeat it. And 

we have seen this with this government in terms of labour 

legislation. And whether it’s essential services legislation that 

we saw that was rushed right after the 2007 election, became 

law, was challenged, and now it’s in the courts, mired in the 

courts. And here we are some five and a half years, six years 

later, and we have not got any further. 

 

And you know, I find it of passing interest that this year of all 

the storms we’ve had, we still talk about that storm of January 

10th, 2007, where the blizzard in this province was so bad that 

the highway workers came out even though they were on strike 

just a few days prior to that . . . the impetus to that legislation, 

essential services bill, and the problems when we don’t get it 

right, when we don’t take the time to get it right. And we’ve 

seen that. And I do have some severe, severe concerns about 

this piece of legislation, and so we don’t support this bill. 

 

We would hope though that in the interest . . . that we 

understand the government has the power and authority to make 

legislation as they see fit, that at least they take the time to get it 

right. And we would hope that they would delay it and take the 

summer to make sure that they get it right. But we do believe it 

is fatally flawed, and I’ll get into those reasons why in a few 

minutes. But I do want to make sure that over the course of this 

afternoon that there is no misunderstanding, that we do not 

support this bill as it is. We think it is fatally flawed, but we 

encourage the government that if they can do nothing else with 

this bill, that they do take the time to get it right and delay the 

passage of it until the fall. 

 

I want to set the stage, Mr. Speaker. I want to take some time 

further on to talk about the history of labour law in this 

province. I think it’s a fascinating area. It’s one that is so hugely 

important because, as we all know, the world of work gives us 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3063 

meaning to our lives. And whatever it is that we do, it’s the 

regulations, the laws that protect us from exploitation, protect 

us from danger, and we must make sure we get those laws, 

those regulations right. So I want to talk a little bit about that. 

 

I want to talk about what seems to be a much better way of 

approaching changes to labour legislation because we’re not 

against improvements to labour legislation. And I’ll talk in 

more details about why that is. But we are not against 

improvements, and we’re not against taking a look at labour 

legislation and how it might fit a modern-day Saskatchewan. 

 

But we are against doing it in a rushed, hurried way that causes 

all sorts of problems, unintended consequences. Because we 

know, we know in our economy, it is just so critical that we get 

the workforce right and that they feel safe and that they’re 

treated fairly in the workplace. And if we don’t do that, then we 

can create a lot of problems immediately and also further down 

the road. So I want to talk a little bit about that. I want to talk 

about the Arthurs report, and I also want to talk about what’s 

happening across North America. 

 

We are deeply concerned and deeply worried about the trends 

that we see with right to work, and we did see the idea that we 

might, the unions might have lost the Rand formula. And that 

wasn’t the case though, and so that’s a good thing, and we think 

that is a good thing. But there are some real challenges across 

this country, right across North America, and so we want to 

make sure that that’s on the record too because we can get it 

right. And we need to get it right and that’s really important. 

 

I’ll talk a little bit about some of the things within the bill. But I 

mean the bill is so, is so huge. It really truly is an omnibus bill. 

And we’ve seen a trend, particularly at the federal, the national 

level of omnibus legislation. And it becomes a bit of an 

awe-and-shock method of legislation where it’s so big, where 

do you start? Where do you start? And it’s too much to get into 

the detail because it has taken so long to evolve to that stage 

and when it’s all wrapped up like this — now we see 12 pieces 

of legislation — that we clearly worry about this. And some 

people can’t believe some of the implications of what the 

changes really are. They go, that can’t be true. And we say, well 

it seems to be the case in here. 

 

But of course the other part of an omnibus bill when you have 

legislation of this size, this quantity, that the implementation 

becomes a real challenge. It becomes a real challenge. So how 

will this be implemented? So we have some real concerns about 

that. And we do want to make sure we will raise this. 

 

Now it’s not the current minister’s doing, the essential services 

fiasco that started six years ago, but he was part of the 

government that saw that. And so we think that all members on 

the opposite side would have learned a lesson from that when 

Justice Ball emphasized how important consultation is, how 

important it is to get it right, how important the balance of 

power between the employer and the employee is critical to 

make sure that it’s respected, that you don’t have unintended 

consequences.  

 

And so we have some real concerns about not learning the 

lessons from history. So once again I’ll repeat that. If we do not 

learn from history, we are doomed to repeat it. And it seemed to 

be . . . This is way too soon, way too soon for a government that 

it’s in the sixth year of its mandate, that they’re already falling 

into a trap of not learning from history, their own history, their 

own history, their own mistakes. And we often on this side — 

and we do this because we think it’s important — we raise 

concerns about the quality of consultation. 

 

And clearly this government needs to think, rethink how they 

do consultation and how important it is, how important it is to 

get it right. I do want make sure that we highlight some of the 

union concerns, some of the labour concerns because they are 

representing not only their members — and whether it be 

members who are in the health sector or whether it be members 

that are in the public sector or members who are in the private 

sector — but also they recognize their role of how important it 

is to give a voice to those who are vulnerable, those who are not 

organized, those who are transient in their workplace, those 

who are even temporary workers, that there are rights. And we 

do look to organized labour to be that voice at the table to make 

sure their concerns of whether it’s fairness, fairness in wages, 

fairness in hours of work, but also making sure that the 

workplace is safe. And that it’s important that if a person is 

trained appropriately, that the important . . . the equipment is in 

safe running fashion and that all of that is in place. 

 

And so we have some real concerns, and I do want to make sure 

that we talk a little bit about that. And at the same time, I’ll be 

raising some concerns that we think is important in terms of 

even agriculture because we see how important agriculture is to 

our economy, and we want to make sure that we recognize the 

critical nature of farm workers and how critical it is. It’s 

important that they’re treated in a safe fashion. That’s very, 

very important. 

 

And we’ll also be talking about . . . I want to make sure we 

raise some concerns that the Privacy Commissioner raised. He 

wrote a letter, and it’s very thorough, very thoughtful. And it’s 

always one . . . I think of all the five legislative officers, we 

should listen to each one of those when they have their points of 

view on legislation. We should make sure that their voice is 

heard. Now clearly it’s up to the government to decide whether 

or not they give any weight to it. We sure hope they do because 

these folks, we have them as officers because they bring an 

expertise and a thoughtfulness to the issues before us through 

their own particular perspective, their own particular lens. And 

when you have people like the officer of . . . Privacy 

Commissioner talking about his concerns, I think we need to 

take a look at that . . . and interestingly some business thoughts. 

You know, the one thing . . . And it is interesting that the 

minister has placed on the website the feedback that he has 

received. 

 

And it’s been an interesting, it has been an interesting process 

where at one point I know he received over 3,000 responses. 

Two thousand were identical. They were faxed-in forms. It’s a 

concern that we have about how authentic consultation is. I 

mean it’s one thing to say we consulted, but it’s a real other 

thing to say we went out and we met with people, both 

employers, employees, and we had a good, productive 

conversation about what we needed to do and making sure 

people had the capacity to have that conversation. And I’ll talk 

a little bit about that when we talk about students and some of 

the challenges that they face. 



3064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

And I also want to reflect and thank my eight colleagues here 

and the speeches that they gave. They were very thoughtful. 

And I do want to, if I can, if I have enough time before the end 

of the day, reflect on some of the things they said because each 

one of them brought some very interesting perspectives to this 

floor. And I think it’s important that in summary we think about 

the work that they have done. 

 

And so I think that’s the thing that we want to talk about today. 

And I just want to lay that all out because I think it’s very 

important that we have a plan of what I really want to make 

sure is covered in my remarks. 

 

I want to start by saying that it was a real surprise on May 2nd, 

2012, about four, five, six months after the November election 

of 2011, that we saw ourselves faced with this kind of review. 

When the minister said he launched a consultation paper, and he 

said he’s going to allow 90 days on the review of labour 

legislation in Saskatchewan, I think people were aghast at 90 

days to review 15 pieces of legislation that took over 100 years 

of law and parliamentary discussion here in our legislature and 

that it was all going to be done in 90 days. 

 

But not only was it going to be in 90 days, but it was not going 

to be in person. There were not going to be any face-to-face 

consultations. They were going to be all mail-in papers. And so 

clearly that was going to not only cut out a significant part of 

our population, that it really meant that people’s voices were 

not going to be heard. 

 

Now the minister did set up a minster’s advisory committee, 

and that’s fair enough. I mean I think that’s good to have at any 

time. That’s a good process to have. But to give them this kind 

of role when . . . I mean they did not have a role in saying 90 

days and only written consultations. That became a real 

problem. And then it really became an issue of what was going 

to be fair, what was going to be . . . How was this going to 

move forward? Some of the questions seemed pretty 

inflammatory. And the minister was not saying, you know. . . 

When we’re talking about reviewing stat holidays, we’re not 

really talking about that. We have questions in the House. And 

it really became a real problem because we weren’t sure what 

was going to come out of this and what this was going to look 

like. 

 

But the minister has kept his timeline. He said it was going to 

be 90 days, and they closed it off on July 31st. And then they 

released all the papers on the website. And of course that was 

quite a thing because obviously when you saw thousands of the 

same fact sheet . . . really raised the credibility, the integrity of 

the consultation paper. But the number was used over and over 

again as if it was some sort of licence to say we did consult, 

when really it added more fuel to the flame because really, did 

you really consult when you had that kind of response in 90 

days, 90 days over the summer, over what we could consider 

holidays? 

 

And then we saw the bill in its true form in the dying days of 

the Christmas . . . just before Christmas in December 2012. And 

of course then we were left with only two or three months then 

over of course a big part of that would be the Christmas 

holidays. So we were really worried about that, and we had 

some real concerns. 

But not only did we have some concerns but also the folks who 

were on this advisory committee because on one hand they felt, 

fair enough, we will participate in this. And they had some real 

concerns. I know from the employee side that there was some 

real concerns, what they felt, and I agree with them that they 

felt they should participate. Then when the opportunity is to 

have the ear of the minister and the ministry, a person and a 

group should do that. It would only be the reasonable thing to 

do. But they realized the size of the work that was before them 

and the impact, the potential impact of this was going to be very 

significant. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And so when this all came about, many of the . . . In fact it was 

the labour side or members who represented labour who then 

went and had a press conference and asked the minister to 

reconsider the timeline — not to reconsider passing the bill, not 

to reconsider whether or not he had the authority to do the bill, 

but reconsider the timeline so that people could fully appreciate 

what was before us. 

 

And I think this was only fair and only reasonable. And there 

appeared a commentary in the daily papers here in Saskatoon 

and in Regina, and it was very thoughtful. I thought it was the 

reasonable thing to put out there and the reasons why. And I’d 

like to quote from that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The headline is 

“New Sask. labour law: why the rush?” Leader-Post, March 

6th, 2013 on page 8. And I’ll read the first part, and I quote: 

 

As labour leaders, business leaders and government we 

have a responsibility to work together to maintain a 

stable, balanced and fair work environment for all people 

in Saskatchewan. We have been charged to preserve the 

rights and freedoms of choice we all enjoy resulting from 

the solid foundation of labour legislation we have built 

together over the past 70 years. 

 

We challenge ourselves to be thorough in our review of 

any major legislative changes so that we may reduce the 

risk of unexpected and unintended outcomes that could 

harm the livelihoods of the people we serve and the 

community we seek to enhance. 

 

And so he goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan stands at a precipice of labour instability 

with the introduction of a sweeping and rushed overhaul 

of the province’s labour laws in Bill 85 — the new 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

And so he really sets the stage and says we should be really 

concerned about this. We’re really at a crossroads of doing the 

right thing and making sure that we’re thorough, that we know 

it’s the best piece of work we can do and not be held hostage to 

a false deadline that really, really doesn’t matter. It doesn’t 

really matter whether it’s May 16th or December 31st just as 

long as we get it right. There’s too much at risk. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, we had a good debate the other 

day about the economy of Saskatchewan and how well it’s 

doing, and I was disappointed that the other side did not 

mention the role of working men and women in making that 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3065 

economy as strong as it is. Clearly business has a role and has 

done so much, and we appreciate that, but you’ve got to admit 

that it’s the working men and women who’ve made this 

province what it is. And when we put what we have at risk, it’s 

a dangerous, dangerous thing. 

 

And so let’s get it right. Let’s get it right, you know. And he 

goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

It raises a question: what is driving the government’s 

rushed efforts to pass Bill 85 in the spring sitting of the 

legislature? There is always a danger that far-reaching 

legislative changes, when driven by undue haste, can 

create unplanned consequences, as seems to be the case in 

this instance. 

 

What is of equal concern is if the people of Saskatchewan 

understand how these changes will impact them, their 

families and their businesses. 

 

And what they’re concerned about, and I quote: 

 

For individual workers, the balance of current legislation 

will shift dramatically in favour of employers. 

 

Under Bill 85, employers will have the discretionary 

power to limit whether employees are able to access the 

traditional two consecutive days off in a work week. 

Scheduled lunch and rest breaks may no longer be the 

common standard . . . 

 

And he goes on and on and describes this. And he says, and I 

want to close with this: 

 

We are all part of the “Saskatchewan advantage” and the 

biggest economic boom in our province’s history. We 

have the lowest unemployment rate today in the country 

and more people are moving to our province than ever 

before. 

 

All of this has been achieved under our current labour 

legislation — there clearly is no crisis requiring a hasty 

fix. 

 

Modernization of laws is a good thing, but it requires 

thoughtful and inclusive review and that will take time. 

 

There is no harm in taking time, but there is a worrying 

potential for real damage if passage of this new legislation 

is rushed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, end of quote. I think that’s an important, 

important piece of advice for us. Let’s take the time to get it 

right. Now on this side of the House, we think there’s some 

fatal flaws that are hard to get past. But the government is the 

government, and they’ve been working with an advisory 

committee that’s reasonably saying, let’s take some time and 

get this right. This is a real problem. This is a real problem. 

 

You know, and we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 

government is quite okay, quite okay about taking some time to 

get it right on some other issues. We see the lobbyists’ registry 

that we understand, after the election, was a key piece of 

legislation. That was a priority for this government. This 

Premier was very concerned about how we stood out across the 

country because we did not have strong legislation in this area, 

and we needed to do something about it as soon as we could. So 

we even responded. We thought that was very important. 

 

And so where is it now? We heard from the Minister of Justice 

when asked about it a few weeks ago that he wants to make sure 

he gets it right. Well that’s a good thing. That’s a very good 

thing. And I think that we applaud that. We applaud taking the 

time to get it right. But it shouldn’t be inconsistent, that one 

minister thinks it’s the right thing to get it right, and the other 

minister says, we’ve got to live to our timelines no matter what, 

no matter what people are saying. And so, Mr. Speaker — I 

want to make sure that I get a good glass of water here — but I 

think we want to make sure we get it right. 

 

And when we see that . . . And we saw that with the people who 

ride motorcycles and raised a lot of concerns about the fact of 

the increased rates. And they were able to say, hey maybe we 

should take the time to get that right. And of course there’s a lot 

of debate on that, what’s right and what’s appropriate, but they 

are taking the time to get it right. 

 

So we see examples of this. We see examples of taking the time 

to get it right. So we have a lot of questions about why. Why 

the rush? And so, Mr. Speaker, I think this will be something 

that this government needs to wrestle with. And why is it for 

one case that they will not do the right thing and on the other 

hand they seem quite open to it? 

 

The other question I have and, Mr. Speaker, we saw this in the 

budget debate last week that we raised questions about, I raised 

questions in my speech about the implementation of this bill. 

We did this a year ago actually as well. When this was 

announced as an initiative on May 2nd we asked, what are the 

extra costs that are provided for in the Ministry of Labour’s 

budget? And at the time the minister said not to worry, that in 

fact he would be able to absorb it in the existing budget, that 

there was not going to be any extra costs, that in fact everything 

was going to be quite fine. And we were a bit surprised at that 

time when he said that because we know when you’re 

overhauling 15 pieces of legislation clearly there were going to 

be costs. Clearly there were going to be costs. 

 

We did raise concerns. We were worried about the impact, 

especially in terms of were there the resources within the 

ministry, particularly because of the lean initiative. Who was 

going to be writing this legislation? And of course we were 

assured that not to worry, that everything was going to be all 

right. They had the resources and the capacity to do this thing. 

 

And then we found out in December that in fact that was not the 

case, that in fact we had to have supplementary estimates where 

they needed an extra $700,000. They had spent between May 

and the end of November $700,000 on the consultation process. 

Part of that was the fact that they had spent $200,000 on 

consultants to actually write the bill. And so now we’re at that 

same stage where . . . So the bill is out and we had four months 

left in the year. And now we’re in a new year, and there did not 

seem to be any new resources set aside for the work that . . . 

implementing this bill. 

 



3066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

So we have some real concerns about this because we know that 

there’s so much more to this bill that needs to be done, so much 

more that needs to be done. We’re waiting and we’ve heard that 

there will be a need for between 350 and 1,000 regulations and 

a significant numbers of regulations that will have to be written 

before parts of this piece of legislation can come into force. 

 

And we’re not sure exactly even how this bill will come into 

force. Will it come into force as a complete package? Will only 

sections of it come into force? I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

kind of negates the hope and promise of having one big code if 

you’re only implementing parts of it at a time. And we know for 

sure there is one big gap when it comes to the section around 

essential services. That is still there and so we have some real 

concerns about that. So there’s some real questions. 

 

And then you set this against the backdrop, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when there was no promise, no forewarning, 

particularly during the campaign, that this kind of omnibus, this 

kind of labour legislation overhaul was going to be happening 

and that was part of their legislative agenda, in their legislative 

agenda. I mean it wasn’t even part of the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when we got back after the election. So we 

have some real worries. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, were there . . . Are there other concerns that 

this government should be addressing? Well for sure there is. 

Absolutely there is. You have this kind of work being done 

when we have one of the worst safety records in Canada, and 

it’s been for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

something that we all should get behind and say, what can we 

do? What can we do about our safety record here in 

Saskatchewan when it comes to our workplaces? And again 

we’ve got to have more than words. We’ve got to have more 

than fancy slogans. We’ve got to have more than that. 

 

And I think that if there was a priority that when you see the 

kind of the things that are happening in Saskatchewan in terms 

of our economy, we clearly need to act in a much more 

comprehensive manner when it comes to workplace safety. That 

would have been something I think should have been a priority 

for this government. It still should be a priority. And that’s 

where we think we should . . . where the government should put 

its efforts. When they’re saying we need to do an omnibus bill, 

we’re saying, why? And that answer has not been asked and we 

can say, these are the things you should be doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the worker shortage too. Clearly 

we see that, and that’s an issue that keeps coming up in the 

media and the papers. And whether it’s the government 

sponsoring junkets to Nevada or Ireland to hire workers, we 

should be doing a lot more to make sure our own people have 

the skills and the things that are needed to participate in the 

workplace. And we know that’s a real issue. That’s a real issue. 

And we could be doing much more in terms of addressing the 

labour shortage in this province. And that’s something that, 

again, priorities. Isn’t it? It’s all about priorities. What are your 

priorities? And we think these are real priorities and employers 

are saying and employees are saying. 

 

You know, we know that there’s many trades and we’ve heard 

about electricians and in fact . . . And we did have a member 

statement earlier today about the unemployment rate here in 

Saskatchewan and the good things that are happening here. It’s 

not so good in the rest of Canada. Why aren’t we doing more to 

connect with the electricians, those types of trades and saying, 

come out to Saskatchewan here. And so this is something that 

we’re wondering about. Why, why is it that this seems to be the 

labour priority? 

 

[16:00] 

 

Then again though, as I said, it’s a priority and not a priority. It 

all depends. For example when we had the budget debates over 

the past few weeks and not mentioned at all about the 

government. So on one hand, it’s a key piece of their ideology 

that they’re putting forward and they’re stubborn about doing it. 

And on the other hand, it’s just not an issue that they want to 

really address in terms of considering the fullness of the work 

that they’ve got to do both in terms of being thorough, 

complete, thinking about all the unintended consequences, but 

also the fact . . . improving our workplaces, improving our 

workplaces so they’re safer and they’re fairer. That’s really 

critical. 

 

And of course we were all . . . The other issue that I just want to 

highlight because I think it’s so important, and while there’s 

been some gains made in this area, just clearly not enough in 

terms of Aboriginal employment. We need to do so much more 

there. We were disappointed on this side when they cancelled 

the Aboriginal employment development program, clearly a 

program that was working. We are waiting and waiting for the 

work that the government has put out there in terms of a report, 

in terms of how the education part can be addressed in a more 

appropriate way. But we really are concerned that this should 

have been, it should have been a bigger priority for the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so we have those. Those are real, real issues. And I think 

that as we move forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you know, 

every day I read a petition calling for a delay of this bill. It’s 

very important that we consider that. And I’m not just doing 

that to stand up every day. I think it’s really important that we 

do think about the impact of getting this bill right, and it’s 

hugely important that we do. 

 

And so what I’d like to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could talk 

about this petition that we have. Because every day I read parts 

of it but I haven’t read the whole thing, and maybe people at 

home would want to know more about this petition who are 

tuning in right now. 

 

But I take this bill and it talks about the 12 pieces of legislation 

that have been rolled in together. But as I said earlier, the 

proposed Saskatchewan employment Act introduced in 

December of 2012 is a sweeping rewrite of our labour laws, 

including but not limited to The Labour Standards Act, The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, the health labour relations 

reorganization, and The Trade Union Act. 

 

And since The Saskatchewan Employment Act was introduced 

in December, literally hundreds of hours of study in comparison 

have been carried out in the interests of due diligence. But there 

is no labour relations crisis to fix, and no necessity to rush this 

omnibus bill through that will likely govern workplace relations 

for decades to come. 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3067 

If Bill 85 becomes the new consolidation of labour laws in this 

province, working people — particularly the young workers, 

immigrant workers, and other vulnerable workers — will suffer 

from a hasty watering down of our current labour standards 

which set the mandatory minimum for all Saskatchewan 

workers. Stable labour relations in all sectors run the risk of 

being thrown into turmoil as a result of Bill 85’s sweeping 

changes. Thousands of represented workers stand to lose their 

rights to bargain collectively and be represented by the union of 

their choice. 

 

And so there is a prayer that goes with this petition: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

And many hundreds of people have signed this bill, and it may 

be into thousands. But I know, I know and I’ve seen the 

Minister of Labour actually receive postcards from CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees]. And we know as well 

that there are many letters being sent to the Premier and to the 

minister urging them to step back, take some time, and think 

about, is this the most appropriate way to do this? 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to read one 

letter. You know, it seems like I’ll be talking, I will largely be 

talking from the workers’ side. It’s interesting how in some 

ways this hasn’t really caught fire. There are some people 

within the business community that are quite supportive of this, 

and I appreciate that. But it’s not caught on as much as I 

thought it might have. And here is an example. This one, 

actually this is a letter that’s from the Ministry of Labour’s own 

website. And it’s submission no. 341(0), and it’s from Ray A. 

Graves, president of Saskatoon Boiler Mfg. Co. Ltd. 

 

Now it is addressed to the Sask Party, Saskatoon Silver Springs, 

attention the MLA for Silver Springs. And this is what he says. 

This is what he says. So it’s not just labour saying this, but this 

what a business person has said: 

 

The proposed new Labour Legislation is an absolute 

disaster for our firm. It will cause us to spend enormous 

amounts of money for no improvement in safety of our 

firm, because our firm’s safety history is so good. The 

legislation will penalize the good firms in hopes of 

improving the bad ones. Our already precarious 

competitive position will be further damaged. Our 

immediate problem is that no one is listening to us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just unions who are saying this but just 

generally everybody is saying, let’s get this, let’s get this right. 

And I think that the onus is on the government to get it right. 

It’s taken several decades for us to get to this stage, and let’s get 

it right. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said from our side here, I want to take a 

minute and I want to step back and talk a bit about the history 

of labour in Saskatchewan. And I do find this very interesting, 

and I know that a few people over on the other side find the 

history of our province fascinating. And it’s always a good 

thing if we can take a look and say, so how did we end up 

where we are? How did we evolve to this? And there is an 

excellent book out there called On the Side of the People, a 

History of Labour in Saskatchewan. And this was written by 

Jim Warren and Kathleen Carlisle, and it was written in 2005 as 

part of the centennial projects — so many centennial projects 

that were done across Saskatchewan and from different 

perspectives. And it was a way to reflect back on what was our 

collective history. How did we achieve so much in our first 100 

years as a province? 

 

And of course it would be misleading to think it was just 100 

years. Obviously we need to honour and respect and think about 

the contributions of the First Nations and the Métis people. And 

in fact, as I’ve said to many people, our first labour dispute in 

many ways was something, and I believe it was in the late 

1700s, 1777, when the first organized labour dispute happened 

in Saskatchewan, in the Saskatchewan territories. And it was 

actually in Cumberland House where the First Nations and the 

Scots organized against the Hudson Bay Company because they 

felt that they were being treated unfairly. And so that was our 

first workplace action. It was a stoppage where people thought 

that they weren’t going to work for their bosses until they got 

treated fairly. And of course it was very brave to do because it’s 

not an easy, it was not an easy lifestyle working in the fur trade 

industry. 

 

And so that was interesting. Of course then the book goes on 

and talks more about some of the things in the early 1800s, the 

mid-1800s, and of course the railroaders of course were the 

first, were among the first organized workers to come. And it’s 

a fascinating history. And of course, and John A. Macdonald 

introducing the first trade union Act recognizing the right of 

workers to organize. And ironically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The 

Trade Union Act that he called for I believe took out the 

offence, that it was no longer a criminal offence to belong to a 

union. But it still had problems if you belonged to a union. So it 

was really quite interesting. 

 

But the section that I want to focus on if I may, Mr. Speaker, is 

the fact that this government seems to be quite infatuated, and I 

know this Premier is quite infatuated with Premier Walter Scott. 

And it really came to be a bit of a neat thing when I learned that 

Walter Scott of course was a strong trade unionist in his own 

way. He belonged to the international typesetters union. And so 

for Walter Scott, unions were very, very important. Labour was 

very, very important. And it was important because it meant 

that working people could make ends meet, and in fact there 

was a way of creating a middle class. 

 

 And we’ve seen that particularly over the course of the 20th 

century, and it’s kind of lost its way in the last decade or so, but 

governments realized that you need to do something to protect 

the middle class — the people who earn the basic income so 

they can meet their basic needs, but yet have something more 

for their families so their kids can go to school or participate in 

their communities, make their communities a much better, 

healthy, vibrant place to be. 

 

But I just want to talk about this because you know, Mr. Deputy 



3068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

Speaker, we just celebrated the centennial of this building last 

fall. And it’s interesting that in fact we’ll see a statue be raised 

in the near future, I’m not sure, about Walter Scott. And I think 

it’s interesting to reflect a little bit about Walter Scott. So I’m 

just going to read this section, and I think you will find it 

interesting. And the subtitle is “A Friend in the Premier’s 

Office.” 

 

One 1908 liberal election ad read, “Vote for Scott and 

Boost the Union Label.” Nor was this just an empty 

slogan. The Scott Liberals met a number of labour’s 

legislative demands during the boom. These included a 

prohibition on the use of prison labour, the fair wage 

clause in the legislative building contract [so that’s very 

important because when we were building this there had 

to be a fair wage contract clause], and the creation of the 

Bureau of Labour. 

 

So as Walter Scott, who created the first Bureau of Labour here, 

that’s very important. 

 

As well, The Mechanics’ Lien Act, The Woodsmen’s Lien 

Act, The Thresher Employees’ Act were all designed to 

give some assurance that owed wages would be a first 

obligation on employers. 

 

And in fact, it was interesting, during question period today we 

had somebody come here with that very same issue because he 

wasn’t being paid by an agent of the government. Here we are 

106 years later dealing with that same issue, making sure people 

get paid — get paid. Very interesting. 

 

There were other gains. In 1909, the unionists got their 

Act for the protection of persons employed in factories 

(which applied only to women and children). The Act 

limited the work day for women to ten hours [it’s 

interesting that we’re going up to 10 hours now but 

limited to 10 hours] and prohibited the hiring of children 

under fourteen years of age. [And of course it was this 

government who lowered the age of employment pending 

passing of certain tests.] Safety regulations were 

developed for electrical workers, as well as a law 

requiring proper scaffolding on construction jobs. The 

union label was required on government printing.  

 

Which I find very interesting, Mr. Speaker, because we 

often refer to that union label as the union bug. And I think 

it’s really critical. It’s very interesting that Walter Scott was 

the one who put that forward. 

 

The fair wage system was extended to railway 

construction and other operations where provincial 

financing was involved. Employment agencies were 

required to be licensed and fee splitting between such 

agents and company managers was prohibited. The labour 

councils were also on-side with the government decision 

to take an ownership stake in the provincial telephone 

system. 

 

So there I see the idea of our Crown systems. But: 

 

Not all the victories were so laudable. In response to 

labour’s antipathy towards Asian immigrants and the 

racism common at the time, it became illegal under a 

provincial statute for a white woman to work in any 

business owned or managed by any “Japanese, Chinaman 

or other oriental person.” This piece of legislation 

[formally was] known as The Female Employment Act, 

odious by today’s standards, was actually in force during 

the first decades of the 20th century. Surprisingly, it 

survived in statute books until 1969, when the Thatcher 

government got rid of it in conjunction with the creation 

of The Labour Standards Act. 

 

As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

In 1911, the Scott government created one of Canada’s 

earliest workers’ compensation schemes. The new 

Workman’s Compensation Act didn’t eliminate civil 

action suits. An employee could still take a chance, hire a 

lawyer, and sue an employer for damages. If, as was 

usually the case, the employee couldn’t prove the 

financial loss due to the accident was entirely due to 

employer negligence, he or she could ask for 

compensation under the Act. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to put that out there 

because I think it’s interesting to see where we’ve come since 

1908 when the first Bureau of Labour was created, and this 

building was being built. And the idea of people being able to 

get their wages that they were owed, whether they were on a 

threshing crew, or a crew, a construction crew, as we were 

dealing with today during question period. So it’s very 

interesting that we have this kind of situation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also interesting to take a look at 

what’s happening federally. You know, we’ve all heard about 

the private members bills, particularly Bill C-377. And it’s very 

interesting because this is essentially the one that talks about 

how trade unions spend their money and the role that Canada 

Revenue Agency will have in following that. And there’s a 

whole mix of opinions, but of course the Harper government 

seems bent on making that happen. And they’re doing it in 

unusual ways, typical ways that you would not see done in 

parliament. And now we see that it’s coming out as private 

member bills. And we see that there will be even more of this 

kind of thing happening. 

 

But I do want to talk about this because I think it’s interesting 

that the other side realizes this is not just an NDP or a liberal 

idea, that there’s concerns about this, as I’ve said with Walter 

Scott that in fact he was a strong liberal and thought it was the 

right thing to do to support labour. 

 

This one talks about Hugh Segal and his view about Bill C-377 

and how he speaks out against the Bill: 

 

Hugh Segal, Conservative Senator and former advisor to 

Premier Bill Davis and Prime Minister Mulroney, has 

spoken out in defence of trade union rights and against 

Bill C-377 . . . 

 

Senator Segal explained that Bill C-377 is “bad 

legislation, bad public policy and a diminution of both the 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3069 

order and the freedom that should exist in any democratic, 

pluralist and mixed-market society.” 

 

He goes on to say that he believes that “society prospers 

when different views about the public agenda, on the left 

and right, are advanced by different groups, individuals 

and interests. Debate between opposing groups in this 

chamber, in the other place and in broader society is the 

essence of democracy. Limiting that debate as to scope 

and breadth is never in the long-term interest of a free and 

orderly society.” 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

At one point Segal says that [and I quote] “this bill is 

about a nanny state; it has an anti-labour bias running 

rampant; and it diminishes the imperative of free speech, 

freedom of assembly, and free collective bargaining.” 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

The bill before us today, as well as right-to-work 

legislation that is being proposed in the other place as a 

private member’s bill, is not who we are as Canadians. It 

is time this chamber said so. 

 

And he was of course referring to the Senate. And I think it’s 

great that he can stand up and say that and support labour. So 

it’s not just a New Democratic value — but it is a strong value 

of ours — that we support many of the labour ideals and values. 

But it’s also one that Liberals — in fact, Conservatives — have. 

And we know that because it really does coincide. It really runs 

deep with what we believe our community should be in terms of 

our core values. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think with all of that being said, 

it really adds more intrigue to, so why are we doing this? What 

is the rush? Why not get it right? Why not take the time and do 

a piece of legislation that we feel will stand the test of time, that 

will have integrity, that can survive scrutiny, that we won’t see 

in the courts like we have with the essential services piece of 

legislation and other pieces of legislation? 

 

But we are particularly concerned that, as I’ve said, that if we 

do not learn from history, we are doomed to repeat it. And I am 

very worried that in many ways that is what’s going to happen 

with this piece of legislation, that there’s just too many 

problems with it. Simply put, there’s just too many problems, 

and we’re going to see it come back to the House or we’re 

going to see it ended up in the court. And we have some real, 

real concerns about it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take a minute and share with you 

some other ideas of how this should have been done. There was 

a review done of the federal labour standards. This is a report 

called Fairness at Work: Federal Labour Standards for the 21st 

Century. And it was the review . . . And you can see this, even 

by the book, it’s a quality piece of work. 

 

And it was interesting, the minister and I had a chance to talk 

about Bill 85 at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], the 

law forum there. And we found it very interesting. And one of 

the people who got up and actually was also on the forum was 

one of the people who participated in the writing of this. And I 

think it was very . . . she was quite proud that many of us still 

look at this piece of work and think of it as something that we 

should all take some time and do it right. 

 

Now her name is Daphne Taras. And she was one of the expert 

advisors; there was four. But the thing is what you do is — four 

advisors to Harry Arthurs and his work as commissioner on the 

Federal Labour Standards Review — you do take the time to 

get it right. You do make sure that you’re proud of the work and 

that it will stand the test of time. In 10 or 20 or 40 years you 

look back and say, that was a good piece of work. That was 

very thoughtful. It was very thorough. It anticipated some of the 

issues that we’ll see into the future and it solved some of the 

problems that we had in the past, but it preserved the balance of 

power that we have in Saskatchewan because that’s what’s got 

us to where we are today. That’s what’s got us . . . And so one 

of the, I won’t go through the whole book, but I do want to talk 

about a couple of the principles. 

 

He started out by saying, I want to set the stage by having key 

principles about what really matters. What are our principles? 

We’re going to take a principled approach to this and there is a 

way of doing that. Now this may be foreign to this government 

to have a principled approach to the kind of work that they do, 

but this was something that was very important to Harry 

Arthurs and was well-received. And I think that it’s something 

that we should take a minute to reflect on before we go too far 

further with this. And the first fundamental principle he had was 

principle one, decency at work, and I quote: 

 

Labour standards should ensure that no matter how 

limited his or her bargaining power, no worker in the 

federal jurisdiction is offered, accepts or works under 

conditions that Canadians would not regard as “decent.” 

No worker should therefore receive a wage that is 

insufficient to live on; be deprived of the payment of 

wages or benefits to which they are entitled; be subject to 

coercion, discrimination, indignity or unwarranted danger 

in the workplace; or be required to work so many hours 

that he or she is effectively denied a personal or civic life. 

 

Isn’t that a worthwhile goal or principle that we should really 

strive to do our legislation on? I think that’s just a fundamental 

principle of who we are as Canadians. Now we could talk about 

that and translate it into, from labour standards to labour, our 

workplace, that type of thing, but I think it’s something that we 

should really reflect on. What is the principle or principles that 

were driving the consultation paper that caused us to overhaul 

12 pieces of legislation like that? I think that’s really important. 

 

Interestingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the second principle that he 

talked about was the market economy. So he reflects on the fact 

that this is a kind of economy we have in Canada. And I’ll 

quote that: principle two, the market economy: 

 

Labour standards ought — so far as possible — to 

advance the decency principle in ways that allow workers 

to contribute to, and benefit from, the success of Canada’s 

market economy. Because successful enterprises are 

better able to treat workers decently, labour standards 

should support and, if possible enhance, the 

competiveness and adaptability of enterprises. 



3070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

So here you have I think a very important one, I think that most 

businesses would say makes sense. We want to create an 

environment where workers are treated in a decent fashion, 

safety, and fairness but we don’t want to impede our market 

economy because that’s where jobs are created, and that’s very, 

very important. So this can be a balance. This can be achieved. 

And it’s an important area that we think more about. 

 

And so he goes on. It talks about flexicurity, a level playing 

field, the workplace bargain, and inclusion and integration 

which really talks about human rights. And I think that’s a key, 

key aspect of it because as we know in our communities today, 

human rights, the meaning of human rights is expanding to 

honour and respect more diversity and the challenges that 

people face in our communities. And I think this is important. 

 

In fact I’ll read . . . This is principle no. 6: 

 

The decency principle requires that labour standards be 

inclusive, in the sense that all workers should enjoy in the 

workplace the full benefits accorded them by human 

rights legislation. The inclusion principle, in turn, requires 

that all workers enjoy like opportunities to integrate their 

working lives with their personal, family, cultural and 

civic lives in a balanced fashion. 

 

I think that’s huge, Mr. Speaker, that we think in those terms. 

And that really speaks to a higher level of thinking that I think 

we should be aiming for when we talk about this kind of 

legislation. 

 

And principle 7, respect for international obligations, and we 

saw that. We saw huge problems with essential services that did 

not respect the International Labour Organization and its 

standards for consultation. And that was where things started 

going off the rails around essential services legislation — when 

it was clear that we were not in accordance with international 

labour law. 

 

So when we talk about appropriate uses of public resources, 

high level of compliance, how we want to make sure . . . And 

this is a question that I’ve had about the budget part. When we 

want to ensure high level of compliance, how is it that there 

doesn’t seem to be — and we will dig into this — any extra 

funds or resources to ensure such a bill like this size is actually 

implemented? Can it be implemented with the resources that the 

ministry has set aside for it? 

 

Now we know last year when it said it could do everything and 

didn’t have to have any extra resources, it actually spent 

700,000 more dollars. How is it that we’re going to see this 

implemented and that there’s actually going to be a high level 

of compliance? 

 

And regulatory . . . There’s some flexibility, talking about . . . 

You know, we have to deal with the realities of employment in 

diverse circumstances. 

 

And clarity: “Labour [laws] . . . should be clearly stated, and 

workers and employers should have easy access to accurate and 

understandable information concerning their rights and 

responsibilities.” 

 

And I want to end this part with principle 12, circumspection, 

which I think is huge. The last principle he says is, and I quote: 

 

Labour standards should be designed and implemented so 

as to avoid unintended harm to workers who are the 

intended beneficiaries of the legislation, and to avoid 

unnecessary costs and inconvenience for employers who 

are intended to be regulated by it. 

 

Where standards seek to alter established practices, 

expectations or cost structures in a significant way, it may 

sometimes be appropriate to introduce changes gradually 

so as to permit necessary adjustments in management 

personnel practices, and to minimize negative impacts on 

firms and workers. 

 

So they’re talking about being realistic, but making sure that if 

you’re changing the legislation here, that you are actually 

changing it in a positive way but respecting the idea of the 

balance of power, that you don’t upset the balance of power. 

We’ve created a province, a provincial economy that’s so 

strong, but yet I think that there is a real risk, a real risk that we 

may have some unintended consequences and we will see this 

piece of legislation either being challenged or bringing back 

with several pieces of amendments or in the courts. The 

implementation plan is unclear. Is there resources? How will it 

be implemented when regulations aren’t even clear? So we have 

some real problems with this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now and as I said, you know, I do want to just talk briefly 

about some of the concerns that we have, but it is not the 

exhaustive list. It is clearly not the exhaustive list because it’s 

impossible to have that exhaustive list because of the shortness, 

how tight this reference and examination of this bill over the 

short three months, that we got it in December and it began 

again in March. And we’re seeing more and as we speak, we get 

more and more information about concerns that we should have 

or the meaning of this, the meaning of that, and so . . . But I do 

want to highlight some of the concerns we have and some of the 

other concerns that we’ve raised. 

 

So first of all, we are really concerned about the overtime and 

the end of the eight-hour workday as we know. And the 

minister will assure us that it’s not really the end, that in fact 

people can work eight hours, and I suppose they could work six 

hours as well. But we do now make it a lot easier to have a four 

times 10-hour day, and that’s our workweek now. The 10-hour 

day is back, and it’s much easier to do and that’s a real problem. 

And we see that there are those employers who are celebrating 

that as a victory, that they now see it is a 10-hour workday and 

that there’s no overtime for that. There’s simply no overtime for 

that unless you get over the 40 hour. But then we’re not clear 

about the 44-hour implication. We’ll have to wait to ask 

questions on that. So we have some real concerns about the 

overtime and the end of the eight-hour day. We think this is 

really, really sad that this has happened in this way. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we have deep concerns, we have deep 

concerns about the minimum wage. Now the minister has said 

that he will index it. Three months has passed. We have not 

seen any indication of any of the regulations that show that it 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3071 

will actually be indexed. We believe the indexing should be in 

the legislation because it’s there that it will be solid, it will be 

fixed, and we can count on raises every year. When it’s in 

regulation that can be changed, and we won’t see those 

regulations. In fact the regulations won’t be debatable in this 

House because we don’t debate regulations. They are passed by 

cabinet, advertised in the Gazette. 

 

Now they may, and I do hope the minister does, take the time to 

get some feedback on the minimum wage regulations. But we 

have some concerns about that. First of all, I want to say that I 

think that the indexing should be in the legislation, not in the 

regulation. 

 

But the other issue that I am very worried about is the minimum 

call-out. And I raise that as a flag because I think that it’s one 

that many people don’t really understand, that there’s a 

minimum number of hours that you can be called out for and 

whether . . . Right now it’s the equivalent of three times the 

minimum wage. So if you are paid $15 an hour, then you 

essentially get paid for two hours, because that’s the equivalent 

to three hours at minimum wage. But I am very interested to see 

what happens around minimum call-out. 

 

And the other issue about minimum call-out is around 

university students and whether they will be disqualified for 

being . . . qualifying for minimum call-out. Up to 2007, the 

regulations were unclear about whether university students were 

high school students and fell in that category because they don’t 

qualify for minimum call-out, or were they in the category that 

did qualify? So we’re waiting to see. We saw the letter from the 

University of Saskatchewan that said that they think the 

minimum call-out should be cancelled for university students. 

We were very, very, very disappointed about that because we 

think that’s important for university students who are trying to 

make ends meet. And when they go to a restaurant for their call 

and they should expect to get three hours, and they may only 

get one hour, I don’t know. It’ll be interesting to see what 

happens with the regulation. This could have a huge impact, 

that instead of . . . You think you’re going to get your $30 for 

going to work; you find out you get $10. Not only that, then 

your tips may be based on your hours as well, and you get 

two-thirds less, ending up getting one-third. So there’s some 

real changes in that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very, very concerned about the end of the 

weekend. I have to say that the disappearance of the word 

Sunday in the legislation is worrisome. The minister has said 

that this tends to be the way in other provinces. We found that’s 

not the case, and in fact it’s split, that many provinces have 

retained Sunday within their labour standards. And so now we 

can potentially have, you get two days off if you meet certain 

criteria, but it doesn’t have to be Sunday. And the old Act said, 

Sunday wherever possible. We think that upsets the work-life 

balance. We know kids are at home on the weekend. This could 

have huge implications. And we’re disappointed that this is an 

erosion of benefits for those people who are working and just 

expect to have Saturday and Sunday off. And I think that we 

could have a much more proactive response to this, and I’m 

deeply concerned about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m concerned about some of the issues around the impact that 

this has on labour, organized labour, particularly around 

supervisory employee and the splitting of bargaining units and 

the impact this will have not only in the workplace itself, where 

you start . . . when people who had . . . You know, they identify. 

I think of myself as a teacher but I was an administrator. I 

would have hated to have been pulled out of my staff. I think 

that’s really unfair to have that circumstance happen. And so I 

worry about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And this is something that they’re talking about in a lot of 

public sector offices, and the impact that will have. The impact 

that will have actually on the cost of bargaining will be huge 

too. And I think this is a slippery slope. And it’s one of those 

things, be careful what you wish for because this could cost a 

lot more money because you’re bargaining twice as much and 

with smaller unions. I think this could be much more 

complicated than this government has thought through. So we 

have some real, real concerns about that. 

 

And of course the accountability piece. I’ve always felt that 

unions were accountable to their members and had processes in 

place that worked and that there were ways of addressing 

concerns within unions with the Labour Relations Board, that if 

you had a problem you could . . . Your needs could be met. And 

I just think that it’s unfortunate that these kind of heavy-handed 

strategies of this government to put these in this omnibus bill 

gets to be a real problem. 

 

And so we have real specific concerns about this, the public 

holiday swaps. As I said, the 44 . . . Now the 44-hour 

workweek, what does that mean? Meal breaks, layoffs, a new 

director of employment standards, a new position created there. 

We have some real concerns about that. So, Mr. Speaker, this is 

a real problem. 

 

And you know, the other issue, and when I talked about the 

Arthurs report, talked about clarity. And you know, when you 

look at this bill and you try to read through it and, you know, 

we’ve had people try to read through it and they’ve tried to use 

the concordance that the government has, but you know, when I 

look at this, you know how many times employee is defined? 

There are at least four different definitions of employee in this 

bill. 

 

Now interestingly an employee in the employment standards 

are called employees, but in occupational health and safety, 

they’re called workers. So how does this work that the bill adds 

clarity to the discussion? And so in the sense what you’re really 

ending to have to do and this is, you know, one hand they say 

it’s great to have this all together. In this day of technology, you 

could have it all together. You have it on your tablet or your 

iPad or whatever. You could have it in the same binder, just 

have dividers, and then you have them pretty much like what 

you have now. So we’re not sure what the game is here to have 

one big Act. And of course the issue will be when it needs to be 

opened up, because then you actually open up the whole bill. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have some real concerns about 

this. And I did want to raise . . . You know, in one hand, I talk 

about those big picture ones, and many of the unions and other 

organizations have identified their top 10 or top 20, but the real 

issue is . . . The devil’s in the details. The devil’s in the details, 

because we don’t know what the implications are until they’re 

tested in court or in Labour Relations Board, and lawyers have 



3072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

to push this, this scrutiny, and it becomes a real problem. What 

does it really mean? And what does it mean when the language 

has changed? And what does it mean when you’re called an 

employee under the employee standards Act but a worker under 

occupational health and safety? Why the different terminology? 

What’s the implication there? So we have some real concerns 

and I think this is very, very important. But the devil’s going to 

be in the details. 

 

But I do want to talk just briefly about one group that was left 

out from the discussion. That was farmers. You know and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when you were . . . If I may say you were 

critic of Labour at one point, and you know that on April 28th 

we’ll be reading the names of the people who were injured or 

who died at work and unfortunately . . . There are some groups 

who are not part of that group. The two groups that I’m 

referring to is, one is teachers. Teachers will not be listed. And 

of course we don’t know how many teachers have died at work, 

whether, you know, whether through heart attack or different 

things that happened at work. But also through, particularly 

what we’ve seen in the States but it’s happened here in Canada, 

where you have violence in our schools. And I think about what 

happened in Massachusetts last December with the shootings, 

and teachers have died there. I think that we need to think more 

about this. 

 

The other group that we need to talk a little bit about are farm 

workers. What’s happening with farm workers? When I was 

Minister of Labour — but I probably would think this has been 

raised many times before — that actually farm workers weren’t 

recognized on the Day of Mourning. And that was really 

unfortunate because I think farm workers who have died in their 

workplace should be recognized, and for some reason they’re 

not. And the reason given is because the day . . . The people 

who are, whose names are honoured on April 28th are provided 

by Workers’ Compensation Board and it’s those people. But it 

could be expanded. And I can’t see why not, why we couldn’t 

expand it to farm workers. 

 

But what’s interesting — and you would see this more than I 

would because you have a rural riding and I have an urban 

riding — but the nature, the change of the workplace in our 

farms and what’s happening there. Are we doing all that we can 

to make sure that they’re safe? And as well, as we see new 

employees, to make sure that they’re treated as fairly as they 

can be. Now this is a question I can’t really answer very well, 

but I do think it’s a question worth exploring. And I think it’s 

very important that we take some time to think about that. So I 

find it really disappointing actually that we didn’t have that 

discussion, that we didn’t have that consultation around farm 

workers. And I think that this is an important one. 

 

And the other group that we didn’t really talk a lot about was 

temporary foreign workers. Now there is another bill before the 

House, I believe it is Bill 53 or 83 . . . I believe 83, the 

temporary . . . Yes, it talks about temporary or foreign workers, 

a big factor in our workplaces today. And we want to make sure 

they’re treated fairly and with respect and that safety . . . That 

when they come to our country that in fact that we live up to 

our reputation of being a fair and safe place to come and work. 

That they’re not coming here to be exploited, and they’re not 

coming here to do things that others would not do. And I think, 

Mr. Speaker, we have a huge responsibility there. 

So I’m curious about why temporary or foreign workers are not 

included in this. In fact we have a separate bill that deals with 

their concerns. I would think that they would be part of this 

omnibus legislation, but clearly they are a glaring omission and 

I think that they should have been considered part of this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that before I wrap up, I want to 

acknowledge the kind of work that my colleagues have done on 

this, that they’ve worked very hard to make sure that all the 

points of view have been brought forward concerning this piece 

of legislation. 

 

[16:45] 

 

We’re looking forward to having more questions about this. But 

as I said we clearly think this is a fatally flawed bill, that there 

should be more time taken before it moves to committee to deal 

with some of the issues that we’ve identified, that there is just 

too many problems with this. It’s being rushed forward. There 

is no need for it to be as rushed as it is. It’s causing a lot of 

concern in the workplace, and as I’ve read into the record not 

only from labour, but for business as well, the great unknown is 

worrisome. And so the fact that it’s not very transparent is also 

very worrisome. And so, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of, a lot of 

concerns about this. 

 

We see that this government has been able to step back and do 

the right thing. When we think about the lobbyist registry, that 

they’re taking some time to get it right. We are a little 

concerned about the fact that we thought they’d be much 

quicker, but if they’re going to get it right, then that’s a 

reasonable thing. We are concerned about the implementation 

of this bill, that there’s not the resources in the budget for it. We 

have some real, real grave concerns that when we think that a 

bill like this will have an impact in a positive way, that in fact 

we will see nothing positive, that in fact that we will only see 

the negative of it. And that’s really a problem. 

 

And it doesn’t make a lot of common sense, does it, Mr. 

Speaker? The fact that the middle class will be hit by this, our 

young people could be hurt by this when it comes to minimum 

wage. We have some real concerns about older folks within 

their workplaces, that they’re used to being treated in a certain 

way and now the laws are being changed that they may be 

expected to work a 10-hour day. There’s no negotiation on that. 

That just happens. So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real 

concerns about this. 

 

You know, the minister’s advisory committee has asked, I 

think, a very important question. What is the rush? What is the 

rush, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Let’s take the time. Hundreds have 

communicated with this government over the last several weeks 

to say, let’s take the time. Get it right. Let’s do it right. And 

clearly this government is digging in its heels and saying, no, 

we’ve got an agenda; we’re going to get it done. And we think 

that’s just unfortunate that they’re blinding attached to an 

ideological problem. When you see the pendulum swing too 

much either way, either way you create problems. And it’s 

important that we preserve, that we preserve this piece of . . . 

this power balance, that we preserve this power balance, that as 

we move forward we want to make sure the economy is strong 

and performs even better that we have the balance. But we don’t 

want to have unintended consequences. 



April 8, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3073 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are my points that I have, and clearly we 

think this bill is fatally flawed. Every day I will call for this bill 

to be delayed. We think it’s important, but our best hope is 

actually that the bill be withdrawn. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? The question before the Assembly is the motion by 

the Minister of Advanced Education that The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act be now read a second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 79 — The 

Representation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise this afternoon and speak to Bill No. 79, An Act 

respecting Representation in the Legislative Assembly Act. 

Now normally the government likes to put political names on 

bills, and the political name for this bill would have been the 

three more MLA Act. And, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t put that on 

there because they know that the public of Saskatchewan are 

surprised that something like this was brought forward by the 

government after not a mention of it in the 2011 election. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we have is effectively the description by 

name of the 61 legislative constituencies and also effectively 

the adoption of the Constituency Boundaries Commission final 

report around those particular constituencies. At this stage I 

want to say thank you to that committee, chaired by Mr. Justice 

Neil Gabrielson. They took the information and the job that 

they had, and I think they did a good job with that. But as you 

can tell from my initials comments, they could have done 

probably even a better job with reorganizing the boundaries, 

keeping 58 seats and basically leaving us still in the same 

position as having the fewest number of constituents per 

member in Western Canada. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have this legislation and it spells out 

all of the constituencies that are here. We know that the net 

effect of the report from the Constituency Boundaries 

Commission was to add two urban ridings and one rural riding. 

And I think that’s been done with a fair bit of discussion and 

done in a way that is responsible to the legislation that they 

were working with. 

 

But it still doesn’t answer the fundamental question about 

where did this idea come from. And we know from questions 

asked in the previous session that it really wasn’t on the radar 

screen of the government until pretty well right at the week or 

so after the election, and that was the response we got. It’s a bit 

hard to believe that that’s what was going on, but that was the 

response that we got. 

 

And so what is it that requires us to have more legislators in 

Saskatchewan? We know that it will cost the people of 

Saskatchewan more money to have more legislators because we 

all know the kinds of issues that arise. And so I think that the 

issue of surprise from the Premier on this one is one that he will 

wear as we move towards the next election. 

 

Now normally when something of this magnitude is introduced 

to change the rules around how the legislature is elected, 

normally it would be introduced and maybe even discussed 

through not just one election but two elections because it gives 

the people of the province time to give their opinions on how 

this would work. Obviously we don’t have that in this particular 

situation, and so we will end up probably having that discussion 

in the next election, and we will see what kind of perspective 

there is on the particular issue. 

 

Now the other point in the legislation is that some of the 

traditional names have been changed. And that’s not necessarily 

an issue, but it is always interesting to see how historic names 

are included in the creation of the boundaries and how the 

boundaries are changed and actually move people around. I 

know that in a number of the urban constituencies people have 

been moved to a new constituency each time that legislation is 

passed. I think this will have that effect as well. It also takes 

names and moves them slightly so that people aren’t always 

sure how they connect with the community that they’re in. But 

on that particular issue, I think the commission itself has been 

very careful about the kinds of names that they’ve put forward. 

 

The other members of the Boundaries Commission, Mr. Stuart 

Pollon and Mr. Harry Van Mulligen, were I think quite 

cognizant of the concerns of individuals across the province. 

And so I don’t have a particular issue with the final report that 

they ended up with. I do have an issue with the increase in 

numbers and with the rationale or lack of rationale for doing 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some questions that will probably arise 

as the matter goes to committee. We know that the previous 

legislation changed how the population is counted. In creating 

the constituencies, we think that the method that’s been used is 

fundamentally wrong. We’re assuming that at some point we 

will have a chance as a legislature to correct that. But obviously 

it probably won’t be corrected before the next election, but 

we’ll have a chance to ask a number of those questions as this 

matter proceeds. And I have no further comments. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 



3074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2013 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 79, The 

Representation Act, 2012, be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 53 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is of 

course a very important piece of legislation, and I think it’s 

important that we take the time to . . . Were you going to 

adjourn this? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What’s that? . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . No, I’m not. Okay another minute, 

okay. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very important piece of 

legislation that we have in front of us, and it’s important to . . . 

This is one that I think we need to take some time to think about 

and make sure we do due diligence with it. And you know, with 

all these kind of pieces of legislation that we do, it’s a matter of 

age. And so I think . . . that we get this right. 

 

And I know there’s various parts of this piece of legislation that 

are . . . The government is taking some time and thinking it’s 

time to cancel or withdraw pieces of legislation or cancelling 

. . . the age or relevance anymore. And so there’s several pieces 

of legislation that are part of this. And I think it’s important that 

we get this right. Of course, you know, you often hear me 

talking about unintended consequences, and I think this may be 

an example of one of these when we have things that we need to 

say. But of course the time is just not there for you, so I know 

we’ve got other . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There we go. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 5 

o’clock, thankfully this House will recess till 7 p.m. tonight. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3043 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3043 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3043 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3044 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3044 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3044 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3044 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3044 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3044 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3045 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3045 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Shaunavon Badgers Win Championship 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3045 

 2013 Global Citizen Award 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3045 

 Recognizing the Saskatchewan Fire Commissioner 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3046 

 National Poetry Month 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3046 

 Holocaust Memorial Day 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3046 

 Paragon Business Excellence Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3046 

 Job Numbers for March 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3047 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Payment to Contractor 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3047 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3047 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3047 

 Standardized Testing and Student Achievement 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3048 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3049 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3050 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3050 

 Plans to Replace Saskatchewan Hospital 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3051 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3051 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3052 

 Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3052 

 Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3052 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3052 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3054 

 Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3057 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3059 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 SaskEnergy Annual Report 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3057 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3062 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3073 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3073 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3074 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3074 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


