




















































Hansard: May 09, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 61A  THURSDAY, MAY 9, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3521 

 May 9, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

my honour and privilege to introduce 31 students from Cardinal 

Léger School. Give us a wave up there, everybody. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first school that’s come from Saskatoon 

Sutherland since being elected in 2011 and I believe it’s the first 

school from 2007, so I’m very excited that they were able to 

make the trip down this morning. 

 

We have, accompanied by their teacher Heather Jelinski, we 

have chaperones Francis Maza, Shaun Pawluk, Mark Fenton, 

and a very special chaperone who is well known to this House 

of Ms. Trish Cheveldayoff, which I’m sure the member from 

Silver Springs will be introducing in a second. 

 

So please welcome, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the House, it gives me great pleasure . . . 

Oh I’m getting all choked up here . . . great pleasure to 

introduce two of my favourite people in this whole world. There 

are others, but these two happen to be here today: my sister 

Michelle and my daughter, my youngest daughter, Ophelia. I 

know many of you would have seen Ophelia over the first 

couple of years I was elected. She was a regular fixture here. 

She probably is the only child who had a pass to the Legislative 

Assembly. And I normally wouldn’t need, I normally wouldn’t 

need a paper to introduce my own child, but there were a couple 

of things she wanted me to put on the record, so just about her. 

 

Ophelia is a little girl who has a very eclectic music taste. She 

loves everything from Peter, Paul and Mary, Pete Seeger — 

good socialist, good social democrat — all the way up to Carly 

Rae Jepsen. And her new favourite song, Mr. Speaker, actually 

is a duo with Chris Hadfield and Ed Robertson. She got to sing 

on Monday with Chris Hadfield and Ed Robertson from her 

school. So she loves to sing and dance. She’s a gymnast. Her 

favourite thing happens to be the trampoline, and she uses our 

bed and the couch as a trampoline as well. 

 

Ophelia is in maternelle [kindergarten] at l’École 

canadienne-française in Saskatoon. I’m quite proud that she’s 

going to a Francophone school. She’s a génération retrouvée 

[found generation]. And I have to say my vocabulary is still 

bigger than Ophelia’s for now, but her accent is much better 

than mine. 

 

And I just want to give a big shout-out to my big sister who . . . 

She’s one of the reasons I can do this job, Mr. Speaker. And she 

tells me never to say nice things about her publicly or she thinks 

it’s inappropriate. But anyway, she’s a really important person 

in my life. So I ask all my colleagues to join with me in 

welcoming Michelle and Ophelia to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

with a great deal of pleasure I want to introduce a school group 

from Moose Jaw. It’s the A.E. Peacock Collegiate, the 35 grade 

12 students, if you want to give us a wave. You can see they’re 

all on the right. Not the right right, just the right. So welcome 

here to Mrs. Kiefer. She’s a great teacher in Moose Jaw. And 

Peacock brings a class every year. In fact they wanted to come 

last fall and then one of the storms prevented them, so I really 

appreciate them making the extra effort to be here today. And 

she makes a point of being here every week with a great class, a 

great school. They’re very involved with the community, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Along with Mrs. Kiefer is an assistant, Nancy McLafferty, and 

their bus driver, Elma Kaus. So if you want to give us a wave. 

And I’d ask all my colleagues to make this special group feel 

very welcome in their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To you and through you, I’d like to join with the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland and welcome the school 

group from Cardinal Léger, not only because my wife and 

daughter are part of the group, but Cardinal Léger is a very 

special school to me because, soon after being elected, I had an 

opportunity to meet with teachers and the principal. And they 

were very worried about the school closing because the 

enrolment was, back in 2003, was about 200-and-some. Now 

today there’s 419 students, 31 teachers. And we’re always 

pleased to have school groups here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just a little bit about my daughter 

and my wife, my daughter Paige. I’ll tell you a little story very 

quickly. We were going out to Batoche and I asked my 

daughter to come with me. And she said, what are those sitting 

on the seat beside you, dad? And I said, those are briefing notes 

because I need some briefing notes on Batoche and Back to 

Batoche. And Paige says, I can brief you — she was in grade 5 

— I know everything about the Métis; I just learned about it in 

school. So she briefed me and it was one of the best briefings 

that I ever had, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as far as my wife goes, she has a briefing note for me as 

well. Every Thursday or Friday when I get home, she briefs me 

on what happened and briefs me on what my duties will be on 

the weekend. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re always pleased as members when 

family members can come into the legislature. So I do ask all 

members to help me welcome Paige, Trish, and Cardinal Legér 

class and chaperones to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 



3522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

Assembly an individual seated in your gallery. I’m speaking 

about Elder Mike Pinay. 

 

Now Mike Pinay is a proud member of the Peepeekisis First 

Nation up in the File Hills country, but really an individual that 

has done good work throughout the province in terms of treaty 

education, in terms of cultural liaison work. I won’t get into his 

rodeo background, Mr. Speaker, but certainly I’ve had the 

opportunity to see Mike work some pretty important things over 

these years. 

 

And he, in addition to all the other sort of work that he does in 

terms of treaty education, Mr. Speaker, works as an elder in the 

Regina Catholic School Division. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, 

he’s played a very important role at Sacred Heart Community 

School and is very interested in what’s happening with that 

school, Mr. Speaker, and in terms of making sure that the full 

complement that should be there for infrastructure, you know, 

such as a gymnasium, is brought to bear. 

 

So I’d like to ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

Elder Mike Pinay here on Treaty 4 territory to his Legislative 

Assembly. Ta wow. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to join the member opposite in welcoming 

Elder Mike Pinay to his legislature. We know that he does 

extremely important work in a number of communities, helping 

to ensure that the work that’s under way across those 

communities is informed by wisdom and humility. And so I’d 

like to join the member opposite if I could and ask all members 

to join me in welcoming Elder Mike Pinay. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased and honoured to stand today to present a petition in 

reference to cellphone coverage for the Northwest. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation along with the neighbouring community of 

Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring communities 

in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most amazing thing about this petition 

that’s asking for cellphone coverage to the Northwest, it has 

been signed by people from all throughout Saskatchewan. On 

this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, there’s 250 names and 

these are all primarily people from the community of Turnor 

Lake. And I’m so pleased and proud to present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise to present a petition to the Legislative Assembly on behalf 

of some residents of the province of Saskatchewan. Northern 

Saskatchewan is being targeted by the Nuclear Waste 

Management Organization to become a storage site for millions 

of used irradiated nuclear fuel bundles. These radioactive 

nuclear bundles would be shipped on provincial highways. And 

some provinces have already banned the storage or transport of 

used nuclear bundles. So I’d like to read the petition: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly pass legislation to 

permanently ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

of nuclear waste into, out of, and through Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this comes from citizens from the northern 

village of Patuanak, Saskatchewan. Thank you. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

asking for the repaving, repairs, and maintenance of the north 

road, Highway 102, from La Ronge to Sucker River. This road 

is a major highway used by buses transporting our students to 

schools, tourists for camping and fishing, and by the mining and 

forestry industry. Mr. Speaker, people are very concerned for 

their safety. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the repairs and 

maintenance on the La Ronge north road, Highway 102, is 

important to northern residents and must be undertaken 

immediately. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is signed by many La Ronge and area residents. 

I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

d’Lish by Tish Café 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, for individuals who have visited 

my constituency of Saskatoon Nutana, they will know it’s a 

diverse, vibrant community. And I’m privileged to represent a 

constituency with many active small businesses. 

 

This January my constituency became even richer in its 

diversity with the opening of a new business, the d’Lish by Tish 

Café, and this is a café I try to get to as often as possible when 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3523 

I’m not in the House. 

 

Tish Paget delivers hardy, homemade food in a cozy 

atmosphere that feels like sitting in Tish’s kitchen. She has 

created a space where people feel like they’re coming to her 

house for a bowl of soup or a home-baked muffin. There’s 

clearly a lot of love in her food and we see this in her 

commitment to creating a community at the café. Every 

Wednesday night there’s an open jam session led by Paul 

Gitlitz, and Tish also uses social media like Facebook to let her 

customers know what the soup of the day is. 

 

In addition to the incredible work involved in owning and 

operating a café, Tish is a tireless volunteer at her children’s 

school. And just today she’s cooking her last hot lunch at her 

children’s school to cap off 10 years at the helm of the hot 

lunch program. This program has helped to build a new 

playground and put Smart Boards in every classroom while 

feeding the kids high-quality, nutritious lunches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the House to join 

with me in celebrating the success of the d’Lish by Tish Café. I 

invite the other members of the House to make the time for a 

bowl of Tish’s soup the next time they are in Saskatoon. They 

won’t regret it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mother’s Day 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

weekend will be a very special one for women across this 

province as we celebrate Mother’s Day. Mother’s Day 

traditionally falls on the second Sunday in May, the time of 

year when we see new life emerging all around us in the season 

of birth and renewal. It is a time to thank those who brought us 

into this world and for all of their work and sacrifice in the most 

important job in the world. 

 

Mothers are the anchors of our families, dedicating themselves 

to being our most important role models, nurturers, and 

teachers. Motherhood involves passing on the values and life 

lessons our youth need to become outstanding Canadians. As 

our province continues to grow, it is important for people to 

remember where they came from. And days like this remind us 

to pause and give thanks to the people who are responsible for 

where we are today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the hard work and loving support that mothers have 

been and continue to provide to all of us in our daily lives. We 

will always appreciate your years of dedication to making us 

the best children we could be. And in particular, happy 

Mother’s Day to my mom. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Early Childhood Educators Month 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is Early 

Childhood Educators Month. This is a chance for early 

childhood educators to speak about the value of their work as 

well as advocate for accessible, affordable early learning 

programs for children. 

 

Research overwhelmingly confirms the importance of early 

childhood experience in healthy child development. 

High-quality care can positively influence a child’s life. 

High-quality care includes stable, consistent caregiving, 

appropriate adult-to-child ratios, and staff who are well-trained 

in early childhood development and school-aged care. This also 

includes decent wages and working conditions for early 

childhood educators. We are pleased to see the Saskatchewan 

Party government supporting early childhood initiatives such as 

increasing spaces. This is an important first step in supporting 

children to grow and develop into healthy adults. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a useful practice that other jurisdictions are 

implementing is an online child care registry. This simple, 

common sense solution helps both parents and government. 

Registering online for licensed child care means parents don’t 

have to put their names on multiple wait-lists in multiple 

facilities. It allows families to make decisions with clear 

information. For government, a registry provides a picture of 

the demand for child care spaces and allows for them to be able 

to address gaps and allocate child care spaces in a way that 

addresses the concerns of communities. 

 

Early learning educators have many ideas and solutions for the 

concerns that are facing this sector as well as the challenges that 

children and families are facing in communities. Mr. Speaker, I 

would invite my colleagues to join me in thanking early 

childhood educators for their work in caring for and advocating 

for children. Their input is invaluable when it comes to building 

supportive community for our children. Thank you. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Swift Current Physician Leads 

Simulation Training Centre 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When 

Tami and I first moved back to Swift Current around 1991, I 

guess, we lived on the south side of town and were able to 

frequent a great community grocery store there, convenience 

store operated by the Lee family, Dick and Johanne Lee and 

their kids. And we met young Tara Lee through that 

frequenting, became friends with the family. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

young Tara Lee is now Dr. Tara Lee, practising in the city of 

Swift Current. She is the project lead and site director for the U 

of S [University of Saskatchewan] rural family medicine 

program that is located in Swift Current. And there was a very 

special official opening she was a part of recently in my 

constituency of the Lee/Irwin Simulation Training Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this project became a reality as a result of a major 

donation by her uncle and aunt, Jack and Louise Lee, of about 

$100,000. They referenced Tara when they made the donation 

in the announcement. They said: 

 

We are very proud of her accomplishments, her hard work 

and dedication that she has given to Swift Current and 



3524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

area. 

 

We made our donation in honour of my father, Lam Lee, 

and Louise’s mother, Irene Irwin. I don’t think Tara’s 

grandpa ever imagined he would have a doctor in the 

family. I know he would be bursting with pride had he 

been able to witness all of this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Tara Lee has been confident for some time 

that a local training centre would provide a great benefit to the 

Southwest. It employs the latest equipment and technology and 

also maintains a mobile unit that can be sent out to rural 

communities around Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, it is a great 

project for health care in the Southwest. It’s being led 

significantly by Dr. Tara Lee and, Mr. Speaker, we thank her 

and her family for their support for this important training 

centre. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Women Entrepreneurs Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today in celebration of this province’s accomplished and 

thriving women entrepreneurs as we celebrate May 6th to 12th 

as Women Entrepreneurs Week in Saskatchewan. 

Saskatchewan women entrepreneurs are leaders, risk takers, 

role models, and major contributors to our province’s 

prosperity. Their success and entrepreneurial spirit is 

unmatched and as their enterprises grow and expand, they are 

helping to create jobs and opportunities for the hard-working 

people of this province, adding great strength to our growing 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, small businesses make up 98 per cent of all 

businesses in this province, and I can proudly say that 

Saskatchewan’s self-employed females are 31,100 strong. 

Thanks to the assistance of organizations like the Women 

Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan, women in every corner of this 

province are realizing their business goals through access to 

loans as well as pathfinding, business training, and advisory 

services. 

 

The entrepreneurial spirit is alive and well in this province. As 

we look to the future, we can trust that our women 

entrepreneurs will foster that spirit as they continue to leave a 

great mark on this province’s business landscape and our 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in recognizing 

Women Entrepreneurs Week. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

World Catholic Education Day 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise to 

recognize that, across Canada and throughout the world, World 

Catholic Education Day is being celebrated today. Mr. Speaker, 

Christian-based Catholic education has served parents and their 

children in most nations throughout the world for centuries. 

 

In Canada, Catholic education makes an important contribution 

to our Canadian identity and culture, serving the nation through 

faith-based leading and learning. Catholic education has helped 

define Canadian society through its deeply rooted teachings of 

personal responsibility and social justice, service to the 

community, and ongoing promotion of respect and dignity of all 

persons. Catholic education is founded on the Biblical values of 

peace, justice, and respect — values that are inherent to our 

Canadian identity. Accomplishments over the past 170 years of 

the Canadian Catholic school system, both English and French, 

have been an integral part of the growth and spirit of Canada. 

 

Congratulations to all who are involved in Catholic education in 

our province as they join with their colleagues throughout the 

world who today are celebrating World Catholic Education 

Day. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing 

World Catholic Education Day and thank educators, 

administrators, boards, and volunteers for their commitment and 

contribution in delivering this important Christian educational 

opportunity. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Relationship with Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, at least the NDP [New Democratic Party] is consistent 

about one thing. They ignored rural Saskatchewan when they 

were in government, and they’re still ignoring rural 

Saskatchewan in opposition. Yesterday the Leader of the 

Opposition spent three hours in Premier’s estimates — not one 

question about rural Saskatchewan, not one question about 

agriculture, not one question about the rural economy, not one 

question about rural hospitals, not one question about 

Saskatchewan’s towns and villages and rural municipalities. It’s 

like rural Saskatchewan doesn’t even exist to the NDP. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why the NDP barely exists in rural 

Saskatchewan. That’s why they didn’t elect one rural member 

in the last election — not one, Mr. Speaker. The good news is 

rural Saskatchewan does have great representation in this 

Assembly, and it’s all on this side of the House. So the NDP 

leader can go ahead and keep on ignoring rural Saskatchewan, 

and rural Saskatchewan will keep on ignoring the same old 

NDP. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to date that government 

has offered up dismissal and deflection instead of answers and 

accountability on the IPAC [International Performance 

Assessment Centre for geologic storage of CO2] affair. 

Yesterday however, the Premier shifted his dismissal and 

deflection to attack, Mr. Speaker. He attacked the opposition. 

Instead of taking any responsibility for the IPAC affair his 

government has overseen, he cherry-picked an email from a 

civil servant and went on the attack. 

 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3525 

Mr. Speaker, we welcome the full disclosure of every detail on 

the IPAC affair. The Premier should as well. And that’s exactly 

what we’ve continually called for — accountability and 

answers instead of a slow leak of information. Mr. Speaker, 

how can the Premier not finally believe that it’s time for real 

answers and accountability as it relates to the IPAC affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think it is 

important that all members of the House would want all the 

details on this particular, on this particular deal known to the 

public. And I would think that member who’s been raising 

questions would also want all the details raised. So what a 

shock and surprise it is that he never shared with the Assembly, 

even though he’s got colleagues who served in the cabinet, what 

a surprise it is that in October of ’07, before the election was 

called, while the NDP were in power, it was the NDP 

government that approved $100,000 for Climate Ventures Inc., 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

He’s been saying over and over — and we’ve got the quotes; I 

guess we’ll deal with them this morning — that this is a Sask 

Party company that was started. It was a Sask Party initiative. 

We’ve been saying it was an initiative of the university that 

received funding. And, Mr. Speaker, that apparently was true. 

The funding began when? Under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. I think 

that’s a pretty important detail. 

 

In terms of the other matters with respect to IPAC, those have 

been the subject of investigations, a forensic investigation. The 

Provincial Auditor of course looks at the U of R’s [University 

of Regina] relationship with this particular . . . with the entities 

around IPAC, Mr. Speaker. Those details are available to the 

public. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier also 

went on the record suggesting that the MNP investigation 

exonerated those with noted conflicts of interest from personal 

gain, repeating a claim that’s been made by the CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] minister, a claim 

that simply isn’t true. 

 

Of course if the Premier simply read the MNP report, he’d see 

that it does no such thing. In fact the report makes clear that 

MNP didn’t have access to CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.] or 

CVI’s books in a way that would have been able to validate the 

claims as it relates to personal gain. They were stonewalled, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the Premier: why is he unwilling to provide the answers and 

accountability that people deserve as it relates to the IPAC 

affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of the member’s 

question is wrong. Here is the MNP report. This is from the 

conclusion, section 7.0, page 21: 

 

Dr. Wilson and Mr. Bailey did not disclose their conflict 

of interest to the University of Regina. However, we have 

no evidence that Dr. Wilson or Mr. Bailey monetarily 

benefited from their relationship with CVI. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is where the Premier continues to 

play fast and loose with the facts, where he talks about no 

evidence. The reason there was no exoneration that was able to 

be had, and certainly they deserve a full review in this as well, 

is because they were denied, MNP was denied access to CVI’s 

books. And it states it very clearly in the MNP report. The 

Premier should know that. To date the Premier’s ducked and 

weaved on this file. Now it seems, as sort of a new strategy, that 

it’s about going on the attack, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Premier’s been consistent on one thing on the IPAC 

affair. From the very beginning of this scandal, the Premier has 

failed to support providing a full mandate to the Provincial 

Auditor, and he’s failed to send and deliver any of the 

information he has to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police], failed to provide accountability. Mr. Speaker, rather 

than cherry-picking dribs and drabs of information for political 

spin, he needs to do the right thing. Enough is enough. Will the 

Premier finally here today call in the Provincial Auditor and 

send all information to the RCMP? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor is the 

auditor of record for the University of Regina. Mr. Speaker, her 

investigation, her study of the U of R affairs would have 

included the relationship with the entities that the member is 

concerned about, that we should all be concerned about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s review the facts. A couple of years ago when 

it came to the attention of the government that there was 

concerns around sole source and conflict of interest, what 

happened? Mr. Speaker, a board was appointed because, 

previous to that, all of the affairs of these entities were run by 

the University of Regina, not the government. So a board is 

appointed. The board has government members on it, 

government representatives. It’s government representatives 

and other board members that identified the problem, reported it 

back. The government stopped the funding. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, investigations ensue. There’s a forensic 

investigation. I’ve already quoted from the report. And in the 

meantime, the NDP want to ignore the facts. Because here’s a 

quote from the member that just asked the question, from not 

long ago: “Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s pet project, Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, helped create Climate Ventures Inc. in 2008.” 

Will he now apologize to the Assembly for this fact? This is 

factually incorrect because we know today that Climate 

Ventures was started by — who? — by the NDP in 2007. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Workplace Fatalities and Injuries 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

week marks Occupational Health and Safety Week, and five 

years since Mission: Zero was introduced here in 



3526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

Saskatchewan. But in that time we’ve seen far too many 

fatalities and injuries in our workplaces. In 2008 there were 31 

workers killed; 2009, 34; 2010, 45; and in 2011, 37; and this 

last year, 60. That’s 207 workers killed on the job, Mr. Speaker, 

since the government introduced Mission: Zero. And while the 

goal is laudable, the fact remains the number of workplace 

deaths has increased under Mission: Zero. And that’s a tragedy 

for our province, and for the families of these workers is 

immense. 

 

Mission: Zero does not appear to be effective at reducing 

workplace deaths in our province. Mr. Speaker, what is the 

government’s plan for improving occupational health and safety 

so we never need to read 60 names into the record on the Day 

of Mourning again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think I can speak for all members of the Assembly when I want 

to offer our deepest sympathy and condolences to the family 

members of someone who’s lost a worker and a loved one. I 

think every such death is a tragedy, and not just a tragedy for 

the family but for the entire province. 

 

One of the worst days of the year in the legislature is the day 

that we stand up and read the names of those that have been 

lost. I can advise the House, Mr. Speaker, that 19 of the deaths 

this year were from asbestos-related injuries where the exposure 

had taken place often decades earlier. We have created an 

asbestos registry which we think will reduce or minimize the 

likelihood of that happening as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can also advise the House that 10 of the fatalities 

were from motor vehicle accidents. We have formed an 

all-party committee to study traffic-related accidents. It 

appointed the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton. 

We’ve also renewed and updated the occupational health and 

safety legislation, which is now part of Bill 85, and I would ask 

the members opposite to support that legislation. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of conversations 

about Bill 85, and I appreciate the offer there. And we could 

talk further about that, if the minister wants to talk about Bill 85 

and how we can make that as effective as possible. 

 

But we know Mission: Zero is the right goal to have, but the 

fatalities have increased even with this goal and plan in place. 

And as the province with the second-worst rate of workplace 

injuries in the country, clearly the current plan needs more 

efforts by this government. The Workers’ Compensation Board 

says these injuries and these deaths are preventable, and sadly 

WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] has seen more claims of 

injuries in 2011 and ’12 after a period of improvements. And 

the highest numbers of claims come from health authorities, 

hospitals, and senior care homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the government know why these tragedies in 

these workplaces is increasing, even under Mission: Zero? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite asked about steps the government is taking. We have 

as well reviewed and updated our legislation with regard to 

protection for late-night workers. I thank the members opposite 

for their support on that initiative. 

 

We are working with Workers’ Compensation Board to try and 

identify causes and try and improve the injury rate. The injury 

rate in our health care systems is largely caused by lifts and 

sprains, strain type of injuries rather than traumatic type of 

injuries. We have added a significant number of dollars towards 

providing lifting equipment to help people move patients. Part 

of it is a factor of aging baby boomers. Part of it is a matter of 

training. And we’ve met with the Minister of Health, with the 

deputy minister of Health, with a number of the health 

authorities to try and ensure that they understand the importance 

of driving down this rate. Even though they’re not traumatic 

injuries, they are nonetheless injuries. It is not good for workers 

to be in that place. Our injury rate has continued to drop but 

nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, there continues to be work to be 

done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The high number of 

workplace injuries for young people is a growing concern for 

many families. Of particular concern was the number of young 

men who are injured, often in their first job. We see a high 

number of injuries, Mr. Speaker, almost a quarter of injuries to 

men were injuries by young men. And for young women the 

rate is also way too high. Clearly young people need to know 

the working conditions in this province are bar none the best in 

the country and are strictly enforced. Mr. Speaker, what is the 

ministry going to do to lower the rate of injuries for young 

workers here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We introduced 

amendments to the occupational health and safety legislation in 

spring of 2012. That Act is now part of The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. We’ve had significant consultation regarding 

regulations around that Act. We would like to have that bill 

passed so that we could finalize the consultation with regard to 

the regulations and implement those things that are there. 

 

I can advise the member opposite that we have had a number of 

inspections and prosecutions that have increased in the last 

number of years. And I’ll give you some statistics. Workplace 

inspections increased from 3,621 in ’06-07 to 4,578 in ’11-12. 

Notices of contravention increased from 4,480 to 6,086 in the 

same time period. And prosecutions increased from 30 during 

the last year of the opposition to 73 in the most recent time 

period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have more work to do. We will continue to do 

that work. And what the most important thing that could 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3527 

happen, Mr. Speaker, if we pass Bill 85 and we allow the 

process to continue on under way, so that we’re able to do the 

prosecutions and do the things we need to do to make sure that 

our workers are safe in our province. And I think all members 

want to see that happen. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Repairs to School Infrastructure 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, for the students and staff at 

Sacred Heart Community School, the blow of losing access to 

the school’s gymnasium has been immense. It’s lowered student 

morale and it’s been a challenge for the teachers and staff to 

find as many opportunities for alternative activities that went on 

in the gym as they can for these students. Everyone knows, Mr. 

Speaker, that physical activity is essential to help students learn 

and stay healthy. And that’s especially apparent to the parents 

and elders in the community of North Central, who want to see 

the students of Sacred Heart Community School succeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party says the Sacred Heart gym may be 

able to access some funds to get fixed, but that likely won’t 

happen this school year. How can the Sask Party let the rest of 

the school year roll out with no plan for fixing the gymnasium 

at Sacred Heart Community School? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for the question. As has been stated in this 

House, our officials are continuing to work with the separate 

school board to deal with the issue of the gymnasium facility at 

Sacred Heart School. We realize the importance of physical 

education activities for our children. We understand the impact, 

that healthy bodies and healthy minds go together, Mr. Speaker. 

And we will continue to work with the separate school division. 

It’s important to note that our investment in capital in education 

is a record that we’re very proud of and a record that we will 

stand on going forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, Mike Pinay is a respected elder 

in the community who has had a positive and profound impact 

on students and staff at Sacred Heart. He has joined us here 

today in the gallery. As an elder, Mike knows that for Sacred 

Heart — the largest elementary school in North Central with 

450 students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations and Métis, 

Mr. Speaker — Mike Pinay knows that access to physical 

activity is good for the mind, body, and spirit of these children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Pinay also knows, because he has worked in 

the school providing leadership to these students, that the 

school has been due for an upgrade for years. It’s not a recent 

problem, Mr. Speaker, it’s a compounding problem. While the 

attendance is actually improving at Sacred Heart, the morale of 

students is waning. They need access to physical activity, Mr. 

Speaker. They need their gym, like any other students would, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why can’t the Sask Party listen to the respected people like 

Elder Mike Pinay who has advocated passionately for the best 

possible education for these students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize 

the contributions of Elder Pinay. He and I have done many, 

many initiatives together over the years. We know each other 

quite well, and I respect his guidance and influence in some of 

the decisions that I’ve made over the years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long way in the last five years. You 

know, we inherited a $1.2 billion deficit when we took 

government in terms of infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, over 70 per 

cent of our schools are at least 40 years old, so both 

replacement and new schools are necessary. Mr. Speaker, if the 

members opposite hadn’t neglected schools for the 16 years in 

government, we may not be in the position that we’re in today, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we’ve come a long way 

in the last five years, and we will continue to invest in 

infrastructure as we go forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker: when we 

were in government, the students at Sacred Heart had a gym. 

I’ll tell you that much, Mr. Speaker. The enrolment at Sacred 

Heart is up over 100 students in the last four years alone and the 

problem is, for these First Nations and Métis students — 75 per 

cent of them, Mr. Speaker — the lack of attention for pressing 

replacement of their gymnasium is hurting their education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students, along with their teachers and staff, 

are closing the achievement gap. They’re reading more. They’re 

studying more, and students are improving their attendance. 

Elder Mike Pinay has seen them, Mr. Speaker, and we need 

more elders like him throughout the school system in the 

province to provide that leadership. But we also need to make 

sure that education matters in closing the gap for First Nations 

and Métis students at the schools where they attend is a real 

priority of government. 

 

Why is the Sask Party government neglecting an important 

school, one focused on improving the lives and education of 

First Nations and Métis students, in their budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it might be interesting to note that I did my practice teaching at 

Sacred Heart School. That was some time ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I very much respect the guidance and the 

influence of Elder Pinay. It’s important for everyone in this 

Assembly to know that in the Regina area alone, Mr. Speaker, 

over the last number of years, our government has provided 

$131 million for school infrastructure in the Regina area alone, 

Mr. Speaker. That funding has provided for 121 renovation 

projects, seven early years projects, Mr. Speaker, and 10 major 

capital projects, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, I know, I know the importance of a gymnasium. I 

know the importance of physical education for the well-being 

and for the academic development of our children, Mr. Speaker. 

A healthy body and a healthy mind go hand in hand. I recognize 

that, and we will continue to mitigate the situation at Sacred 

Heart School, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we had 

the Statistics Canada results released. And of course in the 

province of Saskatchewan, one of the features of our population 

is that there’s a young and growing First Nations and Métis 

population. And we know that very well, Mr. Speaker, in a 

place like North Central Regina, and we know that very well in 

a school like Sacred Heart Community School where, of the 

450 students at that school, the second largest school in the 

Regina Catholic School Division, 75 per cent of those students 

are First Nations and Métis. 

 

And you know, you go through the exercises where the task 

force reports out to this government, and you see the response 

of that government. You hear of another task force being 

launched to consult with young Aboriginal students, young 

Aboriginal people throughout the province. And at the same 

time, Mr. Speaker, on the other hand, out in the real world, 

you’ve got something as fundamental to the education situation 

for young First Nations and Métis students as the gymnasium at 

Sacred Heart going wanting. 

 

Why are the priorities of this government so screwed up, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the situation at Sacred 

Heart School can’t be fixed overnight, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that. My officials are working with the separate school board to 

mitigate that situation, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to 

work with them to ensure that the situation is alleviated there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for everyone again 

in this Assembly to note that we’ve spent or we’ve budgeted 

over $22 million in this budget to deal with and to address 

issues around First Nations and Métis achievement, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s for all of the children in our province that 

attend our schools that are First Nations and Métis children, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not just for one school, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Testing Standards and Student Assessment 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier admitted yesterday 

the Sask Party government hasn’t been able to communicate 

very well why it’s spending $12 million on standardized testing. 

I asked the Minister of Education in estimates about the 

academic studies he was using to justify this expensive system. 

The minister provided a list of 11 articles and books defending 

the position, but he hadn’t read them. 

 

So we took at the list and asked some professors with a keen 

interest in the topic for their views. Dr. Paul Orlowski, and Dr. 

Marc Spooner, professors of education at our universities said 

of the list, and I quote: 

 

You will see that the Saskatchewan government has not 

read any of the works they cite. Only one (by Phelps) 

intimates there may be some value in teaching to standards 

(although even this one does not focus on standardized 

testing). 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask Party government cite these 

11 sources as proof that standardized testing works when 

experts say they do not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

First I want to clarify when asked the question in estimates 

about whether or not I’d read them all, I had said I had not read 

them all, that I was familiar with some of them, in particular the 

Phelps study, which is the one that the member opposite 

referenced to, that Dr. Spooner et al. have agreed that there is 

some value in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They don’t agree with standardized achievement, the 

high-stakes model. That’s true, because this study talks about 

formative assessment, Mr. Speaker, which is the direction that 

our ministry is going with the student achievement, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’ll continue to work with this sector. We’ll 

consult with our teachers. We’ll consult with our school boards. 

We’ll consult with our school trustees association, Mr. Speaker, 

and we will communicate the student achievement initiative as 

we go forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Let’s talk about that one. Let’s talk about 

Phelps. And this is what the two professors said about that 

article, and I quote: 

 

It is the only reference in the entire list that seems to 

support using standardized testing, but because it is 

looking at studies starting with those conducted in 1910 

[1910], the conclusions might be about something entirely 

different than mandatory standardized testing in schools 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is 2013 not 1910. If the Sask Party 

government is using 100-year-old research to justify their 

highly computerized standardized testing system, something is 

not right. Mr. Speaker, why can’t the Sask Party government 

spell out exactly what they’re using to justify $12 million in 

taxpayer dollars being used for standardized testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Talk about cherry-picking, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the article spans hundreds of studies 

between 1910 and 2010, Mr. Speaker. That is a considerable list 

of research that one can go through to validate and to justify the 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3529 

formative approach to student assessment, Mr. Speaker.  

 

I want to remind the members opposite that our pilots are 

happening today. The feedback that we’re getting from our 

teachers, from our sector, are happening today, Mr. Speaker. 

The results are dramatic. And we will continue to work with the 

sector to bring that information forward so that all the students 

in our province can benefit from that kind of formative, holistic 

approach to student achievement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, one article was called Inside the 

Black Box: Raising Standards Through Classroom Assessment. 

And here’s what that the professors had to say. I quote: “It is 

not in support of standardized testing.” 

 

The minister also referenced a book called How the World’s 

Best Performing School Systems Come Out on Top. And the 

professors say, and I quote, “This book has nothing to do with 

standardized testing.” And they go on to say, “This is anathema 

to what the Sask government is doing, regarding the cutting of 

professional development days to accommodate more 

classroom hours.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the government include these sources in 

order to justify their $12 million spent on standardized testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister just referenced, we’re using pilots in the 

field, in the classroom, today. The balanced literacy program, 

which is a standards-based initiative, the balanced literacy 

program has seen grade level reading improve in the Chinook 

division over four years by 20 per cent. 

 

We see standards-based achievement programs and pilots 

working in Melfort. We see them working at Albert School, 

right in this city, where grade level reading in grade 2 is being 

maximized, Mr. Speaker. It’s at that level. That’s the basis for 

which we’re proceeding. The early years evaluation program, 

standards-based, working already in the province, delivering 

results — that’s the model we have at Albert School. 

 

Why are the members so ideologically opposed to doing what’s 

best for our students, what is working today? Mr. Speaker, we 

will leave the member to his lists and his studies. We’ll go with 

what is working today in the classroom and export it to the rest 

of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Programs that Support People with Disabilities 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

absolutely honoured and privileged to enter into this debate 

about what we are doing for people with disabilities in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we inherited an absolute mess. We 

inherited a long list from the opposition for 16 years where they 

did very, very little, if anything, for people with disabilities in 

our province. 

 

When we took government in 2007, there was the 440 wait-list 

— 440 people with disabilities that were completely ignored by 

the New Democratic Party. This is the New Democratic Party 

that is quoting and standing on their podium saying, we 

represent the people. We look after the people of Saskatchewan. 

Just trust us. But what happened, Mr. Speaker? That trust has 

been eroded. And I think you can tell that trust has been eroded 

by the 49 people sitting on this side and the nine members 

sitting across there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I wanted to talk a little bit about what we’re doing as far as 

people with disabilities. The Premier has appointed the member 

from Coronation Park as Legislative Secretary for people with 

disabilities, working with the Minister of Social Services but 

also other ministers, Mr. Speaker. This whole program, people 

with disabilities, does not just reside within Social Services, Mr. 

Speaker. It goes across the spectrum. That Legislative Secretary 

is going to work with all ministries to make this the absolute 

best place in Canada for people to live with disabilities. 

 

Personally, Mr. Speaker, since being elected I’ve had the 

privilege of working, basically with all autism services within 

Saskatchewan: Autism Services in Regina, who just recently 

opened the art centre; Saskatoon Autism Services; Above and 

Beyond Autism Services. I’ve worked with all of these groups 

because they represent a very specific group of people with 

disabilities, the people that have the autistic disabilities are on 

the spectrum, everything from Asperger’s to very mild autism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people out there are very capable of 

contributing to the growth within Saskatchewan. We want to 

make sure that we can take people with autistic disabilities and 

move them into meeting their full potential. They never had that 

opportunity under the previous government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also this hits me on a personal level, not just on a 

professional level. My daughter has an intellectual disability, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s something that I have been working very 

hard with my family. I was very fortunate, Mr. Speaker, that I 

had the support of family and of friends to be able to help my 

daughter’s development. But when my daughter was two years 

old in 2001, the government of the day did not do anything to 

support that. We had to actually take our daughter outside the 

province and outside the country just to be able to get the 

diagnosis that she needed, Mr. Speaker. Those were the very 

dark days within the Government of Saskatchewan back in 

2001, Mr. Speaker, and it was very, very shameful that the New 

Democratic Party. I also wanted to put a personal thanks out to 

my family, and especially my mother, who was there day in and 

day out taking care of my daughter while my ex-wife and I were 

out working, trying to support the family. So thank you very 

much for that, mom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you about some of the things that 

we’ve done since 2007. First, and the most important thing that 

I think that this government has done for people with 

disabilities, was create the SAID [Saskatchewan assured 

income for disability] program. The SAID program separated 



3530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

the people with disabilities out from everybody else that was 

within Social Services. These people, on an annual basis, would 

have to go and reapply to Social Services to make sure that their 

income was guaranteed. They were treated like employable 

people. They were treated just like in the norm, thrown in with 

everybody else. We wanted to make sure that we recognized 

that people with disabilities were treated in a different way. 

 

We wanted to make sure that they were given respect, Mr. 

Speaker, that they were given all the tools necessary. And we 

also wanted to make sure that the support structure in and 

around the people with disabilities was there. Some of the 

things that we did is we increased the SAID benefits to a 

maximum of $3,000 a year for all 10,000 recipients of the SAID 

program. We just hit that mark about a week and a half ago, and 

I was able to attend with the minister to be able to celebrate that 

moment. We have also increased . . . Sorry, we’ve increased 

inheritance exemptions for the SAID recipients as well. 

 

One of the key highlights — and this is a huge, massive 

number, Mr. Speaker — 832 per cent more has been invested in 

increased income assistance for people with disabilities, 832 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s unprecedented. And I wanted to credit 

certainly the Minister of Social Services and the former minister 

of Social Services for taking that forward to the cabinet and 

making that happen, Mr. Speaker, because it’s absolutely 

critical. 

 

Now let’s talk about what didn’t happen previous to this, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP just completely ignored the 

demands, completely ignored. It was very, very disappointing 

that the New Democratic Party did not do anything to support 

the people with disabilities. I want to talk a little bit about, Mr. 

Speaker, about Gayle Dixon from Saskatoon. When she was on 

the previous program with the New Democratic Party, Gayle 

was basically not able to have anything to herself. She didn’t 

have any means. She didn’t have money. She scraped by month 

to month working within the Social Services program. 

 

Now Gayle owns a small house and lives there with her service 

dog, Daisy. Gayle has multiple disabilities and has never been 

able to work. Gayle was one of the first people to go on the 

SAID program, Mr. Speaker. And when the program was 

expanded in 2012, Gayle said she got the first SAID cheque and 

she had a big, stupid grin on her face. Mr. Speaker, Gayle says 

now that the SAID program has given her one thing that the 

opposition could never give her — self-respect. 

 

When she was on the SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan] 

program, a family member told her that she was ashamed of 

Gayle because she was receiving social assistance. Now she no 

longer needs to be ashamed, Mr. Speaker. Gayle says, “It’s like 

I earn my money now because of my disability. I didn’t do 

anything wrong. I shouldn’t feel ashamed. SAID gives me 

respect and now I can take care of myself.” That’s what this 

program does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I wanted to also talk about briefly is how we are able to 

do these programs, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s very critical to 

talk about. We can’t just have programs out there and be 

spending money, even though it’s the right thing to do. We have 

to have the economic engine behind us to be able to drive these 

programs, Mr. Speaker. 

Some of the economic indicators that are going on in 

Saskatchewan have been spoken a lot about on this side of the 

House. They’ve been spoken about in the media and several 

other places across Canada and yes, Mr. Speaker, around the 

world. Saskatchewan has arrived. Saskatchewan population has 

grown by 21,690 people in 2012 to an all-time high of 

1,089,807, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have also received, for the first time in our history, a AAA 

credit rating. This credit rating was Standard & Poor’s and it’s, 

“The upgrade was warranted because of low and declining debt 

burden, rebounding economy, strong liquidity and moderate 

support from the federal government.” The province operating 

capital after results will continue to improve and strengthen the 

economy, operating revenue growth, and liquidity that remain 

strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also had last year $32.6 billion worth of 

exports. And as the Premier said many times, not too bad for a 

place that doesn’t have a port. We have surpassed British 

Columbia. Our forecasted economic growth year over year for 

2013 is going to be 2.6 per cent while the Canadian average is 

only 1.7. Our labour market is increasing. We need people to be 

coming to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. All of these economic 

indicators, Mr. Speaker, are signals that we are allowed to do 

the programs that we can do, that the ministers can take the 

programs for people with disabilities forward to cabinet, and we 

have the revenue to support that. 

 

We are not going to be spending money that we don’t have. We 

want to make sure that this economic growth that we have is 

growth for a purpose. And one of the main purposes and 

something that’s near and dear to my heart is people with 

disabilities and the SAID program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I want to talk about this absolutely shameful list we 

inherited of the 440 list, Mr. Speaker. Those members over 

there should just absolutely be ashamed that they had 440 

people and then they have the gall to come out and say, well 

what about this one person that we are working within the 

system right now? Yes we recognize that there are still people 

out there with disabilities, and we still need to get them into 

some of our day programs and our homes. But we had taken a 

440 list and eliminated it in five short years. It’s 16 years . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Plus an extra, thank you, plus an 

extra 250 people that were in the queue that we wanted to make 

sure that once the 440 list was done, that we didn’t have another 

250 there. So we expanded it out. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is how we are within government. 

Government’s not always the most nimble thing, but do you 

know what? In this we reacted very quickly with both ministers, 

the current minister and the previous minister, to make sure that 

the people on the 440 list were taken care of. 

 

I want to give you some of the stats, Mr. Speaker, because I 

think it’s worth talking about. $23.9 million in capital 

investment, bricks and mortar, to make sure that people with 

disabilities are taken care of. We have newly expanded or 

enhanced services in 41 communities. That’s critical because 

that’s not just in the big cities of Regina and Saskatoon. This is 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3531 

all across our province. People with disabilities just don’t 

concentrate in the major centres, and we have to make sure that 

we take care of them across the board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of these people on the 440 list, they had very 

complex needs. These weren’t just a matter of finding 

somebody a place to live, Mr. Speaker. There was infrastructure 

had to be put around there, lifts, and all of the people in the 

training staff that needed to be done, that needed to be there to 

be able to take care of them. 

 

We increased, funding increased by 110 per cent for group 

homes for people with intellectual disabilities, 110 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, basically ignored by the opposition. Very upsetting. 

 

I wanted to read you a quote from Amy McNeil from SARC 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres]: 

 

SARC is very proud to play a supporting role in the 

wait-list initiative through the four-person team assisting 

SARC member agencies and their expanded services, 

SARC’s executive director Amy McNeil said. The 

wait-list initiative was a wonderful example of the 

partnership between the Ministry of Social Services and 

SARC. It is evidence of what can be achieved when the 

Government of Saskatchewan, SARC member agencies, 

and SARC collaborate to work towards a common goal — 

creating common capacity to provide individuals with 

options to meet their needs now and into the future [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other thing that I wanted to touch on briefly 

— I see my time is running out — I wanted to talk about 

employment, Mr. Speaker. A lot of the people that were sitting 

on that 440 list had the potential to contribute to Saskatchewan 

and to the Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker. We wanted to 

make sure that they had abilities, or had the means to be able to 

go and work at Cosmo in Saskatoon. I will quote from a letter 

dated April 8th to Minister Draude: 

 

In recent years we had lost many of our trained staff to 

positions to health and education. This significant increase 

will make a difference as our retention. It now allows us to 

appropriately compensate trained front-line staff members 

who will work with people with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what it’s about. We’re not just doing the 

bricks and mortar. We’re not just throwing money at it. We are 

making sure that there is an entire package there, Mr. Speaker, 

of the bricks and mortar, of the support staff, as well as support 

from the government in supporting community-based 

organizations, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is one thing that I 

really want everybody to understand, that this government is 

taking care of the most vulnerable people within our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to work with my colleagues in 

supporting people with disabilities, with the Ministry of Social 

Services, other ministries as well, as well as the appointment of 

the Legislative Secretary, my good friend from Coronation Park 

who will be speaking on this later. But at this time I would 

certainly like to move the motion: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for 

implementing programs in support of people with 

disabilities, such as the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability program and addressing the 440 wait-list for 

persons with intellectual disabilities; and further 

 

That this Assembly support the government in its future 

initiatives that will move Saskatchewan closer to the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth’s goal of making this 

province the best place in Canada to live with people with 

disabilities. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for 

implementing programs in support of people with 

disabilities, such as the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability program and addressing the 440 wait-list for 

persons with intellectual disabilities; and further 

 

That this Assembly support the government in its future 

initiatives that will move Saskatchewan closer to the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth’s goal of making this 

province the best place in Canada for persons with 

disabilities. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to wade 

into this motion, this debate on the government and its work 

around disability issues. And I have to start by saying that part 

of the motion, I have no difficulty with. I’ve commended the 

government on the SAID program. Definitely there’s been some 

very good work done with respect to people who have 

intellectual disabilities. 

 

I don’t believe, to the best of my knowledge, there’s ever been 

anybody on this side who said that SAID wasn’t a very good 

program and that that wasn’t a move in the right direction or 

that addressing and providing residential services and day 

programming for people with intellectual disabilities wasn’t a 

good thing. The $62.5 million I believe was a very good and 

very important investment. I have no problem saying the 

government has done some very good things. I’ve said it in 

estimates; I’ve said it in my budget speeches; in the Throne 

Speech response that yes there’s some very good work done on 

this front. 

 

And I’m very pleased actually that the government has 

launched a strategy or the process by which a strategy will be 

created. I think that that’s absolutely imperative because, as the 

government goes on . . . I’m a big believer in not doing things 

ad hoc, Mr. Speaker. And I think that there will be many things 

that we discover in the consultation phase where there are many 

areas that need serious work. The area of respite services, Mr. 

Speaker, the area of FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder], 

particularly around adults, are huge holes. 

 

But I think the difficulty that I have is that it is important . . . 

I’ve never had the privilege of sitting on the government 



3532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

benches, and it is a privilege, Mr. Speaker. It is a tremendous 

privilege to be in this Assembly and to have that opportunity, 

I’m sure. But I know that this is a file that there will always be 

more work to do, and the minister gets up and says that. But 

that is why there will always be more work to do and it’s 

important to remember that for those people who don’t yet have 

services and have been waiting, some of them . . . We had a 

case here with Devon Birns last week since 2006, who has been 

on a list since 2006. And Devon isn’t an isolated case. 

 

I had the opportunity to work in the disability community. 

Actually when I was finishing my social work degree, I did a 

practicum for SACL [Saskatchewan Association for 

Community Living] called Adopt an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly], which connected people with 

intellectual disabilities and their family to their elected 

members in sort of a non-threatening environment. MLAs went 

into people’s homes or in a comfortable spot to find out, just get 

a little piece of what was going on in people’s lives. 

 

And I talked to people, Mr. Speaker, who have been waiting for 

services for many years and don’t have them. There’s a case of 

a woman whose son was on the 440 list, and at that particular 

point in time, they didn’t need services. And I understand that 

they’re considered being served. It’s not that they don’t want or 

need services now. But they were considered served. 

 

I think my difficulty is that the 440 list was a snapshot in time, 

and the government has done good work in providing services 

for those people. But it is not the role of government to boast 

about its work, especially when there are still so many people in 

so many areas that need work and support, Mr. Speaker. That is 

my big challenge here. 

 

And when in opposition we raise issues where there are huge 

holes or gaps, we’re told that we’re bringing one or two rare 

cases. For every one or two rare cases, there are many people 

behind them, Mr. Speaker. This is an area that needs serious 

work. 

 

And in estimates a few weeks ago . . . I’ve had trouble 

wrapping my head around the 440 list. What does this mean? I 

remember when I became the critic last year, Mr. Speaker, I 

knew people who had been waiting for services, who weren’t 

getting services, and they didn’t quite understand this. So in my 

questions I was trying to get the feel for . . . Sorry, I’m all over 

the place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you read the headline from April 22nd, 2013, “Waitlist 

initiative completed — Government fulfils commitment to 

citizens with intellectual disabilities” . . . I’m a former reporter, 

Mr. Speaker. I was a reporter for 12 years. And I can tell you 

the first thing that people look at and often the only thing that 

people look at when they read things are headlines. So when 

people read a headline like “Waitlist initiative completed — 

Government fulfils commitment to citizens with intellectual 

disabilities,” that would leave the impression for many people 

that everybody is served. Everybody has what they need. That 

is the impression that this government has chosen to leave. This 

is about public relations and spin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

“Waitlist initiative completed — Government fulfils 

commitment to citizens with intellectual disabilities.” So many 

people, so many people, Mr. Speaker, saw that headline, saw 

that headline and the impression with the general public is that 

oh, everybody with intellectual disabilities have what they need. 

 

So that was my goal in estimates. I was trying to understand 

this, Mr. Speaker. Because a year ago when SACL was here for 

their mother’s breakfast with MLAs, talking about some of their 

issues, they were pointing out respite services in rural 

Saskatchewan particularly are huge. You have women. You 

have families . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member is 

speaking from his seat, Mr. Speaker. I asked many questions in 

estimates, and I asked the questions in estimates about respite 

services, Mr. Speaker, because I’ve heard from many people 

that respite services in rural Saskatchewan are a huge issue. 

You’ve got families under huge pressure who are doing the best 

to provide the care for their children that they can, and they 

don’t have the supports that they need. So respite services 

didn’t really fall under the 440 list. 

 

We’ve got adults, particularly, with FASD, and FASD is an 

intellectual disability, Mr. Speaker. And I asked what supports 

are out there right now, Mr. Speaker, for those adults with 

FASD because adults with FASD need ongoing, regular support 

and contact to live a fulfilling life where they can contribute to 

their community. They need, as the minister said and people in 

the field would say, they need an external brain. They need 

someone reminding them once a month that they pay the bills 

and once a month that they pay their rent. People with FASD, 

particularly adults, need very intensive supports, Mr. Speaker. 

And the answer that I got was that, well there’s cognitive 

disability funding for them. Which is true, Mr. Speaker, but for 

someone who has FASD to apply or access cognitive disability 

funding is incredibly difficult. 

 

So the challenge here I think, Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker. 

Why do I always do this to you? Mr. Speaker, I think the 

challenge here is . . . Sure. Yes, I commend the government on 

$62.5 million and dealing with one list — a list — and have 

done some very good things. Like I said, I think SAID is a great 

program. And dignity in not having to apply for a program 

when you do have a profound and lasting disability is very 

important. Those are good things, Mr. Speaker. And a strategy 

on disability issues is a very good thing. 

 

But I do not believe it is the role of government to be the bearer 

of news on that front. Let other people talk about the good 

things you’re doing. And I know . . . Let that work speak for 

itself, Mr. Speaker, because people in the disability community 

. . . Yes, there are people with services. But chatting with 

someone today actually, who wasn’t on the 440 wait-list, her 

exact quote, she had said — she had written this — but she had 

said this in a conversation with me today: 

 

When the 440 list was announced, I was thrilled, then 

absolutely devastated. I was near despair. My God, they 

did not put my son on it, and he has near complex or 

complex needs with his care. Anticipatory grief set in. And 

all I thought, we’ve got him till we die or he dies or when I 

think he should be assessed for long-term care. 

 

So this is a mother who has been looking for services since 

2007 and was very panicky. And her adult son, she had some 

very big concerns, and she doesn’t believe her adult son should 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3533 

be living in long-term care. 

 

And we have to note when the government talks about more 

work to do, we have young people, we have people with autism 

who are living in the hospital until . . . three people in a hospital 

in Saskatoon until they get long . . . until they get residential 

placements, Mr. Speaker. We have people living in Parkridge in 

Saskatoon, five-year-olds, Mr. Speaker, who live in long-term 

care because they don’t have the residential services. A 

five-year-old is living with seniors, Mr. Speaker. So there is 

much, much more work to do. 

 

That doesn’t take away from the good work that’s been done. 

There’s no doubt about that. But it is not the place of a 

government, when there are so many places where work needs 

to be done — does not take away from the good work’s that 

been done — but it is not the place of the government to boast 

about a record, particularly when there are so many people 

waiting to be served: people with autism, people with FASD, 

people who are looking for respite services and a bit of time to 

gather their thoughts and their lives. So with that, Mr. Speaker, 

I will not be supporting the government’s motion. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to speak to the motion by a good friend and colleague 

from Saskatoon Sutherland, and I will be, I will be seconding 

and supporting this motion. 

 

In the past few weeks, there have been a number of 

announcements for people with disabilities — a number of them 

— and all of them we should be proud of. First there was an 

announcement of the strategy, and I was particularly honoured 

and proud to be named by the Premier as the Legislative 

Secretary to the Minister of Social Services, for disabilities. 

And I want to thank the minister as well and the previous 

minister of Social Services for all their work on these files. I’m 

looking forward to this role, and I look forward to speaking 

with and learning from people in the disability community. 

 

Now in terms of the consultations . . . And we as a government, 

we’ve always been criticized by the opposition. And one of the 

lessons I’ve learned in the past year and a half is to have a thick 

skin, and you can’t please everybody. I also reflect on what it 

means to be a critic. It’s an important role in a democracy, but 

being a critic comes with an equally important responsibility. 

It’s a responsibility to be accountable and transparent with your 

accusations. It’s easy to criticize a government, and that comes 

with the territory. So it’s easy to demand . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I wonder if the members would mind 

quietening it down so I can actually hear the member speaking. 

I recognize the member for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — I can stand here and proudly say that we’ve 

been accountable and have been transparent. You might not 

agree with all the policy decisions that we make, but we tell the 

truth. What about the accountability to be honest with the 

people of the province in the role of critic or, in this case, 

opposition? The burden of this standard should be equally as 

high. The public has the right to know that both sides of this 

House are accountable and transparent and not misrepresenting 

the facts. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province spoke with 

their ballots in the last election, and they’ll speak again in the 

next one. 

 

These are the words that I hear from the members opposite: 

increasing disconnect, common sense, dismissive, stubborn, 

congratulatory spin, not with reality, failing on the front, lack of 

consult, don’t listen. Mr. Speaker, every single one of those 

terms we can refute on every single day in this Assembly, and 

it’s shameful. 

 

Well that is amazing because guess what? What we’re going to 

do with the disability strategy, we’re going to consult and listen. 

For at least the third time during this spring session, I’m going 

to reference the doom and gloom prophesying of the opposition. 

Not sure if it’s Nostradamus they’re channelling or Henny 

Penny or Chicken Little. Because the glass is half full. And in 

your world, the sky is falling in the world of opposition. It’s not 

always time to sound the alarm bells. 

 

Well the people of this province don’t feel the calamity of doom 

and negativity. They feel a sense of hope. They don’t cry. 

 

If you want to sit and cry wolf, this is what you’re going to get. 

And also you’re not the nimble nine. Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t 

call them the nimble nine, but a more apt description might be 

the Nostradamian nine. Wow, Mr. Speaker, nine prophets of 

doom. Oh look, the sky is falling. Maybe they need to look at 

the licence plates of this province and realize in this province 

our sky is living. But I’m not sure if their slogan would be the 

land of dying skies. Anyway maybe you forgot the line, maybe 

they forgot the line, hope is better than fear. 

 

And on that hopeful note, I would like to talk about some of this 

government’s accomplishments and announcements and, in 

particular again, about the disability strategy and that 

announcement. Absolutely, absolutely so proud, couldn’t be 

more proud in terms of that announcement. And as I said, I 

mean our government is committed to developing a 

comprehensive disability strategy in consultation with members 

of the disability community. This will support the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth and the goal of making 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live for persons with 

disabilities. 

 

I had the great opportunity to go to Huston Heights, an 

independent adult facility who have independent living for 

people with disabilities. And in regards to the SAID program, 

they cried. People looked at me and said they were so happy 

and thankful for the opportunity not only to have some hope in 

their lives but to feel some level of inclusion. And that’s one of 

the pieces that all people with disabilities are hoping for. They 

want to be full citizens. They want to be included in society. 

And absolutely with our announcements and all of the 

initiatives that we’ve been a part of, we are including them, and 

they feel this. And we should be absolutely proud of this. 

 

Now in terms of the disability strategy, we’re going to focus on 



3534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

the priority areas specified in the plan for growth and the 

Speech from the Throne: accessibility, affordability, and 

availability of housing, transportation, employment, education, 

support for community inclusion, support for caregivers, and 

including respite for families and caregivers. This inclusive 

strategy will consider needs of children and adults with 

physical, sensory, psychiatric, cognitive, or intellectual 

disabilities and will be created in consultation with community 

partners from across the province. And this disability strategy, 

again as mentioned with my friend from Saskatoon Sutherland, 

will be inter-ministry, an effort by the Ministry of Social 

Services led. 

 

Also in terms of consultations, we’re going to start with a 

citizen consultation team, and that citizen consultation team will 

be created to provide the perspective of individuals with 

disabilities, their families, and supporters, in the development of 

the strategy. And beyond the citizen consultation team, we’re 

going to go from there to priority working groups. Six working 

groups will be created for the identified priority areas which 

I’ve already mentioned, and these priority areas, related 

consultation findings, with the potential for solutions, would be 

reviewed later. Then stakeholder association meetings will 

follow those two pieces, Mr. Speaker, which again proves and 

shows just how consultative we are. Public consultations again 

will follow that, and that is absolutely fantastic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition has a record of many, many lost 

opportunities in terms of this file. They’ve ignored the demands 

for a separate assistance program. They’ve allowed the wait-list 

to grow. In 1992 it was zero. In 2008, it was 440. Mr. Speaker, I 

think that was 16 years. That’s correct. If you subtract, that’s 16 

years. That’s amazing. They failed to increase the shelter rates 

for people with disabilities for 13 of their 16 years in power. 

832 per cent more has been invested in increased income 

assistance for people with disabilities in this government’s last 

six budgets than the NDP’s last six budgets. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it seems that the members 

opposite must have taken the people of this province hostage 

with their rhetoric and their misinformation, and I wish they 

were, at a minimum, half-truths. On behalf of this province, 

release us from your bonds of rhetoric. 

 

What about what the community says? DISC [Disability 

Income Support Coalition], the NDP’s disability framework 

ignores the deep, pervasive, long, long-held poverty that so 

many people with disabilities face. Some DISC members are 

boycotting the discussions because of the lack of consultation, 

the lack of action. DISC’s view of our government post-election 

in their letter to us was, to Premier Wall: 

 

We also want to thank you for the commitment you have 

made to improve the quality of life for people with 

disabilities — for a long time these individuals have been 

ignored and undervalued . . . the increased benefit rates 

you have promised will help them to move towards a 

better standard of living and will allow them to be more 

actively involved in their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can go on in terms of letters thanking us, 

commending us on our initiative. I could keep going. Well the 

executive director of the SACL: “I’d like to acknowledge and 

applaud the government for their pledge for better living for 

individuals and disabilities.” Hope’s Home: “Thank you. Thank 

you. Thank you.” And . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Maybe you should table copies. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — I could. I have nothing but copies. Yes. We 

created SAID in 2009, added over 10,000 people, and we’ve 

given more than $3,000 more per year in benefits. Now what 

did the NDP do? Ignored the demands for a separate, more 

dignified income assistance program for people with 

disabilities. They allowed the wait-list for services to people to 

grow to 440 people. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did nothing. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Absolutely. The motion from the member 

from Saskatoon Sutherland, I will be seconding that and 

supporting that motion, Mr. Speaker, absolutely. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased and honoured to be able to stand up today to respond to 

the motion by the members. And before I do that, Mr. Speaker, 

I want to very basically point out that I want to spend a bit of 

time doing an analysis of some of the services that are lacking 

in northern Saskatchewan. And before I get into that, I want to 

point out that it in no way, shape, or form does it diminish some 

of the challenges that southern Saskatchewan has because 

obviously there are many people that live in southern 

Saskatchewan that do need the recognition and certainly need 

the supports that every disabled person should get, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to steal a line from one of the politicians from many 

years ago, when the politician made the comment that this isn’t 

a good country for any of us unless it’s a good country for all of 

us. That I think really resonated with a lot of people because 

obviously, from our perspective in Saskatchewan, this shouldn’t 

be a good province for any of us unless it’s a good province for 

all of us — if I can copy that line, Mr. Speaker — and 

especially the people that have disabilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s no question that as I look at the headlines for southern 

Saskatchewan, and I’ll give you the example — and this is what 

really annoys me, and certainly it doesn’t surprise the people of 

Saskatchewan — that this billboard government spends more 

time patting themselves on the back and putting up billboards, 

which really don’t do anything to resolve overall the challenges 

many people face in the disability community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, some of the headlines that we see in the 

newspapers as we look at this, for example one of the headlines 

I have, and I quote: “Government called out about eliminating 

wait-list,” Mr. Speaker, and another headline, “Valley View 

residents and families facing uncertain future.” And that’s of 

course the Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw. “Saskatchewan 

Hospital replacement delayed, changed,” another headline, Mr. 

Speaker. And the list goes on and on of some of the headlines 

that we see in today’s paper about some of the challenges that 

the disabled community face, and yet you see the Saskatchewan 

Party government busy patting themselves on the back at every 

opportunity that they have and certainly putting out billboards, 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3535 

you know, to that effect. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that there’s a lot of work that is 

needed. There is no question about it. While the Saskatchewan 

Party had the opportunity, had the money, had the booming 

economy, Mr. Speaker, they could have done some very 

exciting things for the disabled community, and all we’re seeing 

is a piecemeal effort here and there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that you look at northern 

Saskatchewan as a whole where we have a lot of overcrowding 

because of the growing communities, and you look at many of 

the people in northern Saskatchewan. There is estimates of 700 

people with disabilities that live in northern Saskatchewan. 

They’re living in crowded homes, Mr. Speaker, and some of the 

awkward things that this government has done really hurts a lot 

of disabled people all throughout the province and certainly in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things I think is really important 

is that the disabled community really has strived to become full 

and productive partners to the extent that they can, on every 

occasion, on every level, and at every meeting. There’s no 

question that, from my perspective, I think that we have to 

develop a matrix of support systems and programs to ensure 

that the disabled community, the people that have disabilities — 

and there’s a wide range of definition of disability, Mr. Speaker 

— that we need to be able to put in measures that would really 

counter some of the challenges that they face and that would 

really eliminate some of the barriers that they face. And that 

matrix of supports need to happen on a continual basis, and we 

need to exhaust every avenue of support towards the disabled 

community so that they are able to participate as much and as 

fully as they can, Mr. Speaker. That’s the important thing that 

we have to constantly strive for. 

 

So one of the things that’s really important that I would 

encourage this billboard government and this back-patting party 

over there to make sure that they do one thing, and that’s to 

listen to the disabled community, Mr. Speaker. From northern 

Saskatchewan’s perspective, as I mentioned, there are about 700 

people in northern Saskatchewan that have been basically 

coming forward and have deemed themselves to have some 

disability of some sort, Mr. Speaker. And a lot of them live with 

extended families. They live with their parents yet. And some 

of them have the ability to go on their own. And I really 

recognize their initiative and their incentive, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s something that we always constantly strive to recognize. 

And I do that as a MLA. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many challenges. When you 

see this particular government start telling people that have 

been renting homes for a number of years . . . And some of 

these homes that they’ve been renting for a number of years 

house disabled people. Some of these homes have disabled 

homeowners. And now this particular minister and this 

government is saying to all these people that have rented for 

years, guess what? You don’t have the option of home 

ownership. We’re eliminating that program. From now on 

you’ll be renting forever. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, part of the disabled community live in some 

of these housing units. And even though they’re crowded, some 

of these homes are what they consider their own. And for the 

minister to come along and arbitrarily tell people, you’ll never, 

ever, ever, ever own your home; you’re going to rent off us 

forever, she’s saying that to a large group of disabled people as 

well, Mr. Speaker. And then they come along and they start 

back-patting themselves on programs that they have put 

together on a piecemeal basis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there certainly isn’t, there certainly isn’t the 

commitment needed to make sure that the matrix of supports 

towards making disabled people become much more productive 

and independent people as they strive to be. The support simply 

from the Saskatchewan Party is not there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to certainly mention a few folks in northern 

Saskatchewan that have worked really hard, worked really hard 

in trying to promote development and opportunity and 

awareness, Mr. Speaker, of some of the challenges of people in 

the disabled community in northern Saskatchewan. And what I 

would say is the champion of many of these people, and I say it 

on a constant basis, is a gentleman by the name Gary Tinker. 

Gary has been working over the years for the past 20, 25 years, 

striving and fighting and even walking great distances to bring 

awareness to the disabled issues in northern Saskatchewan. And 

having a decent home, having supports around the community, 

having educational opportunity, having the support mechanisms 

when necessary — these are the issues that Gary has brought to 

the forefront. And, Mr. Speaker, he has been really, really a 

strong advocate, has been talking about some of the issues. 

 

And what has Gary said in the past? What has Gary said in the 

past about the program support and some of the challenges that 

they face, Mr. Speaker? And I would point out, these are some 

of the comments that Gary has made. And one of the comments 

that really sticks in to my particular head, Mr. Speaker, is the 

one that Gary talks about is funding. And the quote I have here 

is that: 

 

Ever since the new government came to power, the 

Saskatchewan Party, our funding has been changed a lot 

lately over the last seven years. Basically what I’m trying 

to say to the public, we’re only getting $60,000 in 

programming for the whole North because we deal with 

the whole North with people with disabilities, with the 

whole North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the other point that he raises: 

 

I don’t know what has happened with the government 

people, with the new people. I don’t understand why they 

didn’t consult with me when these changes came through. 

We only have $60,000, and that’s it. And that money is 

gone by the time the new money comes in. 

 

And I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, it’s for the following year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s got to be a better answer in northern 

Saskatchewan. There are people out there that are in 

wheelchairs, Mr. Speaker, that need to have accessibility issues 

addressed. There’s educational opportunities that many in the 

disabled community are striving for, Mr. Speaker. There are 



3536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

housing options that the disabled people ought to be able to take 

advantage of. And when you’re hearing the Minister of Social 

Services crying crocodile tears on some issues and then turning 

around telling the people who have been renting off the 

government for years, you’ll never have the opportunity to own 

those homes . . . Why? Because the Saskatchewan Party’s in 

power, and that’s it. You’re going to rent off us forever and 

ever and ever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that decision impacts and affects a lot of young working 

people. It affects a lot of disabled people, Mr. Speaker. And I 

say, shame on that government for taking the opportunity of 

home ownership away from the many people in northern 

Saskatchewan that deserve that opportunity. But this minister 

sits here and steadfastly rejects any notion that some of these 

people in the North — and many of them are disabled — that 

she denies them the opportunity to have home ownership as part 

of their pride and joy. 

 

And many disabled people, many disabled people have that 

option to become home ownership. And when you see that kind 

of activity on one front, and you don’t see the opportunity for 

training and programs and opportunity for disabled people on 

many other fronts, then you can see, Mr. Speaker, this 

government and the entire caucus across the way are simply 

about spin, about PR [public relations], about billboards, Mr. 

Speaker, when in fact the people of Saskatchewan know better. 

 

They are simply not there for the long term. They’re simply not 

there for the disabled community. They’re simply not there for 

many, many organizations that have been telling them, when 

you had the opportunity, you could have done something and 

you failed on that front miserably, Mr. Speaker. And the 

disabled people of northern Saskatchewan and the province 

certainly know that. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

support this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly an honour 

for me to stand in this Assembly and support the motion 

brought forward by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland, seconded by the member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin by just going back to a letter that 

was referred to by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 

where the member speaks about a family who were, as she said 

. . . And I do have the letter with me that talked about being 

absolutely devastated and near despair when their son was not 

on the 440 wait-list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be speaking about the 440 list in a 

few moments. But I want to point out the fact that while the 440 

list was there — and is a list that this government or this party 

when it formed government had to deal with — since that 440 

list, there’s been 215 individuals over and above the 440 that 

had to be dealt with who have had services provided. 

 

And the individual that the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

refers to, in fact March 17th, 2012 . . . And I acknowledge, Mr. 

Speaker, that the family lobbied on behalf of their son, but they 

have a right to lobby. And as a result of their inquiries, the 

community living service delivery service began to deal with 

this family, and a transition to Cheshire Homes started on 

March 17th, 2012 and has been completed, was completed this 

year, March 31st of 2013. 

 

So I think it’s important for all of us in this Assembly to not 

only just get one part of the story, but the full part of the story, 

and the fact that this young gentleman that the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale spoke about is now in Cheshire Home 

and is receiving the care and attention . . . And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the family that was advocating for and as they began 

to look at it, are very appreciative of the work and effort of this 

provincial government in reaching out to people with 

disabilities, which includes their son. So I think it’s important 

for that to be on the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of serving in this Assembly for 

a number of years. And when I was first elected, I happened to 

be elected to a government that also reached out to people with 

disabilities. And I can tell you of the number of group homes 

that were developed and built across Saskatchewan. Certainly 

there were some in the Moosomin constituency. I can tell you 

about the Kin-Ability centres that were built at that time, and 

the Sarcan recycling depots that were built. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many members including yourself will 

acknowledge and are aware of many of these services and 

facilities because we’ve had the opportunity of going into these 

group homes, going into the Kin-Ability centres and into the 

Sarcan depots. And I can tell you, if anyone wants to take a 

moment and walk into any of those facilities, you’re welcomed 

with open arms. As you get to converse with people who are 

dealing with disabilities, you realize that these individuals want 

to be individuals as well. They don’t want to be 

institutionalized. They don’t want to be just in a facility where 

they just sit all day and sleep all night. They want to have the 

ability to provide for themselves. They want to have the ability 

to participate in society. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, not only did the government of the 

day back in the ’80s remember and think of people with 

disabilities and provide services and endeavour to provide those 

services, but since forming government, this Saskatchewan 

Party has certainly as well and, under the leadership of this 

Premier, have said to people that are living with or have the 

individuals with disabilities, we will do everything that we can 

to ensure that you have the ability to have the assistance that’s 

needed to provide for your child. But also we are telling 

individuals with disabilities, you are important. You are an 

important sector of our society and that we will recognize the 

fact that, regardless of your disability, we want to ensure that 

you have the greatest opportunity to live your life in dignity. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to . . . I think there was a 

comment made at the most recent Saskatchewan prayer 

breakfast where our speaker was Mr. Gordon Elhard. And he 

brought out something that I’ve never thought of before. We 

talk about hope. We talk about people having hope. And he 

used an acronym, and he used that in his classroom and he used 

that when he was dealing with teachers. And this is how he 

expresses hope: HOPE is “helping other people excel.” And I 

think as a government we can take a hold of that acronym, 

helping other people excel. What we’re doing for people with 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3537 

disabilities, Mr. Speaker, is helping individuals with disabilities 

excel or achieve their greatest potential. And I believe that’s 

very important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said earlier, not only did this government recognize that 

there were a number of people on a waiting list, waiting for help 

and assistance and care — and that waiting list was 440 

individuals — in the few short years that we’ve had the 

privilege of forming government for the . . . well the last little 

over six years, not only did this government address the 440 

wait-list, but this government also recognized that there were 

more than just 440 people that needed care and needed 

assistance. In fact 215 to date, 215 additional individuals over 

the 440 have received care and not only received care but given 

the ability to become productive individuals regardless of their 

disabilities. So, Mr. Speaker, I think the record of this 

government speaks for itself, that we’re thinking of and 

recognize the importance of helping people with disabilities and 

helping the families with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note the fact that — and what we have done as a 

government — not only are we forcing people to rely on social 

assistance, but we’re also recognizing the ability that these 

individuals have the . . . are given the opportunity to provide for 

themselves. I’ve walked into Kin-Ability centres and I’ve 

chatted with people with disabilities. And I have had people 

wrap their arms around me and say thank you and talk about 

what they’ve been able to do. 

 

They’ve received this cheque. They got a cheque, Mr. Speaker. 

They got a cheque. They weren’t just handed something and 

provided everything for . They got a cheque, and they were able 

to spend it in a way that they felt made them feel more like an 

individual, like an important contributor to the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if that doesn’t get 

your attention, if that doesn’t bring a few tears to your eyes as 

you recognize how privileged we are . . .  

 

When you have your health, when you have your mental health 

and your physical health, we take this all for granted. But 

people living with disabilities don’t have all those opportunities. 

And to be able to give them the ability of perceiving themselves 

as being important and that we recognize that and that they have 

the ability to play a productive part in our society is important. 

 

I think it’s said well by Ian Wilkinson, the executive director of 

the Saskatchewan Abilities Council, who’s worked in the field 

for 27 years, “In the last several years, I have seen policy 

improvements, funding increases, and a raised profile for 

disability issues that I have not previously witnessed in my 

career.” Mr. Speaker, I think that couldn’t be even said any 

better than that right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the privilege, many of my colleagues, 

many people in this Assembly have had the privilege of 

working with people from community-based organizations, 

individuals who are out there working to help and assist people 

with disabilities. And we’ve been reminded of the fact that the 

wages in that sector have lagged behind for so many years, and 

the difficulty that these organizations have had in finding the 

personnel because of the lack of salary. 

 

And over the past few years, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a 

significant increase in the salary levels which has made it much 

easier. While we haven’t achieved utopia, if I could put it that 

way, as of yet, Mr. Speaker, we certainly have created a better 

environment for people living with disabilities in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a period of time when there was really a 

. . . There was a period of neglect where issues were left on the 

back burner, where people with disabilities felt that they were 

not important. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, in the few short 

years we’ve had the privilege of forming government, we’ve 

had the opportunity of turning that around. 

 

And as a result, we get letters . . . the Premier’s received letters 

like this. We want to thank you for the commitment you have 

made to improve the quality of life for people with disabilities. 

For a long time, these individuals have been ignored and 

undervalued. The increased benefit rates you have promised 

will help them to move towards a better standard of living and 

will allow them to be more actively involved in their 

community. Thank you. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Time has expired. Next speaker. I recognize 

the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to be 

able to rise to speak to this particular motion after the member 

from Moosomin, because I think the member from Moosomin 

understands about how one serves humbly, how one serves our 

neighbours and our people. And he identified that this is about 

helping other people excel. That’s what this whole area is 

about. And you do it in a humble fashion. 

 

And the difficulty that we have had over the last number of 

weeks is that unfortunately the humble service of people like 

the Minister of Social Services and others who work in this area 

has been taken over a bit onto the hyper-spin side. And that is 

where people get a little uneasy. 

 

The member from Moosomin was quite right to talk about all of 

the good things that happened around these particular issues in 

the ’70s and the ’80s and the ’90s. And, Mr. Speaker, we all 

know that the province had a real difficult corner to get around 

in the ’90s related to the economic conditions and the finances 

of the province. 

 

But I think also what the member from . . . All the members that 

have been around here for a while will recognize that these 

particular issues that are of concern here — the people with 

disabilities, whether it’s intellectual disabilities or whether it’s 

fetal alcohol spectrum disorder related issues or physical 

disabilities — that they were always working to figure out how 

to do things better. And, Mr. Speaker, what’s very difficult for 

those of us who worked in the previous government is when 

there’s not a recognition that the work that is being talked about 

now, which is good work, when it’s not recognized that it built 

on things that happened in the previous decades. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the discussion around how to provide special 

money — as the member from Moosomin said, the cheque that 

goes to individual disabled people — was a long debate and a 



3538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

long discussion, because one of the challenges always was there 

were some people who didn’t want to say, I’m disabled, so they 

could get some money, but they needed the money. There were 

others who said, no I’m okay with that because that’s part of 

who I am, and let’s figure out how to do this. And so there was 

a lot of discussion to make sure that there were services 

provided around that. 

 

During that time people were getting assistance, but it was 

assistance that wasn’t always as specifically designated. And 

clearly there continued to be new facilities being built, but 

obviously there weren’t enough, and I think that’s probably still 

the case now as we hear various things coming forward. But it’s 

about how do we serve people in our community and how we 

do it humbly. And it’s that humble part, I think, that the Premier 

got wrong when he did the press release, because then people 

say, well you know, he . . . The list is gone. That’s what the 

headline is. And people say, well I went to his office four times 

and I didn’t get any response. Well that’s what you trigger 

when you go and try to put this stuff up on a high pedestal. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about here is, how do 

we as the people who are in charge of managing the money of 

the province, how do we make sure that those people who need 

the assistance of government receive that in the best way, in the 

most appropriate way? 

 

Now when I was listening to some of the things that are said, 

people talked about Sarcan, and Sarcan is a very important 

institution in our province. And I know many of you now take 

your electronic items to Sarcan and that’s added a whole layer 

of work for people that really need this kind of work. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that was not the obvious choice of the electronics 

industry. They pushed very hard to have somebody other than 

Sarcan do it, and I know that I said, as the Minister of 

Environment at that point in Saskatchewan, we want to make 

sure that Sarcan has this kind of work. And after a lot of fuss 

and a lot of push from the industry, they finally said, okay, 

we’ll do that. 

 

Well last year we had the five-year anniversary of that 

particular decision and we all know that it’s added a whole 

layer of other good jobs for people so that we can make sure 

that they, in the community, have a place that they can be proud 

of and where they’re doing things. We need to keep doing those 

things. We need to keep doing them in a way where we build on 

what the people we succeed, or that we follow, have already 

done before us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it doesn’t serve anybody very well 

when you dismiss the good work that’s been done by the 

communities before us. And it’s especially true when it relates 

to social services issues and health issues, because I don’t think 

there’s anybody in the room that doesn’t want to make sure that 

our resources are used in the most appropriate fashion. 

 

Now where are some of the areas where we need to continue to 

work? And I know that it’s quite interesting to hear the Minister 

of Highways talk about challenges as the minister. I know the 

Minister of Health uses that word fairly often too, and I know 

that the Minister of Social Services uses that word. Because 

when I was in government, there were a lot of people would 

raise the question, oh you’re always talking about challenges, 

but that’s the nature of the work that we do in government, is 

that we look for the challenges and we want to make sure that 

we address some of those. 

 

So some of the challenges we have now, we have much work to 

do around fetal alcohol spectrum disorder people whether 

they’re young, whether they’re teenagers, but more importantly 

when they’re adults . . . [inaudible] . . . And so some of that 

work is based on the work that was done 10 years ago on setting 

up a Western Canada system of looking at how these issues are 

dealt with. You look at the need for home care in all parts of the 

province but especially in rural areas. Respite care, we know 

that that’s an issue that needs to be dealt with. And it also 

relates to people who are helping and providing care to the 

disabled that we’re talking about here, the mentally and 

physically handicapped people. 

 

And so all of these things are about how do we use our 

resources now. Now the job, as we all know, when you’re in 

opposition is to ask the questions where there are gaps and 

where there are things that need to be dealt with. And we will 

continue to do that because that’s our job. But you also need to 

recognize that we’re doing that because we can do better. And 

that’s the point, that’s the point — that everybody can do better 

and we can do better than what our parents or grandparents did. 

We can do better than what some other institution might have 

done.  

 

But the point is, how do you do that in a way that you do it in a 

humble and a service way. And I think that’s where sometimes 

people get it wrong. And I think that’s maybe what’s happened 

over the last few weeks, is that the Premier got it wrong and 

that’s a problem for all of us. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the member from Saskatoon Sutherland: what is a 

better use of taxpayers’ dollars in your opinion: slick PR 

announcements where ministers dislocate their own shoulders 

patting themselves on the back, or really supporting housing 

and programming for the intellectually disabled and their 

families? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

nothing about a slick announcement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 

about 440 real people living in Saskatchewan that we need to 

deal with. You pat yourself on the back over there, member 

from Athabasca, because you know what? We’re actually 

getting it done. You guys talked about it, you keep talking over 

there, but you know what? We need a little less conversation 

and a little more action. Thanks very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. The NDP record on disability 

issues is absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker. During their time in 

government the NDP chose to allow wait-lists for services for 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3539 

people with intellectual disabilities to grow to a shocking 440 

people. Now the members opposite were really good at making 

announcements. They were really good at creating wait-lists, 

but they forgot one part of it, Mr. Speaker, to actually do 

something about it. 

 

To the member from Riversdale: why did your party feel it was 

more appropriate to let vulnerable citizens languish on a list 

than to provide them with the crucial services they needed? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say to the 

member opposite, thank you for the question. And also, would 

it not be better to ensure that everybody on that 440 list actually 

has received services, or people who have been waiting for 

services since 2006 actually have received services, before you 

boast that everybody else, that everybody else . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . 2006. This government has been in power since 

2007. That’s six years of this government in power where 

people with disabilities have continued to wait for services, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is for the 

member from Regina, and the question is this. I know that . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Regina Coronation Park. I think 

that’s . . . if he’s concerned about that. 

 

But basically the question is this: I know that he has been 

involved in these kinds of issues for his whole career, and I 

know that he knows what’s happened in Regina. And can he not 

explain to us how the NDP government worked on these issues, 

the previous Conservative government did, and that all of the 

work was done in a way where people were concerned about 

the community? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank the 

member opposite for the question. I have absolutely no problem 

understanding, but when I said the word thank you, it’s 

probably something you probably hadn’t heard for 16 years. So 

in terms of the disability community, they have said thank you. 

And I have noticed this and it has been part of it, it has been 

part of the career, but in the last five, six years, all I’ve ever 

heard from people with disabilities is thank you. And in 

particular, and in particular, it does . . . it is in recognition of the 

SAID program and the 440 wait-list. So yes, I do recognize it 

because I’ve heard it, and it’s because of this government. So 

thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

strives to make this province the best place in Canada for 

persons with disabilities. Since November 2007, our 

government has increased funding for services for people with 

intellectual disabilities, including 110 per cent increase for 

group homes, 81 per cent increase for day programs, 61 per cent 

increase for supported independent living, and increased 

funding for approved private service homes serving people with 

intellectual disabilities by 27 per cent in the last two years 

alone. Eight hundred and thirty-two per cent more has also been 

invested in increased income assistance for people with 

disabilities in our government’s first six budgets than the NDP’s 

last six budgets. 

 

To the member from Regina Lakeview: how could your caucus 

present six consecutive budgets that failed to adequately fund 

programs and services for people with disabilities? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the Minister of 

Finance knows, and I think other members over there know that 

this whole program was a part of the transformation of the 

Social Services or Community Services budget, and that there 

was money that was there providing services to these people 

beforehand. And the information that you’ve been given is 

accurate in that it talks about disabilities, but it was a 

transformation of money that came after many years of 

discussion in the Calvert and Romanow governments. So I 

think that the member needs to check the information she gets 

before she gets up and asks the question. 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To the 

member from Regina Coronation Park: Jennifer Birns and her 

brother Devon were frustrated by the news release two weeks 

ago after being on a list since 2006. They came to the 

legislature for help. There are others who have stories not 

dissimilar to the Birns’s and who are constituents of the 

members opposite. Do the Birnses and others not deserve better 

than having their government try to discredit and dismiss them? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Our record stands for itself. And thanks for 

the . . . Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thanks to the 

member opposite. But our records stands on its own, stands for 

itself. We absolutely are going to listen to every single person 

that walks through the door and has an issue.  

 

And in regards to the last . . . I mean, honestly, the 16 years that 

previous to our being in power and in government, the CBO 

[community-based organization] sector absolutely sat and was 

wondering where was their government of the time, pre-2007. 

So I had to sit there, I had to sit there for 16 years and explain to 

people, I’m terribly sorry, your government has let you down. 

In the last six or seven years, our government has not let us 

down. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 



3540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

government has increased funding by a total of 110 per cent for 

group homes for people with intellectual disabilities. 

Additionally total group homes spaces for people with 

intellectual disabilities in our province has increased by 25 

percent. Our government has made a priority of ensuring this 

vulnerable group is taken care of and have a safe place to call 

home.  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is in far contrast to the view of the last 

NDP Social Services minister, who was quoted saying, there is 

no mandate under law to provide services for intellectually 

disabled people. Under the NDP, intellectually disabled people 

were regularly being dumped in hospitals, nursing homes, and 

jails. 

 

To the member from Regina Riversdale: do you still share this 

view as your former . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Saskatoon 

Riversdale: do you still share this view? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubt 

there’s been some very good work done around the area of 

intellectual disabilities here in Saskatchewan. There’s no doubt 

about it. But is it appropriate to grandstand and boast when 

there are still so many people who have not been served, who 

are still languishing in hospitals and long-term care homes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? That is the question. There are still people 

languishing with intellectual and physical disabilities in 

hospitals and long-term care. And that is not appropriate on a 

file as sensitive as this. You should not be boasting when there 

is much work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the member from Moosomin: why does the 

members opposite think that the disabled people of northern 

Saskatchewan do not deserve a chance to own their homes and 

live a full dignified life? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think for the past 16 years, and that member was part 

of the government at the time, a lot could have been done for 

the people in the North.  

 

But I also want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the record 

that has been spoken about today has also proven that this 

government works to work with people and address the needs 

of people across this province, not just in the large urban 

centres or rural Saskatchewan, but northern Saskatchewan as 

well. We’ve increased funding to over 120 CBOs in the North, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, added community service worker 

positions in La Ronge to assess needs and provide ongoing case 

management. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the record of this 

government will stand for a long, long time about how it cares 

for people with disabilities. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

government is moving hard to ensure that Saskatchewan is the 

best place to live for people with disabilities. The Saskatchewan 

assured income for disability program is an example of an 

initiative our government has taken forward . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Motion No. 5 — Allocation of Spending on Education 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. After 

my comments, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving my motion. And I 

want to first of all point out to the people that may be listening 

to this particular debate that we’re going to be speaking for 

some time on the whole issue of standardized testing, Mr. 

Speaker, something that the Saskatchewan Party government 

certainly sail as their flagship initiative. 

 

Standardized testing for Saskatchewan is now one of the things 

that the Saskatchewan Party government want to say they 

brought in, and they do it with great fanfare, Mr. Speaker. They 

brag about it wherever they go. They pat themselves on the 

back that this government is going to bring in standardized 

testing, Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan one thing. We have to 

do an analysis very quickly about what the Saskatchewan Party 

government is really about, Mr. Speaker, the history. And I 

would point out, based on the position that they’ve taken on 

standardized testing, Mr. Speaker, it is in their philosophical 

beliefs that they have to do this, Mr. Speaker, when nobody else 

wants it. 

 

We’re talking common sense from our perspective as an 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I forwarded this 

motion today, to tell the people of Saskatchewan that we in the 

NDP think there’s better use of educational dollars out there 

than spending $12 million on standardized testing that the 

minister had mentioned the other day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what’s even a worse waste of money, Mr. Speaker, is 

spending $400,000 to put together a slick public relations 

campaign, a billboard advertisement to show that they’re going 

to do this PR exercise, wasting valuable educational dollars, 

Mr. Speaker. But on the NDP side of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, we think that is absolutely the worst idea ever, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And let me tell you what I think is probably the norm across the 

way, Mr. Speaker. This is a government, the Sask Party 

government, that doesn’t know where it’s going. It is a 

rudderless ship, Mr. Speaker. It has no idea what it’s doing. It 

has no idea what it stands for. And it certainly doesn’t know 

where it’s going, Mr. Speaker. That’s an absolute, very obvious 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3541 

from our perspective, and very obvious from our vantage point. 

 

First of all, these guys are privatizing our Crowns by stealth. 

We all know that that’s happening, Mr. Speaker. And now we 

find out from the Provincial Auditor that we’re going to be in 

debt $19.1 billion by next year — $19.1 billion, next year, is 

our debt. Well didn’t these same guys, didn’t these same guys 

put out a billboard a number of years ago saying that they’re 

actually reducing debt by 40 per cent? Then the auditor says, 

oh, oops, it’s actually 19.1 billion we’re in the hole. 

 

Then we’re going to war with our working men and women. 

They’re not addressing the housing needs, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

certainly . . . They’re squandering. They’re squandering the 

opportunity to build a prosperous and long-lasting economy for 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because they don’t know what 

they’re doing. 

 

And now we see the debt going up for government. University 

debts are going up. Municipal government debts are going up, 

Mr. Speaker. And their latest scheme is the P3 [public-private 

partnership] scheme, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to put money 

into P3s to build hospitals and roads and schools and they’re 

going to punt that debt down for our kids to pay, our grandkids 

to pay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now their latest foray into politics, Mr. Speaker, is 

standardized testing. Standardized testing is something that they 

want to do, Mr. Speaker. So you look at the history of the 

Saskatchewan Party. That’s why I’m on this side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. We know they don’t know what 

they’re doing, and the people of Saskatchewan are going to 

quickly find that out, Mr. Speaker. They are going to quickly 

find that out that the Saskatchewan Party’s ship is rudderless. 

They have no direction as to what they want to do, but they are 

guided by one thing, their philosophical belief in the 

privatization of our Crowns, of putting Saskatchewan back into 

debt, Mr. Speaker, of making sure they take care of their insider 

and their rich friends, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of 

Saskatchewan’s future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think one of the things that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is 

that if you look, if you look at standardized testing as a whole 

— and we’ve had this discussion, Mr. Speaker — if you look at 

standardized testing, Mr. Speaker, and you say, okay if that’s 

what the Saskatchewan Party want to hang their hat on, this 

standardized testing concept, you know, Mr. Speaker, then 

hopefully there’ll be some other complementary efforts, Mr. 

Speaker, to support that call for standardized testing. 

 

But now you look at some of the examples that they have 

undertaken. English as a second language program — that’s 

gone, Mr. Speaker. Several hundred educational assistants — 

gone, Mr. Speaker. The Aboriginal employment development 

strategy — gone, Mr. Speaker. The Aboriginal education 

support system — gone, Mr. Speaker. Respect for our partners 

like STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], like the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association, parents — gone, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we see schools falling apart, Mr. Speaker, and no support 

towards our school system. I heard an example of that today, 

Mr. Speaker. Support for a long-term plan for our school 

system to bring the infrastructure up to par — gone, Mr. 

Speaker. And all the Saskatchewan Party can do is talk about 

standardized testing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is I look at the 

minister today, and certainly I respect his background. He’s 

been involved with education for a number of years, and he 

ought to know, Mr. Speaker. He ought to know that the teachers 

and the School Boards Association and the many people 

involved with education say one thing to him: that if you’re 

going to insist on standardized testing, then you must bring on 

the supports necessary to build a solid base of support for our 

students so that they can excel in education, Mr. Speaker. He 

should know that. 

 

But what happens, Mr. Speaker, is this minister refuses to stand 

up and fight for the right thing. All he’s pushing is standardized 

testing. Standardized testing — that’s all they’re saying. And in 

the meantime our schools are falling apart. And in the meantime 

our teachers are being taken for granted. And in the meantime it 

puts a lot of strain on the education system as a whole. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they’re not addressing, they’re not 

addressing the key, core issue when they talk about 

standardized testing. And the minister was asked about 

standardized testing. Where did you get this concept? Who likes 

it? And who wants it? And, Mr. Speaker, all the minister could 

say in question period, the response to the question by my 

colleague from Saskatoon, was the evidence is evident. That 

was his response. The evidence is evident. 

 

Well we need to see that documentation. We need to see the 

reason why they brought standardized testing in. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party, the Premier and cabinet and the 

minister, have failed to provide the documentation to the 

Assembly, to the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association], to the STF, and to the parents. Where is their 

evidence that standardized testing is something that the people 

of Saskatchewan want and it’s something that we should have? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as they run up the flagpole their 

standardized testing flag, what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, is 

you’re seeing a deteriorating school system where you have 

gyms such as Sacred Heart’s gym here locally that cannot be 

used by the students. And you’re seeing teachers being taken 

for granted, Mr. Speaker. And you see a number of initiatives at 

the school level being wiped out. And all they can respond to 

some of these challenges, Mr. Speaker, in the time of economic 

prosperity, in the time of economic prosperity, all they can talk 

about across the way, the Saskatchewan Party, the minister, the 

Premier, and the entire cabinet, is standardized testing. And 

that’s shameful. 

 

They all have to know that there’s a lot more work to build up a 

solid base of educational opportunity in this province as 

opposed to talking about standardized testing only. The people 

of Saskatchewan don’t want it. The teachers are telling the 

government that they don’t want it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s better use of resources, better use of 

those valuable $12 million that they’re spending on this 

program plus the $400,000 for their PR and their spin 

campaign. There is better use of that twelve and a half million 



3542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

dollars than forcing something down the people of 

Saskatchewan’s throat that they don’t like, that they don’t want. 

And, Mr. Speaker, about the only party and about the only 

group, the people that like that standardized testing, Mr. 

Speaker, is that 49 people across the way. And I urge the 

backbench to talk to your teachers, talk to your school board 

rep, and speak up for your constituents. A lot of people don’t 

want that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we talk about some of the issues that hamper some of the 

students’ success, Mr. Speaker. A lot of the process — and I 

spoke to an educator today — a lot of the processes that hamper 

students’ progress to achieve all that they can achieve, Mr. 

Speaker, a lot of them are external. There are external pressures 

on students. We know that, Mr. Speaker. We know that very 

clearly — things like housing. A lot of families live in crowded 

housing. You know, and there’s a lot of challenge, and I’m 

doing my own experience of northern Saskatchewan because 

that’s where I’m from. I understand northern Saskatchewan 

quite well. 

 

[12:15] 

 

You look at family responsibility, Mr. Speaker. A lot of the kids 

that should be in school sometimes help out families with things 

like chores, babysitting, and even sometimes work to bring 

extra income into their homes. 

 

You look at peer pressure, Mr. Speaker, peer pressure to not go 

to school, to find a job, a quicker job, a quicker buck. And all 

these factors, Mr. Speaker, do provide external pressures on the 

students in terms of their ability to do the work at school, the 

concentration level. And of course, Mr. Speaker, the most 

important thing is attending school to begin with, to be able to 

be there and to attend school. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, look at the other issues, some of the 

challenges that people talk . . . For example, drug abuse. Is that 

a challenge that affects our students? And the answer is, yes it 

does. A lot of people may be involved with illegal drugs and 

they try and get the students involved. There’s that pressure on 

the students as well. There’s no mechanisms to support that 

student. We need to find ways to support that student better. 

 

Now one of the things that’s really important . . . And so we 

talk a bit about the attendance aspect, which is really important 

on this front, Mr. Speaker. But the whole notion, the whole 

notion of standardized testing is you want to be able to nourish 

the teachings into that child — that this person is not simply a 

robot; that this a human being, that this human being needs to 

be nurtured in many, many ways. And what is happening is that 

a lot of the times the teachers can recognize that. The teachers 

can recognize that sometimes they have to excite the kids to get 

them to come to school — that sometimes it’s your basketball 

practice, sometimes it’s your drama opportunity, sometimes it’s 

your chess club, sometimes it’s a computer club that’ll take you 

to school. So you’ve got to have that exciting agenda at the 

school to be able to attract students there, Mr. Speaker. And you 

cannot stifle the imagination and the opportunity that these 

students deserve and want by simply having a standardized 

testing approach. 

 

So what happens — and I think one of the points that was raised 

with me just today in terms of this standardized testing notion 

— is you’re teaching to the test. You’re teaching kids to the test 

and that stifles personal growth and that really inhibits teachers 

from becoming more involved with that student, Mr. Speaker. 

The teachers are building a person. They’re building a human 

being. They’re building an exciting individual, Mr. Speaker. 

And if you just limit the teacher to teaching to the test, you 

going to stifle a lot of some of the other opportunities that that 

child may want, that that child may need and that child deserves 

as a prerequisite to leading a health, happy, productive life for 

many, many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to allow these students to think for 

themselves and think out of the box. They’ve got to flourish, 

they’ve got to prosper, and they’ve got to be able to be exciting 

and engaged individuals and students. And, Mr. Speaker, if you 

put them in that box of standardized testing where the teachers 

themselves are simply teaching to the test, then, Mr. Speaker, 

you are doing a great disservice to not only that student, but to 

the parents, to the School Boards Association, and especially to 

the teachers whom you’ve stifled from really doing what they 

do best, and that’s building us a bright future to educating our 

young boys and girls. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that as the minister and 

the Premier in the Saskatchewan Party government come along 

and they talk about standardized testing, my only argument is, 

who asked for this? Who asked for this standardized testing 

process to begin? And when you hear they’re spending $12 

million on a standardized testing program when schools need 

work, when our teachers need assistance, when you see gyms 

being closed because they’re in very poor condition, and when 

you see no excitement happening on the education front from 

the Sask Party, the biggest question we have is, who asked for 

the standardized testing to begin and to be part and parcel of 

what Saskatchewan is? Mr. Speaker, absolutely no one. That 

party was driven by its philosophical beliefs to have the 

standardized testing and, Mr. Speaker, they used some far-off 

study dated in 1910 to justify some of the things that they’re 

doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have one resounding 

message to the Sask Party. We don’t want your standardized 

testing. We simply don’t think it’s a proper thing to do, 

especially if you’re not affording the supports in other areas that 

are necessary to bring up and to challenge our kids and to bring 

up the marks that is hopefully being achieved through the 

standardized testing model that the minister is talking about. 

And I underline hope, Mr. Speaker, because what’s going to 

happen is you’re going to have a lot, a lot of kids that are going 

to be falling through the cracks as a result of the standardized 

testing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, but this is certainly concurrent with how this 

government has treated the education system in our province. 

We see universities’ tuition rates going up. Mr. Speaker, the 

first time in years we’ve seen the teachers go on strike. I think it 

was . . . [inaudible] . . . that they held a rally out here, that they 

went on strike over that long period of time because they simply 

had enough of the Sask Party and the way they treat the 

teachers and our schools and our school boards, Mr. Speaker. 

And the list goes on. 

 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3543 

Now the other point I think is really important, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s something that a lot of people seem to have missed, 

Mr. Speaker, and the fact that when you look at the whole 

notion of the result of standardized testing, the minister’s 

saying, oh we’re going to see this for our own internal purposes. 

What happens if a number of schools or a number of regions 

have difficulty in passing the standardized testing process, Mr. 

Speaker? What happens then? Are they going to identify what 

we know already, that there are external pressures that inhibit 

the child’s ability to learn — such as housing, peer pressure, 

drugs, local community problems — all those issues? Those are 

external pressures placed on that student. 

 

So if they’re not able to pass the standardized testing, Mr. 

Speaker, and the schools are struggling with that, what’s going 

to happen? What’s going to happen after that, Mr. Speaker? I’ll 

tell you what’s going to happen. Absolutely nothing, because 

nothing happened before standardized testing to justify 

standardized testing, so you can bet your bottom dollar, Mr. 

Speaker, that nothing’s going to happen after the standardized 

testing is implemented. All they simply want to do is to be able 

to be critical of our teachers. What they’re going to do is to try 

and separate school divisions and separate communities and 

create confusion, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they’re going to do. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, they talk about trying to bridge the 

gap between First Nations and Métis students and that of the 

general population. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what kind of authority does this government 

have if they implement standardized testing to make sure 

standardized testing is applied to the First Nations school? And 

then after they apply it to the First Nations school, what are they 

going to do to resolve the external pressures on that particular 

school? Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s why the teachers out there are saying, why put this 

process in place if you guys don’t know what the game plan is 

before the process and after the process, Mr. Speaker. 

Absolutely no one wanted standardized testing because it places 

an unfair disadvantage on our students. It really, really judges 

the teachers’ performance, which I don’t think is fair to the 

teaching profession, Mr. Speaker, and it inhibits future growth 

of our young people, which is essential to the success of our 

province overall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So once again, the people of Saskatchewan are telling this 

government, we don’t want standardized testing. And the 

minister’s experience in education should demand that he stand 

up. As the minister he should demand to stand up and say, as a 

person that was involved with education to the extent that he 

was involved, we and I don’t fundamentally believe, believe 

that standardized testing is the way to go. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, we see him standing up in the Assembly, 

question period after question period, fumbling through an 

answer that he doesn’t have. Why, Mr. Speaker? He’s being 

told by the conservative-run bench, you will do this. You will 

do this, otherwise you’re out of cabinet. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s exactly my point when I say you’re stifling free thinking. 

You’re stifling really progressive thinking amongst our young 

kids and even to the point where it’s affecting ministers, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s the analogy that I want to make. 

Across the way the minister should have said, look we want to 

make sure our children are educated to the best level possible. 

We want to make sure that they’re free thinkers. We want to 

make sure that they’re exciting. We want to make sure that 

they’re positive. We want to make sure that they’re in school. 

We want to make sure all these positive things happen, Mr. 

Speaker, but there are external pressures on that student. We 

need to recognize that. So let’s address the external pressures, 

such as a crumbling school, such as a crumbling school. That 

would improve attendance. That would improve student 

performance. That would improve attitudes in our school. That 

would make all the world of difference, Mr. Speaker. But 

instead the minister fumbles through the answer and he says, 

the evidence is evident that standardized testing works. Nobody 

asked the minister for that. 

 

So my point is the minister ought to stand up and do the right 

thing and say, based on his educational background, based on 

his experience, discussions with the school board, discussions 

with the teachers, discussions with the parents, and maybe 

involve the students once in a while, Mr. Speaker, that he would 

find that’s got to be the silliest idea ever, to impose 

standardized testing with no backup plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I had the opportunity to attend a few functions with STF, 

Mr. Speaker. And one of the functions that I attended, they got 

a nice gift — I mentioned this earlier in the Assembly — they 

got a nice, decorated box placed at each of their settings at the 

table at this conference and a gift from the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And what it was, Mr. Speaker, was when they 

spent money replacing this ugly green coloured rug here from 

the original red, they cut up little pieces of carpets, little pieces 

of carpets, and they put them in this nice tiny box with bows 

and said, here’s a gift for the teachers. They gave them a piece 

of rug from the Assembly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the teachers were not 

impressed with that gift. That is, that is the primary problem, 

Mr. Speaker, is that as a token of the Sask Party’s appreciation 

towards the teachers, they cut up little pieces of rug, of the old 

red rug here, and they sent it to each of the teachers for a gift,. 

And then they turned around and said, oh now we’ve got 

another gift for you. It’s called standardized testing, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what it’s called, standardized testing. 

 

Now I want to say one thing, Mr. Speaker. What’s really 

important, in northern Saskatchewan when I was growing up, 

attending school, I can tell you right now that as a young 

student what I wanted to do was . . . I was told to go to school 

by my father. You’re going to go to school every day, and if 

you’re not in school, you’re going to go to work. But the 

choices I had was school or work, and I chose to go to school to 

make sure I got my grade 12. 

 

But when I went to school, Mr. Speaker, when I went to school, 

we participated in a number of sports. Basketball, volleyball, 

track, we played them all, Mr. Speaker. And not only did I play 

in those sports, Mr. Speaker, but I also took French, Monsieur 

le Président, one year. Then I joined the chess club, Mr. 

Speaker. And then, Mr. Speaker, we went on school trips. And 

do you think for a moment that all these extracurricular 

activities that the teachers afforded me when I was in school, 

did it have an effect on my attitude and my attendance at 



3544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

school? Absolutely it did, in a very positive way, Mr. Speaker. 

In a very positive way the teachers of Ile-a-la-Crosse or that 

taught in Ile-a-la-Crosse, they had a positive effect and benefit 

on our lives. 

 

And today for me to come along and say, oh we’re going to put 

standardized testing in place now, that is absolutely, Mr. 

Speaker, in the worst way, that’s a betrayal of what the value is 

behind showing the value to our teachers and the value of our 

education system overall, Mr. Speaker. It is a betrayal. It is a 

departure from what I think the minister ought to believe in, 

which is timely, concise, and continual investment to make sure 

that Saskatchewan has the best education system in the country, 

something that we can be proud of. And standardized testing is 

not going to achieve that, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to inhibit that 

opportunity. 

 

Now what’s also really important, Mr. Speaker, is when we talk 

about the universities in general because you want our students 

going to U of S and U of R, Mr. Speaker, and going to SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] as 

well. Mr. Speaker, as we see even those institutions going deep 

in debt and as you see the fact that they’ve got to grapple with 

this debt and layoffs occur, people are saying, well universities, 

you know, how important and valuable are they to 

Saskatchewan? They absolutely are, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just 

the fact that they have a history, that they’re a very proud 

institution in this province but the fact that they have quality 

education. 

 

And as you begin to burden our universities with debt and as 

they begin to grapple with that debt and start firing quality 

teachers, those people leave and go to other areas. And thus you 

affect the quality of education at that particular location. And 

that’s the whole issue that we’re trying to bring up here within 

the NDP is the fact that you’ve got to make sure you have 

timely investment to build on the quality education we have 

now because if you don’t, some of the quality instructors will 

leave. Some of the programs will shut down. And that is a 

deterioration, deterioration of our entire education system right 

from kindergarten to grade school to university and technical 

trade level, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:30] 

 

So the Sask Party’s got to figure this out. And about all they’ve 

been able to do, Mr. Speaker, all they’ve been able to do is talk 

about standardized testing, which nobody wanted. And that’s an 

absolute shame, Mr. Speaker. The minister should free himself 

of the shackles put onto him by that Sask Party government and 

fundamentally stand up and say, I do not believe in standardized 

testing, and the only way that he could support standardized 

testing is if he put all these support mechanisms in place. 

 

Because what’s going to happen to our teaching staff? What’s 

going to happen to our schools? What’s going to happen to the 

First Nations and the Métis people, Mr. Speaker? What’s going 

to happen to a number of people in Saskatchewan that’ll be 

affected negatively by what the Sask Party philosophically 

believes is important to do when they implement this 

standardized testing? Twelve million dollars we could have 

spent somewhere else, $400,000 on PR and spin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say again very loudly and clearly here today that 

the people of Saskatchewan, the school boards, the parents, the 

students, and our institutions that have for years provided good 

quality service and a good education to many of our families, 

Mr. Speaker, they did not ask for standardized testing. And why 

can’t that minister, that Premier, and that government get it 

through their head that this is a wrong thing to do, Mr. Speaker? 

This is a wrong thing to do because (a) they never put the 

supports in place to address the challenges that threaten our 

school system, and (b) they’re not prepared to do anything after 

they do the standardized system testing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again if you look at all these things, look at all these issues, 

our role as a government is to try and attract kids to school. Our 

role as government is to try and enhance extra learning. Our 

role as government is to respect the players — such as STF, the 

teachers, the individual teachers, and the school boards — who 

are taxed with making sure that their school does the right 

thing. We need to respect those players, Mr. Speaker. And 

when we arbitrarily come along and we say, we’re going to put 

the standardized testing in place, and guess what? It’s going to 

cost $12.4 million the first year. When nobody asked for this at 

all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So from every teacher across the province, to every teacher, I 

say this: remember who implemented the standardized testing 

model. It was the Saskatchewan Party government. To every 

teacher across the way, Mr. Speaker: as opposed to respecting 

your rights and supporting your ability to teach our children, 

they send you a piece of rug from the Assembly. To every 

teacher across the way that encouraged, that encouraged 

students to learn not just the math and the sciences and the 

grammar but to learn chess, to learn basketball, you know, to 

learn drama, all the extracurricular activities, they have not 

respected that kind of work. 

 

And about all you can expect from the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker, is standardized testing, something that nobody wanted. 

And today, now we sit here and wonder why this government is 

doing this. Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make any common sense at 

all. They are being driven by their philosophy, Mr. Speaker. 

And at the end of the day, I think what they want to do is rank 

our teachers. They want to rank our schools, and they want to 

rank our kids. For what purposes? I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. 

After they finish their ranking, how are they going to treat some 

of our schools, our teachers, and our students? And I can almost 

guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, based on the conservative 

philosophy, they’re going to take care of their own and forget 

the rest, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I believe is going to happen. 

 

So I point out to the people of Saskatchewan this simple fact: 

the Saskatchewan Party is going to force standardized testing 

down your throat. They have a minister that has an experience 

in education that refuses to stand up for the people that he 

worked with for many, many years. Why? Because he’s told to 

sing from this song sheet and do not deviate from any notes. 

And that’s exactly what he’s doing, which I think is a shame, 

Mr. Speaker. He ought to think one thing, and it’s that he ought 

to be given the free rein to do what he thinks is necessary to 

educate our kids to the point where we’re leading the whole 

nation. I want to see that for my grandkids and for my children, 

Mr. Speaker. We want to all see that. 

 



May 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3545 

But if you put in the penalty-filled proposition attached to 

standardized testing, you’re going to scare off students. You’re 

going to isolate a great number of students that have difficulty 

passing these tests. You’re going to ostracize some of our 

school systems and some of our school boards and some of our 

communities by putting this in place. What’s the whole purpose 

of judging each other, Mr. Speaker, when we can work as a 

collective to build a stronger educational system that’ll serve 

Saskatchewan for many, many years to come. 

 

So on this part, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important that 

people have to know that there is a way that you can defeat the 

Sask Party when it comes to standardized testing. You speak 

up. You speak up and do the media as teachers or parents or 

kids. Get organized, get organized. Go to television or radio. 

Talk to your MLA. Come to the Assembly. Speak to your 

school board. Speak to your MP [Member of Parliament]. 

Speak to whoever you can speak to, Mr. Speaker, and tell them 

we never asked for standardized testing; why are you 

implementing that? 

 

And what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is next time the 

election comes around and some Sask Party guy comes along, 

mention to them the P3s. Mention to them the $19.1 billion. 

Mention that they can’t fix our highways, Mr. Speaker. Mention 

the escalating cost of P3s as I mentioned earlier. Talk to them 

about the challenges that the U of S and the U of R and SIAST 

all face. Talk to them about the record debt that all the 

municipalities are facing now, Mr. Speaker. Talk to them about 

all the programs that we enjoyed once as a province. Why is it 

gone? 

 

And the last point you’d say is, Mr. Candidate, why did you 

guys implement standardized testing when absolutely nobody 

wanted it? You ask him that, Mr. Speaker. You ask him that. 

And when they’re at your doorstep, if they . . . [inaudible] . . . 

give you some solid answers — answers we have not gotten in 

this Assembly because they don’t have an answer — then I 

think the people of Saskatchewan will make up their mind come 

that day, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan, once again 

I’ll say it as loud as I can, they did not want standardized 

testing, especially the money wasted on it.  

 

I don’t know how many more ways I can explain to the minister 

that that’s an absolute shame that he’s standing up advocating 

for that when he knows deep down, based on his experience, 

that there’s different ways that you can challenge the system. 

There’s different ways you can build a stronger education 

system. And one based on shame, on making sure you’re telling 

the teachers to teach to the test and that you stifle future growth, 

that’s not the option, and that’s not the way to go.  

 

And I say today that the same notion, as they stand in their front 

benches, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know who’s pulling the strings 

over there, but this minister ought to have free thinking. And he 

ought to stand up and he’d say, enough of this philosophical 

BS. It doesn’t make any sense. It doesn’t make any sense. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to be careful 

with his remarks and use parliamentary language in debate. I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, I apologize for that 

language, but I have very strong feelings about this, Mr. 

Speaker. As you look at what they’re attempting to do, it is a 

system based on shame. It stifles opportunity for the student and 

for the teacher and, Mr. Speaker, there is no supports 

whatsoever. I don’t know how many more times I’ve got to say 

it. But what I point out, that from their philosophical position, it 

doesn’t make any sense, any sense at all, any common sense at 

all, why they’re implementing standardized testing. 

 

I have no idea where this came from, Mr. Speaker. But I am 

sure that the minister fundamentally and principally doesn’t 

believe in this, but he is forced to sing from that song sheet. 

Because had he been doing a more astute job at being the 

Minister of Education, he’d stand up for the teachers. He’d 

stand up for the school board. He’d stand up for the parents. 

He’d stand up for the students and say, here is a better way to 

achieve better results. Here’s a better way to achieve better 

results as opposed to putting in this standardized testing which 

nobody wanted, Mr. Speaker. Again, nobody wants the 

standardized testing, and yet he insists day after day of getting 

up and saying, it’s a good thing. And he’s wasting valuable 

resource dollars, valuable education dollars to put forward this 

nonsensical strategy called standardized testing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, you look at all these issues, all of these issues. 

Again, I tell the people of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party’s 

honeymoon is over. We’re starting to see that they’re doing a 

lot of things that are not proper, whether it’s P3s which increase 

our debt, whether it’s the debt overall, whether it’s going to war 

with our working people, privatizing the Crowns, not fixing our 

roads, taking home ownership away from many people, Mr. 

Speaker, squandering the opportunity left to them by the NDP 

and the people of Saskatchewan because the Assembly don’t 

know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the worst part, Mr. Speaker, is wasting valuable resources, 

valuable dollars, Mr. Speaker, on things like standardized 

testing. Where did that silly idea come from? And what’s 

worse, Mr. Speaker, is why is that minister, given his history 

with education, supporting that silly concept? That’s what’s 

really confusing and what is totally beyond many of us that 

watch what goes on with our educational system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from my perspective as a member of the NDP, 

I will tell the teachers that you have great strength. I will tell the 

teachers that they have a great strength, Mr. Speaker. I will tell 

the students that they’re the future of Saskatchewan. I will tell 

the school boards that they are tasked with the responsibility of 

putting forward strategies that deal with silly ideas like 

standardized testing, with no control. But they will have 

control, Mr. Speaker. That control will come back. 

 

And I will tell the students above all else that the Saskatchewan 

Party has now squandered and stifled your opportunity to 

become really people that are thinking out of the box, being 

able to think on your own, being able to build on your 

imagination, simply because they’re making you conform to a 

box called standardized testing. You’re being placed in that box 

by the Saskatchewan Party government, and I say to them, 

shame on them. 

 

But to the school board, the parents, the teachers, the students, 

your opportunity to speak up and grade this government on 



3546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2013 

their silly notion of bringing forward a standardized testing 

program will come at the next election. And they come 

knocking on your door, you close that door and say, no we’re 

not talking to you. You didn’t talk to us on the standardized 

testing. We’re not talking to you about politics. We’re going to 

vote NDP. We’re going to make sure you guys never, ever have 

a chance to put any of these philosophical, nonsensical plans in 

place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a lot more I want to say. 

There’s a lot more I want to say, a lot more that I want to say. 

And there’s going to be a lot more . . . The people of 

Saskatchewan is going to speak and speak up in volumes and 

speak en masse, Mr. Speaker, to ensure, to ensure that the Sask 

Party get the message, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the whole notion, the whole notion of these people across 

the way . . . I wonder if they took a standardized test, Mr. 

Speaker, I wonder how many of them would pass a 

standardized test. And I can almost guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, 

half of them would fail. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because they were 

able to maintain their attendance at school because they had 

extracurricular activities. And today now their flagship of 

standardized testing, half the Sask Party caucus, I can guarantee 

you, would fail at standardized tests. And yet it’s something 

that they want to pin their hat on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to do the motion, and the motion reads 

as follows: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to reallocate the 

$12 million being spent on standardized testing towards 

reducing classroom sizes, expanding English as an 

additional language support, supporting more educational 

assistants, and rebuilding crumbling school infrastructure. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the 

members to come to order please. The member from Athabasca 

has moved the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to reallocate the 

$12 million being spent on standardized testing towards 

reducing classroom sizes, expanding English as an 

additional language support, supporting more educational 

assistants, and rebuilding crumbling school infrastructure. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committee this afternoon, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Before I would entertain a motion of 

adjournment, I would invite . . . We have a motion before the 

House, and I’d invite a private member to move adjournment of 

debate . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, okay. The 

Government House Leader has moved adjournment on debate 

of the motion. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’ll recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House Leader has moved that 

this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:45.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3521 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3521 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3521 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3521 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3522 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3522 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3522 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3522 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3522 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 d’Lish by Tish Café 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3522 

 Mother’s Day 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3523 

 Early Childhood Educators Month 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3523 

 Swift Current Physician Leads Simulation Training Centre 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3523 

 Women Entrepreneurs Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3524 

 World Catholic Education Day 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3524 

 Relationship with Rural Saskatchewan 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3524 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3524 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3525 

 Workplace Fatalities and Injuries 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3525 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3526 

 Repairs to School Infrastructure 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3527 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3527 

 Testing Standards and Student Assessment 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3528 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3528 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3529 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Programs that Support People with Disabilities 

  Merriman ...................................................................................................................................................................... 3529, 3538 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3531, 3539 

  Docherty ........................................................................................................................................................................ 3533, 3539 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3534, 3538 

  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3536, 3540 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3537, 3539 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3538 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3539 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3540 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3540 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 5 — Allocation of Spending on Education 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3540 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


