




















































Hansard: November 25, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 18A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4165 

 November 25, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Two 

introductions today of guests that we have in your gallery. First, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a real pleasure to be able to welcome one of 

Canada’s premiers to the Legislative Assembly today. Bob 

McLeod is the Premier of the Northwest Territories. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this: Premier McLeod is a 

clarion voice for the importance of sustainable development in 

Canada, especially around the energy piece. He’s led, frankly, 

the country here and also been a force for good in the United 

States in terms of the whole pipeline discussion and debate 

we’ve had in terms of his support for things like Keystone. But, 

Mr. Speaker, he’s always focused on the sustainability of 

energy development and also the involvement and the 

engagement of Canada’s First Nations and Aboriginal peoples 

in those economic activities. 

 

And he’s become a good friend, Mr. Speaker. He was here for 

the Grey Cup. Came, I think in on Friday and leaves later today. 

And I just want to welcome him here to Saskatchewan, thank 

him for coming to Grey Cup but also to thank him for his 

leadership at the table of Canada’s premiers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, very quickly, we had other, 

many, many guests of course this weekend. We can’t introduce 

them all. But in your gallery as well, joining us from Ontario 

but formerly of the city of Regina are the Evers: father, John 

and daughter, Stephanie. Stephanie is associate producer of 

Power Play, the political . . . The show we political nerds might 

watch in the afternoon on CTV Newsnet. And later today, we’ll 

see Don Martin in a Rider jersey because he made the mistake I 

think of betting with Stephanie about the outcome of the game. 

 

They lived here from ’77 to ’88. She told me when we were 

recently in Ottawa and doing an appearance on or guesting on 

the show, and she said she’d be coming with her dad if they 

made it to the Grey Cup. They are huge Rider fans and, Mr. 

Speaker, she was able to be here with her father for a quick 

tour. And I just want to welcome her and introduce these guests 

to this Legislative Assembly as well today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition I’d like to join with the Premier in 

welcoming Premier McLeod to the Assembly. I’m sure he had a 

great time over the last few days here in our capital city, but I 

also hope that he’s had some good meetings and interactions 

over the course of the time as well. Of course we do share a lot 

of common interests and concerns between Saskatchewan and 

the Northwest Territories. So thank you so much for being here 

today, and I’d also like to welcome you to the Assembly.  

And, Mr. Speaker, also to welcome Stephanie and the Evers 

family to the Assembly. I’m sure you’ve had a wonderful trip 

and have a safe return. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much. I hope 

everybody enjoyed their environment, Mr. Speaker, over the 

last couple of days. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the legislature, I want to introduce a guest that’s in 

your gallery today, a good friend of mine, Orlanda Drebit. 

Orlanda if you want to stand and give us a wave. 

 

Orlanda is a former resident of Saskatchewan. Her career took 

her to Charlottetown, PEI [Prince Edward Island] where she 

works for Veterans Affairs Canada. She’s a graduate of the 

University of Saskatchewan. I know she’s a political, I don’t 

know if I’d say nerd like the Premier said earlier, but yes, sure 

she is. The Premier and Orlanda and I were involved in youth 

politics quite some time ago. 

 

But it’s a pleasure to have her back in her home province. I 

understand she attended the Grey Cup. I see her wearing the 

Tourism Saskatchewan scarf. I know that that will be a popular 

item when she goes back to Prince Edward Island. So, Orlanda, 

thank you for coming to the legislature today, and I ask all 

members to help me welcome her here today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of anti-bullying. And we 

know that bullying causes serious harm, and the consequences 

of bullying include depression, self-harm, addictions, and 

suicide. And we know that bullying can occur within schools 

but also through social media, cellphones, or through the 

Internet, also known as cyberbullying. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives of 

young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of very concerned residents in southern Saskatchewan 

as it relates to the unacceptable closure of the Pasqua Hospital’s 

emergency room. The petition reads as follows: 



4166 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

ensure our capital city has two 24-hour emergency rooms. 

 

And your petitioners humbly pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed by concerned residents from 

Regina, Strasbourg, Wolseley, and Dilke. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefited from the rental 

purchase option program also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their communities. 

 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 

It is signed by many northern residents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. The petitioners point out that the 

gym at Sacred Heart Community School in north central Regina 

is currently closed, having been closed for safety reasons last 

spring. The petitioners are aware that there is a temporary 

solution been provided with refurbishing the old sanctuary at 

the old Sacred Heart Church, but they’re calling for a 

permanent solution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re pointing out that any school needs a gym as a place for 

the school and the community to gather together to engage in 

cultural and educational activities and to promote physical 

activity, which we know is good for the mind, body, and spirit 

of all children. They point out that Sacred Heart Community 

School is the largest school in North Central Regina with 

450-plus students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations and 

Métis. They point out that enrolment has increased by 100-plus 

students over the past four years and that attendance and 

learning outcomes are steadily improving. And they point out 

that, as a matter of basic fairness and common sense, Sacred 

Heart Community School needs a gym. In the prayer that reads 

as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause this government to immediately replace the 

gymnasium of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Estevan. I so present. 

 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 

Leader. 

 

Riders Bring Home the Grey Cup  

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. What a 

historic night in Saskatchewan last night. Our beloved green 

and white brought home the Grey Cup, brought it home by 

crushing the Hamilton Tiger-Cats 45 to 23. The sellout crowd 

of 44,710 would have qualified as the third-largest city in 

Saskatchewan, I think collectively the loudest last night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know this was Grey Cup 101. And it was 

fitting as the Riders gave the Ticats a few lessons in football 

101, I think. Kory Sheets earned MVP [most valuable player] 

honours after running 20 times for a Grey Cup record 197 yards 

and two touchdowns. Regina’s Chris Getzlaf, playing at home, 

was the top Canadian after having three receptions for 78 yards. 

I think it’s important to know, Mr. Speaker, there were 10 

Saskatchewan players on the roster yesterday, and they’ll have 

their names engraved on the Grey Cup trophy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A key to the team’s success was its play on second down, 

converting 9 of 14 opportunities, compared to just 2 of 11 for 

Hamilton. The Riders 31 to 6 lead at halftime was the second 

largest in Grey Cup history, again underscoring their dominant 

performance. 

 

Players and coaches worked hard obviously for last night’s win, 

and they should be proud of how they’ve represented our 

province. They will join the other championship teams from 

’66, ’89, ’07, in the long and proud history of the Roughriders 

football. 

 

The devoted fans who filled Mosaic Stadium and the Green 

Mile afterwards also certainly deserve this win. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate all the players, coaches, 

management, and the staff of the Roughriders but of course, 

most of all, the loyal fans of the Roughrider nation. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a little history was made 

yesterday in our province on Taylor Field at Mosaic Stadium 

with a huge home turf Grey Cup victory by our team, the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. It was a dominant 45-23 win over 

the Hamilton Ticats before a sea of green of more than 44,000 

fans. Names like Durant, Chamblin, Sheets, Dressler, Getzlaf, 

and Heenan and many more will go down in history as legends 

and heroes in Rider nation. This was a game for the ages as the 

elated and proud Rider nation was able to win the first Grey 

Cup on home soil. 

 

Kory Sheets was named MVP as he was unstoppable on the 

ground and broke the Grey Cup rushing yardage record. 

Regina’s own Chris Getzlaf was the game’s top Canadian, and 

Saskatchewan’s defence was a powerful force. In fact in the 

first half, the Riders held Hamilton to just three yards rushing 

and five first downs. 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4167 

I was pleased to attend the game along with the Leader of the 

Opposition and many other members of our caucus. It’s fair to 

say that the atmosphere was electric, and there was no question 

that the fans played their part. And so did the weather, which I 

know was embraced by the fans at the game and those that 

celebrated into the night as they marched the Green Mile.  

 

I ask all in this Assembly to join with me in celebrating the 

Grey Cup in Rider nation and recognizing the coaches, players, 

directors, management, as well as the legions of volunteers and 

fans that made for a historic victory and an exceptional festival 

week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Thanks to Grey Cup Organizing Committee  

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s only one 

thing left to do after the events of the past week and weekend, 

and that’s thank the 2013 Grey Cup organizing committee. 

While it was the job of the Riders to ensure the weekend ended 

perfectly, the committee started work long before last week. 

The event was over two years in the making and went off 

without a hitch, thanks to the countless hours donated by the 

over 2,400 volunteers and the whole organizing committee. 

 

We are quite confident, Mr. Speaker, that last night will go 

down in Grey Cup history as a huge success. The whole 

organizing team did a fantastic job of showcasing Regina’s 

legendary hospitality. Mr. Speaker, it was a pleasure to be able 

to take part in Grey Cup 101 and see first-hand all of the hard 

work done by each and every committee member. From the 

parade down to downtown festival, from the Atlantic Schooner 

house to Riderville, you saw smiling volunteers everywhere. 

 

It was a huge challenge to follow up the 100th Grey Cup in 

Toronto, but the Celebration in Rider nation will be 

remembered for a long, long time. As always, Mr. Speaker, the 

volunteers across Saskatchewan answered the call and 

showcased our province to the country. 

 

Grey Cup is a tradition that attracts fans from across the country 

for one amazing week every year, culminating in a world-class 

sporting event. Thanks to the organizing committee who 

worked hard and guaranteed our friends from across Canada 

saw the spirit of Saskatchewan on full display. I ask all 

members to join me in recognizing the entire Grey Cup 2013 

organizing committee for working so hard to ensure this year’s 

event was a huge success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against 

Women  

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

recognizing the International Day for the Elimination of 

Violence against Women. In December 1999 the United 

Nations General Assembly declared a symbolic day to raise 

public awareness of the reality that violence against women is 

still a global pandemic. 

 

Up to 70 per cent of women experience violence in their 

lifetime that includes physical, sexual, economic, and 

psychological abuse. These forms of violence are interrelated 

and affect women of all ages across the globe. It’s a horrifying 

picture, Mr. Speaker. Almost 50 per cent of the sexual assaults 

worldwide are committed against girls under 16; 603 million 

women live in countries where domestic violence isn’t a crime. 

As many as one in four women worldwide experience physical 

or sexual violence during pregnancy. Eighty per cent of people 

trafficked across national borders are women, and 79 per cent of 

these are trafficked for sexual exploitation. And a full 7 out of 

10 women worldwide experience physical or sexual abuse at 

some point in their lifetime. It’s simply unacceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This year the United Nations Unite campaign is identifying 16 

days of activism against gender-based violence starting today 

through to Human Rights Day on December 10th. Mr. Speaker, 

women, their families, communities, and nations are 

impoverished as a result of this violence. I ask all members to 

join me in working to eradicate these unfortunate realities and 

the discrimination against women that perpetuates this vicious 

cycle. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Lawyer Honoured by Canadian Football League  

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 

in the House today to recognize prominent Melfort lawyer and a 

good friend, Bill Selnes. Bill is a dedicated member of the 

Melfort community. He is involved in many organizations, 

including the Rotary and the library board and several others. 

He has also written a column for the Melfort Journal for the last 

35 years centred on football. His popular column brings great 

depth and insight into what we all know as Rider nation. 

 

Yesterday morning, Bill was awarded an honour that no weekly 

community newspaper columnist has never ever had in the 

101-year history of the CFL [Canadian Football League]. Bill 

was inducted into the Football Reporters of Canada wing of the 

CFL Hall of Fame prior to one of the greatest moments in 

Roughrider history, hosting and winning the 2013 Grey Cup. 

He was honoured for his . . . 101st Grey Cup in 2013. 

 

He was honoured for his work covering the Riders over 35 

years, but he was also honoured for his contributions in other 

ways, including helping the league draft their first media policy 

a few years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing and 

congratulating Bill Selnes on this great achievement and for his 

long-time contributions to the Canadian Football League. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Headstart on a Home Program in Watrous  

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 



4168 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

the House today to talk about the opening of a new housing 

development in Watrous under our government’s Headstart on a 

Home program, Manitou Lodge’s new condominium project 

that will allow 24 individuals and families to have a home to 

call their own, some for the very first time. 

 

Our government provided 2.6 million in financing assistance to 

the developer, Riverwood Development Corporation, to move 

this project forward. This partnership underlines our 

government’s resolve to meet the current and future housing 

needs of Saskatchewan people and address the challenges of 

growth. 

 

And there’s a strong demand for this program. Headstart was 

expected to create 1,000 new housing units in five years. To the 

end of October, Headstart has financed 912 new housing units, 

either completed or under construction, in less than three years. 

We are proud of this success, but most importantly we are 

proud to help more individuals and families to achieve their 

dream of home ownership. 

 

We believe that safe, quality housing is a key part of ensuring 

that Saskatchewan continues to be the best place to live, work, 

and raise a family, and Headstart is a means to help make that 

happen. 

 

I also want to ask the members to help to congratulate Watrous 

for looking forward and moving this project, having the 

initiative to move this project forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week  

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise today 

to recognize that November 25th to 29th is Saskatchewan 

Manufacturing Week. This week showcases the province’s 

high-tech, globally competitive manufacturing sector that is 

contributing, along with agriculture and resource production, to 

making Saskatchewan’s economy one of the growth leaders in 

Canada. 

 

The sector is responsible for thousands of jobs, billions of 

dollars in exports, and establishing the made-in-Saskatchewan 

brand as a mark of quality around the world, and it will be 

profiled this week with events around the province. Some 

events include New Holland Saskatoon school tour, Dumur 

Industries school tour, and speakers in Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

Manufacturing Week is a partnership among the Ministry of the 

Economy, the Regina Regional Opportunities Commission, the 

Saskatoon Industry Education Council, the Saskatchewan Trade 

and Export Partnership, and participating corporate sponsors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this sector employs more than 27,000 people in 

highly skilled jobs throughout Saskatchewan and generated 

approximately $14.2 billion in shipments in 2012. 

 

September was a record-breaking month for Saskatchewan’s 

manufacturing sales numbers, with a 9 per cent increase over 

August of 2013, totalling $1.3 billion. These were the strongest 

figures yet for 2013, Mr. Speaker, and put Saskatchewan in 

second place among all of the provinces. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 

Manufacturing Week and this sector’s vital contributions to our 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Roughly 230,000 

people live in Regina and the surrounding area. As of this 

Thursday, Mr. Speaker, between the hours of 7:30 in the 

evening and 8 in the morning, those 230,000 people will have 

just one place to go for emergency medical care. My question to 

the Premier: how on earth is this acceptable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious 

situation that we’re facing here in the capital city. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s why we have made this particular issue a top priority of the 

government, not just currently but since we were first elected, 

Mr. Speaker, beginning with actually putting a priority on 

training more emergency room doctors here and providing more 

residency positions for those emergency room doctors, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I would also note that the member’s not quite right in 

terms of his preamble. Certainly this is a serious situation and a 

rationalizing of an important service. However, Mr. Speaker, 

the Meadow Primary Health Care Centre, located in the inner 

city here in Regina right across from the Pasqua, is open seven 

days a week from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., Mr. Speaker. And we want 

the residents of Regina to be aware of that fact as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, emergencies can certainly happen 

after 9 p.m., Mr. Speaker. Many of those individuals would be 

accustomed and used to going to the Pasqua ER [emergency 

room] for medical services. If someone, Mr. Speaker, shows 

symptoms of a heart attack or a stroke and they show up at the 

Pasqua ER in the evening after 7:30 p.m. to 8 in the morning, 

Mr. Speaker, an ambulance will be called. Just one 24-hour 

emergency room for about 230,000 people. And if you show up 

at the Pasqua ER after 7:30 in the evening, Mr. Speaker, with a 

life-threatening condition, they’ll call an ambulance for you. 

 

Despite a strong economy, Mr. Speaker, this is the state of 

health care in our capital city under this government. My 

question to the Premier: how is it that his government has 

allowed the crisis to reach this point? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again we need to 

correct the record. This is a very . . . This is a serious time in the 

city of Regina for those who are going to need emergency care, 

Mr. Speaker. And more on what’s happening currently and 

what we’re doing in the short, mid, and the long term on this 

issue. I’ve been working on it for a very long time. 

 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4169 

Mr. Speaker, EMTs [emergency medical technician] will be at 

the facility. They will be there if anyone presents with any of 

the symptoms the Leader of the Opposition is suggesting to 

immediately take them to the care that they’re going to need, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s an important distinction, and what we . . . 

These are fair questions and ones the government should have 

to answer. But what we’re not helped by is the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] torquing, frankly, the question. So let’s make 

sure we’re dealing with the facts, acknowledging that the facts 

are serious enough. There will be EMT people there in the 

emergency room to provide people care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 2008-09 we approved four seats, four training seats for 

emergency residents, for emergency doc residents. That’s a 

doubling of the number under the previous government. Then 

we went to six in ’09-10. Then we went to eight in ’10-11. Mr. 

Speaker, 2010 we’ll begin training two Royal College residents, 

you know, the five-year program for emergency docs, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what we’re doing with the dividends of growth, 

acknowledging more work needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s also current activity under way in terms of sectional 

meetings with the doctors in question, Mr. Speaker. And we 

will continue to make this situation, not just for today but for 

the long term, a top priority of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if someone shows up at the 

Pasqua ER with symptoms of a heart attack, yes, they might 

need an EMT, Mr. Speaker. They also need an ER doc. They 

also need a fully operating emergency room, Mr. Speaker. They 

don’t need an ambulance to ride over to the Regina General 

Hospital. 

 

Just a few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, we heard that front-line 

nurses are afraid for patient safety. Tracy Zambory, the 

president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, says that the 

pressure in our major hospitals is already immense. And she 

had this to say: “What nurses are telling us about the pressure is 

that they are very fearful for patient safety. They are very 

fearful that there is going to be a tragic event happening.” 

 

So now with this decision, Mr. Speaker, the pressure is going to 

be even greater at the General Hospital. My question to the 

Premier: can he guarantee that the General Hospital ER can 

cope with the situation, and can the Premier guarantee that 

patient safety will not be compromised? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

know the shortage of emergency doctors is a national problem 

that we’re facing. It’s a North American problem as well. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s why we have focused on training more 

emergency docs here through the residency positions that I’ve 

already highlighted. It’s also why we have a Physician 

Recruitment Agency in place that is working on issues like 

retention so that now three out of four of those doctors being 

trained in residency programs are choosing to stay here, which 

is a vast improvement over where we were at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the health region has a plan for this particular time 

we’re facing, this serious time we’re facing. That plan includes 

to provide the best possible care, Mr. Speaker, for people who 

are presenting with an emergency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also point this out. We do need to make this a top 

priority, not just in terms of action by the health region and by 

the government, but certainly a priority for debate. But the 

context is this, Mr. Speaker. The context is a health care system 

in our capital city, in the city of Regina, that has never fully 

recovered to its full potential after members opposite closed the 

Plains hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, talking about medical training, 

it’s under this government, Mr. Speaker, that we see the College 

of Medicine put on probation, Mr. Speaker. We talk about, Mr. 

Speaker . . . All we used to hear from this government, Mr. 

Speaker, was talk about being ready for growth. But once again, 

Mr. Speaker, we see this government being ready for excuses, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the closure of the Pasqua ER will not only affect 

the roughly 230,000 people that live in Regina and area, but we 

also know, Mr. Speaker, that this will have a significant effect 

on patients throughout southern Saskatchewan. The health 

region has said that it will refine the process for transfers to 

Regina hospitals, but we don’t know what that means. My 

question to the Premier: how will the closure of the Pasqua ER 

affect rural patients, especially those throughout southern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, every time I get up after that 

member takes to his feet, you have to fact check. The very first 

occasion for the College of Medicine to go on probation was 

when members opposite were the government of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. The very first time that rural patients in southern 

Saskatchewan faced a huge challenge because of a decision 

taken in terms of Regina health care is when members opposite 

closed the Plains hospital in this city, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are plans in place to deal with this emergency situation, 

as there should be. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the health 

region and the government are making a priority of the issue so 

that it can be resolved as quickly as possible. There are 

sectional meetings happening, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

doctors, in terms of the process under way with the contract. 

 

And in the meantime, provisions have been made in terms of 

those who will present at Pasqua in terms of EMTs on site. We 

also have the medical clinic there operating seven days a week 

from 9 to 9 p.m. with emergency capacity. Mr. Speaker, we do 

take this issue very, very seriously, and we’re continuing to 

make it a top priority for the Government of Saskatchewan.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, once upon a time this Premier 

talked about being ready for growth. Now, Mr. Speaker, this 

Premier talks about being ready for excuses, Mr. Speaker. 



4170 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

It doesn’t make sense. Our economy is strong, Mr. Speaker. 

Regina continues to grow. Yet here in our capital city, Mr. 

Speaker, just one 24-hour emergency room available for Regina 

patients. And that’s in the immediate area, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

not taking into consideration rural patients throughout southern 

Saskatchewan that are transferred to the city. 

 

The editorial in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, echoed what 

many people are thinking, and it said this, “All in all, this is a 

very unsatisfactory, not to say worrisome, state of affairs in a 

fast growing city like ours.” To the Premier: when the economy 

is strong, when government revenues are up significantly, when 

the city of Regina continues to grow, why should our capital 

city have only one 24-hour emergency room? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 

Opposition asked about southern Saskatchewan health care in 

his previous question. I have a quote here from the CEO [chief 

executive officer] of the Sun Country Health Region, 

headquartered of course in Weyburn. She says: 

 

It likely won’t have any change in our practices. We do 

already have an interfacility process that’s in place 

between Regina Qu’Appelle and Sun Country. Basically, 

the connections are all made by telephone first — and then 

the specialist would direct us to where the patient needs to 

be sent.  

 

She added Sun Country patients needing to go to a Regina ER 

can be sent to the Regina General, and the direct admissions are 

continuing right into the Pasqua. Mr. Speaker, this would be 

similar for other health care regions in the South. 

 

And to the member’s current question, let me just say this. 

What have we been doing with the dividends of growth in this 

province, unprecedented growth? Well we’ve doubled the 

number of residency positions that we had under the NDP. 

Under the NDP, we were training two emergency doc 

residencies per year, funding two positions — two. I wonder 

how we got into this situation, Mr. Speaker. We doubled it in 

’08, Mr. Speaker. We doubled it again the next year. We’ve 

doubled it again the next year. We’ve also added now the 

five-year program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition to that, there are 70 per cent more doctors practising 

than there were under the NDP, 1,000 more nurses, $70 million 

almost each and every year for the surgical wait times initiative 

to improve health care in the province. That’s what we’re 

doing, Mr. Speaker, with the dividends of growth. That’s how 

we’re improving health care, Mr. Speaker, and we will deal 

with the current situation with respect to emergency docs as 

well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, not only is the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, involved now simply blaming as opposed to taking 

responsibility. But  earlier on, Mr.  Speaker, he said about  what 

 

services would be available at the Pasqua after hours. A quote 

from the Leader–Post from November 22nd, 2013 on A1: 

 

No doctors or other health-care professionals will be at the 

Pasqua’s emergency department between 7:30 p.m. and 8 

a.m. A person other than a health-care professional will 

direct patients who show up at the Pasqua’s ER during the 

night to the General’s emergency room.  

 

“If there is any difficulty in terms of that individual, a 

paramedic will be summoned,” McCutcheon said.  

 

Seriously ill patients who arrive at the Pasqua when the 

emergency room is closed will be transported to the 

General Hospital by EMS at no cost to the patient.  

 

My question to the Premier: how is it acceptable if someone 

shows up at the Pasqua ER after hours with a life-threatening 

condition, Mr. Speaker, that they’re simply transferred over to 

the Regina General?  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Health minister’s just confirmed for me that Dr. McCutcheon 

has confirmed that there will be paramedic coverage at the 

Pasqua after the hour. There will be EMTs on site. 

 

So let’s have this debate. The questions are absolutely fair and 

on point, given what’s going on in the province. To ask them is 

fair. But let’s stay on point, Mr. Speaker, so people tuning in to 

the debate, the discussion, will have the facts and will know the 

truth and will know exactly what they can expect when they go 

to the emergency room, Mr. Speaker. They can do that there at 

Pasqua, Mr. Speaker, and they can also receive until 9 o’clock 

every night emergency medical condition as well at the 

Meadow Primary Care Centre and of course at the Regina 

General.  

 

And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the questions about what’s 

happening in southern Saskatchewan in terms of emergent care, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there is a government in recent 

history that has made a bigger priority out of emergency care 

for rural Saskatchewan, for southern Saskatchewan, and . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, and the impact . . . And there is a 

great impact on Regina. It was his, Mr. Speaker, it was their 

question about the connection between Regina and rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen investments in rural health care. We 

see now in the province STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society] getting to people in a timely way when they need it, 

Mr. Speaker. Emergency care is important there. It’s absolutely 

important in the capital city, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’re 

making it the priority that it is for the government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4171 

Health Care Conditions 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, blocked emergency rooms are a 

symptom that the entire health care system is not working 

properly. The Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians 

says, “. . . the root cause of overcrowding in most regions is the 

lack of availability of acute care beds on hospital wards and in 

Intensive Care Units.”  

 

And Drew McDonald knows this all too well. Drew recently 

had a brain biopsy at Royal University Hospital and he had a 

horrible experience, in part because of overcrowding. Drew 

says, “The hospital is over capacity. If it was a restaurant or a 

bar, the fire marshal would be closing it down due to fire 

safety.” 

 

To the Health minister: when will this government actually 

address the overcrowding crisis that is plaguing our hospitals? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this government has worked extremely hard to dig our 

way out of a health care deficit left by the previous government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In six years of government, Mr. Speaker, we have added $1 

billion to the health regions budget. Mr. Speaker, that has 

allowed the health regions to do a number of things, including, 

Mr. Speaker, in the city of Regina, for example, the number of 

acute care beds in the city of Regina is up 19 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from where we came from though, six years ago 

when the members opposite were the government of the day, 

the number of acute care beds dropped in this province by 15 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. So we’ve had to fill out, we’ve had to fill 

for that, backfill those reduced number of beds, 15 per cent 

reduction, and increase to take the place of population growth, 

Mr. Speaker. So there is more work to be done, but we have 

increased the number of acute care beds in our major cities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Drew McDonald requested a 

private room because he was having brain surgery and he has 

seizures. Noise and lights are often unbearable to him. But 

despite desperately needing it, Drew never got a private room. 

Instead he was put in a semi-private room which had a third bed 

crammed into it because of the overcrowding crisis. In order to 

properly rest, Drew had to get himself to the library in the 

Academic Health Sciences Building next to the Royal 

University Hospital. 

 

To the minister: does he think it’s acceptable that brain surgery 

patients have to take refuge in the library in another building in 

order to properly rest? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, within our acute care facilities, I know our health 

regions and our health support workers, Mr. Speaker, do what 

they can to accommodate all of our patients, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges that we know that we’re 

facing within Saskatchewan are bed blockers, those people that 

are taking up beds, Mr. Speaker, waiting for either long-term 

care placement or being discharged back home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last two years the number of individuals 

who are tying up beds is down 21 per cent in the Saskatoon 

Health Region, within Saskatoon hospitals. Mr. Speaker, that 

has been as a result, in a large part, Mr. Speaker, of the 

tremendous financial support from this government to our 

health regions, Mr. Speaker, where for instance Saskatoon 

Health Region has seen a 50 per cent increase in their budget in 

just six years, Mr. Speaker, that has allowed them to open 

additional beds, to move individuals to other beds, to pay for, 

Mr. Speaker, additional long-term care beds, and to hire the 

appropriate level of staff, Mr. Speaker. More work to be done, 

but we’ve come a long way from the time of the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Drew says: 

 

I am still waiting for any info on my test results and the 

future of my life. Yet I have already received a bill for a 

semi-private room that I was in for half the time in RUH, 

and for the most part had three beds in it, with the poor 

third guy with the head of his bed 4 feet or less across from 

the bathroom door in this room. 

 

So the government was quick to send Drew a bill for a 

semi-private room, even though that room had an extra bed 

crammed into it. He had to go to the library to be able to 

properly rest, and he is still waiting for his test results. To the 

Health minister: when will this government ensure that the rest 

of this health care system is as efficient as the billing 

department is? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know the specifics of this case, but my office 

would be happy to look into this matter, Mr. Speaker, work 

with the quality of care coordinator from Saskatoon Health 

Region and determine what we may be able to do to help 

alleviate the situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, our health regions are using additional 

dollars, record levels of funding from the Government of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to make improvements, knowing 

that we have more work to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But for instance in our emergency rooms in Saskatoon, a 58 per 

cent reduction in ER wait times for cardiac patients presenting 

at RUH [Royal University Hospital], a 50 per cent reduction in 

wait time at RUH for patients with mental health and/or 

addictions, Mr. Speaker, and a 90 per cent reduction in the 

amount of time that ambulance drivers spend waiting for the 

handover to ER personnel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know these are some examples, just a few examples of some 



4172 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

of the work that we’re doing to make the system more efficient, 

Mr. Speaker, and to improve the experience of patients. But I 

would be pleased to look into the specific case of the member. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, strangely the Highways 

minister keeps pointing to Alberta as some sort of great 

example of how P3 schools work. Yet we know that every 

single opposition party in Alberta opposes the Alberta 

government’s P3 scheme. That’s every single opposition party 

— Democrats, Liberals, even the Wildrose party. 

 

One of the big problems with the Alberta P3 school scheme is 

that the province has received just one bidder, and yet they’re 

forging ahead. To the Education minister: with so much 

opposition to the Alberta P3 school scheme, why does his 

government keep holding it up as some sort of shining 

example? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

reviewed this file a number of times in previous questions, Mr. 

Speaker. The facts haven’t changed. 

 

Alberta started with one bundle. They saw great savings. 

Because of that, they went to a bundle no. 2. They went to a 

bundle no. 3. They’re on their fourth bundle, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re aware that only one bidder bid on the fourth bundle, Mr. 

Speaker, but they have saved millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

Not only have they saved millions of dollars but they’ve got the 

infrastructure in place for a growing province in Alberta. 

 

The members opposite would never understand that, Mr. 

Speaker, because under their watch, all they saw was decline in 

population of the province’s population and of the education 

population, Mr. Speaker. We have challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve got to get these schools built because they’re needed 

now, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’re moving ahead with 

P3s. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the three 

opposition parties, school board members, and community 

groups that oppose the Alberta government’s P3 school scheme. 

The Canadian Taxpayers Federation opposes the scheme also. 

Here’s what Derek Fildebrandt of the Canadian Taxpayers 

Federation says: 

 

These children are going to be paying for these schools 

long after they’ve graduated and are in the workforce. 

 

We should not be putting this on the credit card. The 

province has the revenue capacity to build schools. They 

just don’t have the willpower to prioritize building them. 

 

To the Education minister: how can he stand by a short-sighted 

scheme that so many are opposed to and with so many 

problems? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I always find it 

interesting what comes from the other side. Probably not a lot 

of times that the opposition has been quoting the Canadian 

Taxpayers Federation, Mr. Speaker. I certainly think they’re 

much more aligned with CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 

Employees], and we know that’s where this line of questioning 

keeps coming from. 

 

We saw the debates here in Regina with the P3 waste water 

treatment plant. It was very evident that the people of Regina 

wanted to move forward with the infrastructure right now, Mr. 

Speaker, as do the people of the province want to see us move 

forward with education infrastructure, whether it’s long-term 

care infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the provincial 

hospital in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. Those are also 

possible P3s, as well as the east Regina bypass. It’s interesting, 

Mr. Speaker, that in all these questions, they haven’t asked a 

word about those P3s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re worried about schools and education. So are we. That’s 

why we’re building them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, the minister arrogantly 

brushes off concerns and does so in a way that really rejects 

what we’re hearing from a broad stakeholder group. Who’s 

concerned about P3 schools in Alberta and across Canada? He 

suggests one group that has some concern. How about the 

school boards? How about the community members? How 

about the construction industry that I know have spoken with 

that member, and certainly the Canadian Taxpayers Federation 

as well? And we know parents, students, and teachers have 

concerns as well. When will that minister stop arrogantly 

brushing off the real concerns of Saskatchewan and Canadian 

residents? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have met with the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association. I have met with a 

number of different private companies, Mr. Speaker, and they 

want to make sure they get a piece of the pie. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they will, Mr. Speaker, because the pie is getting bigger every 

day in this province, unlike the NDP, Mr. Speaker, when it got 

smaller and smaller and smaller. In fact what many of them do 

say, Mr. Speaker, is we survived through the dark days of the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. We like the way it’s going now. We want to 

see you continue to build. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I heard those concerns. We take those into 

consideration as we move forward. But I can tell the people, 

Mr. Speaker, whether it’s in the construction business or 

anywhere else, that if it was in same old NDP, those schools 

would not be built. In fact we’d be closing schools under the 

NDP. 

 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4173 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, more nonsense from the 

Highways minister on an area that people deserve answers from 

the Education minister. 

 

The Canadian Taxpayers Federation is concerned that the 

Alberta government is putting schools on the credit card, and 

that’s exactly what that government is doing. Just like in 

Alberta, students here will be paying for these schools long 

after they’ve graduated and are in the workforce. 

 

We know Alberta school board members and community 

groups are opposed, and you would think it would give this 

government just a bit of pause that even the Canadian 

Taxpayers Federation is offside with the P3 school schemes. 

Yet it just keeps plowing ahead. So my question to the 

Education minister: if that government is so confident in its P3 

schools scheme, then why won’t they support the NDP bill, put 

some daylight on their plan, and provide Saskatchewan people 

with the upfront, independent accountability and transparency 

that they deserve? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there is a process for 

moving forward with P3s. That’s what our government is doing, 

whether it’s value-for-money qualifications, Mr. Speaker, 

whether it’s a fairness officer. All these lessons have been 

learned by other provinces that entered into P3s many years 

ago. Since 2004 they have been very, very effective across the 

country. We see both municipal and we see provincial 

governments moving forward, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

would only be the Opposition Leader that would call for a new 

school 54 times — he read petitions, Mr. Speaker, 54 times — 

and we’re building it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — And now we will have . . . Order. We will 

now have the opportunities for debate, for members to stand up 

rather than just hollering from their chairs. Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To request leave, Mr. Speaker, to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 

east gallery, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you someone that entered in just before the debate started here 

today, and certainly a good friend of mine and constituent, and 

that would be Dave Coleman, former teacher, retired teacher, 

and someone that’s highly involved in the sporting community 

of this province as well, and all sorts of Masters competition. 

He’s a pretty good hockey player to this day, and it’s a pleasure 

to have him join the Assembly here today. Certainly him and 

his wife Jean are important within our community. Their 

daughter Glenda is a successful young person who I always 

enjoy connecting with. 

 

And I also understand he’s joined by someone I believe from 

Charlottetown here today who is here to take in the Grey Cup 

here yesterday. I believe he’s a retired teacher, and it’s a 

pleasure to welcome him to his Assembly as well. So I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join with me in welcoming Dave 

Coleman and our guest to the Saskatchewan Assembly. Thank 

you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 116, the municipalities amendment Act, 

2013. This Act provides a legislative framework through which 

Saskatchewan’s towns, villages, resort villages, and rural 

municipalities exercise their powers and provide services to the 

residents of their respective communities. 

 

Communities and local governments are an important part of 

Saskatchewan’s plan for growth and are on the front lines of the 

growth Saskatchewan is experiencing, growth that has made 

Saskatchewan the second fastest growing province in Canada 

and that has seen our province’s population surpass the 1.1 

million mark for the first time ever. And it is in this context that 

these amendments to The Municipalities Act are being 

proposed. 

 

The purpose of those amendments in this bill is to strengthen 

the legislation of five key areas. First, they will provide better 

criteria on which to determine whether unincorporated 

communities and areas have sufficient capacity for local 

governance and municipal status. Second, they will provide 

objective criteria for action when municipalities are no longer 

able to function and meet their statutory requirements as local 

governments. Third, they will provide more flexibility and 

choice for interested urban and rural municipalities to 

voluntarily restructure to form a new type of municipality 

known as a municipal district. Fourth, they will provide a new 

means for citizens with concerns about the financial or 

operational management of their municipality to have these 

concerns addressed locally. And fifth, they will enhance 

property owners’ and the minister’s ability to ensure municipal 

compliance with legislation and regulations and constrain the 

potential misuse of local property tax tools and tax abatements. 

 

In addition, the proposed amendments include changes to 

definitions and other provisions to ensure consistency with 



4174 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

recent changes made to regulations in other statutes. 

 

I will expand briefly on the amendments in each of these areas. 

First the amendments related to incorporation criteria propose 

two things. One, they will introduce criteria for the 

establishment of an unincorporated community as an organized 

hamlet. Currently there is no criteria for the Minister of 

Government Relations to base his or her decision on whether a 

community has sufficient capacity to meet the legislative 

requirements of an organized hamlet. 

 

In some cases, an organized hamlet can be essentially a training 

ground for an unincorporated community to demonstrate it can 

meet legislative requirements prior to becoming a village or 

resort village. This includes holding meetings, preparing annual 

financial statements and budgets, and reporting on its activities 

to the public and the municipality in which it’s situated. Having 

a minimum population will be one criteria and is generally 

accepted as one measure of whether an unincorporated 

community can fulfill the legislative requirements of a 

municipal government. Others include minimum dwellings or 

business premises and minimum taxable assessment to ensure 

the available tax base is sufficient to support service delivery. 

The specific criteria will be set out in regulation after further 

consultation with the municipal sector. 

 

The second thing this group of amendments will do is provide 

for the criteria to incorporate new villages and resort villages to 

be set in regulation. This is to ensure sufficient capacity for 

governance and for meeting the challenges and opportunities 

associated with growth. The current criteria for villages and 

resort village incorporation: 100 persons, 50 separate dwelling 

or business premises, and a minimum taxable assessment of 15 

million. It’s been in place for a long time without change, at 

least since 1930. 

 

Increasingly my ministry finds smaller communities, 

particularly those under 300 population, struggle to operate 

independently and generate sufficient own source revenue to 

deliver services, fund infrastructure, and retain qualified 

administration. They have difficulty meeting financial, 

reporting, and other statutory requirements. Updating this 

criteria to better reflect the capacity and growth occurring in our 

smaller urban communities throughout the province is long 

overdue. 

 

And as with the proposed organized hamlet criteria I just 

mentioned, the increased criteria for villages and resort villages 

will be set out in regulation after further consultation with the 

municipal sector. I want to point out here that the changes to 

incorporation criteria will not affect existing organized hamlets 

or existing villages and resort villages. They will apply to new 

municipal entities going forward to help ensure their future 

success as local governments in providing the services, 

facilities, infrastructure, and administration desired by their 

residents and ratepayers. 

 

The next area of amendments is also intended to ensure our 

province’s municipalities have sufficient capacity for 

governance. We recognize that growth does not occur evenly 

and that some communities struggle with declining population 

and meeting their legislative obligations. These amendments 

propose to require a council to act and potentially dissolve its 

municipality if it’s non-compliant with specified statutory 

requirements for two or more consecutive years and if it no 

longer meets a minimum population for two consecutive 

censuses. 

 

I want to be clear that both conditions must be in place before 

that provision comes into effect. The municipality must be in 

non-compliance and be below the minimum population that will 

be set out in regulation after more consultation with the 

municipal sector. Municipalities under the minimum population 

that demonstrate compliance with legislative responsibilities 

and requirements would not be affected. Rural municipalities 

that demonstrate compliance with legislative responsibilities 

and requirements would also not be affected. Both are clearly 

still functioning as local governments and can continue to meet 

their residents’ needs. 

 

The specific statutory requirements, minimum population, and 

applicable census periods would be set in regulations after 

further consultation with the municipal sector. These 

amendments are intended to place the onus on councils as the 

leaders of their communities to initiate and lead change 

processes if their local governments cannot meet legislated 

requirements.  

 

My ministry currently notifies these municipalities and their 

elected and appointed officials of compliance and capacity 

issues and identifies potential solutions to these issues. It will 

continue to do so. The amendments will strengthen these 

processes. Every opportunity will be given to councils to 

become compliant with their statutory requirements or prepare 

for and lead change for their communities. If a council doesn’t 

act, the amendments will provide clear authority for the 

minister to initiate a dissolution if compliance issues are not 

addressed within a specified period of time. 

 

I want to note here that the vast majority of municipalities do 

comply with their legislative requirements. But when that isn’t 

the case, councils need to act to address the issue, or if the 

municipality is no longer able to meet its statutory obligations, 

councils are in the best position to make decisions in the 

interests of their community and its residents. 

 

I acknowledge these may be difficult decisions, but the ministry 

will be more than willing to work with municipalities in these 

situations to identify and help implement solutions. These 

solutions may include partnering with other municipalities, 

using existing mechanisms and legislation. This may achieve 

economies of scale and administration and the delivery of 

services through joint administration and shared-services 

agreements, additional service areas, or voluntary restructuring. 

 

The third area of proposed amendments may very well 

represent another solution. They will provide for urban and 

rural municipalities to voluntarily agree to join to form a new 

type of municipality called the municipal district, recognizing it 

is both urban and rural in nature. These provisions will better 

enable councils to agree on how representation, elections, 

administration, and services will be undertaken in the new 

municipality, drawing on both urban and rural municipal 

approaches. 

 

The amendments will ensure that in instances where legislation 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4175 

may apply differently to the areas of the former municipalities, 

such as the application of The Municipal Hail Insurance Act, 

the legislation will continue to apply in the same manner in the 

same areas as it did before. The amendments proposed do not 

give municipal districts any new or additional powers than any 

other type of municipality under The Municipalities Act. 

Municipal districts will have the same bylaw-making and 

corporate powers, the same accountability requirements, and no 

new taxing powers or authority. 

 

Nor are the proposed amendments about forced amalgamation. I 

want to be clear that a municipal district will only be 

established based upon the agreement of the municipalities 

involved and resolutions from each council. The municipal 

district amendments simply provide flexibility and choice for 

interested urban and rural municipalities to join together for the 

benefit of their residents. They respond to a request for 

legislative amendments to enable this type of entity from the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 

 

The fourth area of amendments will provide citizens with the 

ability to petition their council to conduct and make public the 

results of a financial or management audit. This will provide a 

means for citizens to address their concerns locally. Currently 

the legislation provides for annual audits of a municipality’s 

financial statements, the main objective being to confirm 

whether these are prepared in accordance with generally 

accepted accounting principles. 

 

My ministry and my office receives letters and other requests 

from citizens for provincial intervention, including a request for 

a financial or management audit and other investigations related 

to municipal administration in council or municipal operations. 

The proposed amendments will provide these citizens with the 

means to have their concerns addressed if they are widespread 

locally and shared by a sufficient number of other local 

residents. After consultation with the municipal sector, it has 

been agreed to set this efficiency at the number of voters equal 

to one-third of the municipality’s population. This is equivalent 

to the average voter turnout in urban and rural municipalities in 

recent local elections. These amendments are in the interest of 

ensuring councils remain transparent and accountable to their 

residents and ratepayers. 

 

The fifth area of proposed amendments and change is intended 

to ensure municipal compliance with legislation and regulations 

and to constrain the potential misuse of local property tax tools 

and tax abatements if it occurs. Specifically these amendments 

will do the following: they will provide the authority to 

prescribe limits if necessary on minimum taxes and base taxes, 

and restrict by ministerial order the use of tax tools by an 

individual municipality. This is to give the government more 

ability to constrain misuse and misapplication of local tax tools 

if it occurs. 

 

These amendments will also add the ability for an owner or 

occupant of property in a municipality and the minister to apply 

to a court to quash an illegal bylaw or resolution. Currently this 

ability is limited only to voters of the municipality. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The amendments will add clarification that an individual 

dismissed from a council for failing to comply with a minister’s 

direction is disqualified from running in the election to replace 

the dismissed council or council member. 

 

And this group of amendments will clarify the situations where 

a municipality may abate taxes, including education property 

taxes. This again is to constrain potential municipal misuse of 

this authority such as abating the taxes of an entire class of 

property, instead of instances of hardship or circumstances for 

which abatements are intended. The amendments will make this 

link explicit while continuing a council’s direction to determine 

when abatement is appropriate to specific individuals, 

situations, or types of property. 

 

I want to repeat here that the vast majority of municipalities are 

very responsible, but there have been cases of misuse of local 

tax tool authority such as mill rate factors and abatements. This 

is a small minority only. However we have done too much hard 

work as a provincial government to create a business-friendly 

environment to let the actions of a few damage that climate. 

And that’s why the legislation is being made clearer, so that 

local governments clearly know the rules of the game, so to 

speak. 

 

Finally there are a number of other more minor changes in this 

bill that follow up or clarify changes put in place during the last 

session regarding municipal borrowing approval and treatment 

of municipal electrical utility arrears. As well, definitions of 

mineral, mineral resource, and taxable assessment have been 

added to some provisions to mirror recent changes made to The 

Education Regulations and The Municipalities Regulations. 

 

This bill also contains some consequential amendments to add 

references to municipal district to several statutes that refer to 

specific types of municipalities. This will ensure that these 

statutes continue to apply in the municipal district in the same 

way as they did to the former municipalities that merged to 

become a municipal district. These have been worked out in 

consultation with the Ministry of Justice and the various 

ministries responsible for the respective statutes. 

 

In terms of consultations, the ministry has consulted extensively 

on these amendments with both the Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, and through them also with 

municipal administrator associations. These consultations began 

in April 2013 and concluded this past September. They 

involved meetings, presentations, and sharing drafts 

side-by-sides of the amendments for review and comment. 

 

I believe the sector understands the needs for these 

amendments, and I would like to take the opportunity to thank 

all those individuals who took the time to provide input, advice, 

and feedback in the development of this legislation. 

 

In conclusion, municipalities play a huge role in creating the 

climate for economic growth and improving quality of life for 

residents. These amendments to The Municipalities Act will 

better position new municipal governments to deal with 

opportunities and challenges; give existing municipalities more 

flexibility and options to respond to growth, development, and 

change; provide councils in the ministry with stronger 

legislation regarding non-compliance in capacity issues; and 



4176 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

ensure citizens are afforded more ability to have their concerns 

addressed locally. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 116, 

The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased on behalf of the official opposition to enter the debate 

in reference to Bill 116, in which we’re talking a lot about how 

the municipal structure operates in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it should be noted, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister’s absolutely correct in the sense that 

many of the municipal bodies in our province, whether they be 

urban or rural or northern, they do play a very important and 

integral part in developing our province not only from the 

economic perspective, Mr. Speaker, but also socially as well. 

And certainly it adds to the fabric in the province of 

Saskatchewan overall. 

 

So it’s very, very important that we pay attention to bills of this 

nature, Mr. Speaker, bills that are talking about the future of the 

municipal structure in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And many people in the province ought to know that there are 

many leaders, whether they are reeves and their councils or 

mayors and their councils, that really pay attention to the 

policies of the province and really pay attention to what’s 

happening in their area and their region and of course the 

province as a whole. So they are indeed partners in growth, and 

they certainly are a very, very important part of local 

engagement, local knowledge, and certainly local participation 

when we talk about the economic building that is required for 

the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

point out that I certainly respect and recognize their role. I think 

that every member of the opposition does as well. 

 

And over the years we’ve had some involvement with SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. Many of 

our members are aware how SARM operates. Over the years 

we’ve had some involvement with SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association]. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

no question that those two organizations are key organizations 

as well as the administrators of both these associations that 

work in their particular community. These people are invaluable 

advisors as to how to do things properly in their area and thus 

the whole province overall. 

 

So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that when we hear the 

words extensive consultation with SUMA and with SARM, Mr. 

Speaker, and the fact that the minister indicated that they began 

these consultations in April, and here it is seven or eight months 

later and we still haven’t really had some good collaborative 

and qualifying statements from both SARM and SUMA as to 

whether these consultations constituted agreement. 

 

And I pointed out earlier on a number of bills, Mr. Speaker, that 

there is a significant difference when the government stands up 

in the Assembly and says we consulted group A versus we’ve 

consulted with group A and group A agrees with the 

recommendations we’re putting forward. And I want to point 

that out to the public of Saskatchewan. Both the SUMA and the 

SARM and all the administrators, they know fair well that there 

is a significant difference between the word consulted and 

certainly consultation followed by their agreement. Those are 

the two phrases that I want to focus on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because you look at some of the terminology in this bill and 

some of the language and some of the insinuation in the bill. 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset this reeks of amalgamation overall. 

When you look at the language, Mr. Speaker, and I want to key 

on some of the points that was raised, that the minister brought 

the language forward in some of these bills, things like mill rate 

infractions, Mr. Speaker, minimal population. When he talked 

about statutory obligations for operating a municipal 

government, when he talked about the widespread concern over 

some of the local issues, when they talk about . . . When they 

make reference to management of that RM [rural municipality] 

or town or village or city, it’s all in a negative context, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that whenever you 

wish to try and do something by stealth, obviously what you 

want to do, first of all do, is to try and look and try and make 

the group that you’re dealing with look inadequate. And many 

. . . All the languages here, Mr. Speaker, that we talk about, that 

the minister made reference to in this bill, really tries to make 

our municipal partners look inadequate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s no question that we are all for being positive and 

certainly being responsible and being transparent and being 

accountable in operating some of the local governments in the 

province. But, Mr. Speaker, you look at the bill itself, it just 

reeks of amalgamation, time and time again. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to serve as the mayor 

of my own community. And, Mr. Speaker, I also got involved 

with SUMA. And we’ve learned a lot from our southern 

neighbours and our southern partners of how they operate 

within their particular community. And I can tell you, my 

experience in SUMA was certainly . . . It taught me a lot, and it 

made me appreciate some of the southern challenges. And it 

also gave me the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to share some of the 

northern perspectives. 

 

And as you look at some of the challenges that SUMA had, Mr. 

Speaker, and continue to have, there are some significant 

differences between how SUMA operates and how SARM 

operates, Mr. Speaker, because obviously they have two 

different constituents. One of course is the rural communities, 

and the other of course is the cities, towns, and villages. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, during my tenure as the mayor of my home 

community, again we talk about how the communities need to 

be proactive, of how the communities need to work together in 

a specific region to be an effective voice and to be an effective 

builder of any particular plan for that area. So whether it’s a 

business investment or whether it’s a business opportunity or 

whether it’s a tourism strategy, the list goes on as to why it’s 

important that you work collaboratively with your neighbouring 

community, Mr. Speaker. We understood that. Certainly SUMA 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4177 

understands that and SARM understands that as well. 

 

The second thing I think is really important, Mr. Speaker, is that 

when you look at the efforts of some of these communities — 

and I drive to some of these communities on a continual basis 

and you see some of the advertisement — that these 

communities are trying to attract not only residents to come and 

live and work in their communities but also businesses when 

they offer them say, as an example, no property taxes for the 

first three years. These are some of the things that I think these 

communities are trying to do to get more and more people to 

move to their community and certainly have the businesses also 

move to their particular community. So I think these are some 

of the innovative things that many municipalities across the 

province try and do. 

 

And they obviously have other issues, Mr. Speaker. They also 

have infrastructure challenges that they will bring forward to 

the government. And nothing in this bill talks about meeting 

some of those challenges, Mr. Speaker. They also have the 

labour force development that is required in these communities 

in order for them to effectively attract new residents, to 

effectively attract investment into their community, into their 

region. And these are some of the challenges that we need to 

talk about when we talk about the municipal sector in particular, 

when we talk about SARM and SUMA’s role in developing our 

economy overall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we don’t need to do, what we don’t need to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is bring forward bills that highlight the negative 

aspects of operating a municipal entity in our province of 

Saskatchewan. And all I hear, Mr. Speaker, from this particular 

bill, are things that talk about amalgamation, things that 

mention about minimal population or census information. 

What’s going to happen here? What is going to happen? 

 

And what is really important is that this particular government 

is now embarking on a strategy to bring in amalgamation by 

stealth. That’s exactly what is being planned here, Mr. Speaker. 

It is amalgamation by stealth, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what 

this is, and we see it as clear as day on this side, Mr. Speaker. 

On this side of the Assembly we see it. There’s no question in 

our minds they’re going to start picking off the small hamlets 

and the small villages and those that are struggling. And like 

anything, they’ll pick on those that are having difficulty. But 

this totally reeks of amalgamation. That is clearly their plan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why don’t they just have the courage to stand up today and 

say exactly what they want to do? They want to get rid of some 

of the small villages and the hamlets and those people that 

pester the Saskatchewan Party government by hanging around 

and trying to build their region and their community because, 

for the Sask Party, some of these villages and towns are simply 

on the way, and they have to bulldoze their way through and get 

rid of some of these small villages and hamlets that refuse to go 

away. But because the Saskatchewan Party wants them gone, 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will accomplish that. 

 

Now one of the important things that people in Saskatchewan 

ought to know is that when you sit down with the chamber of 

commerce and you sit down with CAPP, the Canadian 

Association of Petroleum Producers, they are at odds when it 

comes to the whole notion of the number of municipalities 

operating in the province. 

 

The Association of Petroleum Producers, CAPP, and probably 

more than likely the chamber of commerce, from the economic 

perspective, will tell this government, we need less red tape and 

we need less municipal interference, municipal licensing rules, 

and all these different processes that we have to go through. So 

we want to invest in Saskatchewan. We want to invest in 

Saskatchewan, but those pesky municipalities are in the way, 

they might tell the Sask Party. 

 

So they come along, and the Sask Party knows that if they 

mention amalgamation to anyone, including some of the RMs 

that are supportive of this particular government, then they 

know that they’re in deep trouble. So what is this government to 

do, Mr. Speaker? They have CAPP and the chamber on one 

side, and they have the municipalities on the other side. So what 

do they do, Mr. Speaker? They simply don’t want to do 

anything that people are going to realize and recognize as an 

effort to amalgamate some of the municipalities in our 

province. And so what they’ll do is they’ll do it by stealth. 

 

First of all they’ll say, we had these hearings. We had these 

consultations, and the consultations lasted a whole seven 

months, Mr. Speaker. They lasted a whole seven months. So 

right now the consultation process is under way. It’s been 

completed. We’ve heard some great comments, according to the 

minister, great comments from SUMA and SARM. We’ve 

heard some great comments from some of the administrators, 

Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, comments — and again I go 

back to my earlier point — comments and consultation does not 

constitute agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now I wouldn’t mind seeing, Mr. Speaker, how some of the 

consultations did occur in some of these regions. Did they have 

one meeting and invite all the communities around them to 

come to that meeting? How was the attendance at these 

consultation meetings? Who was there? Was there any concerns 

expressed, Mr. Speaker? And exactly my point is, were some of 

the municipalities not there? Were some of them not advised? 

 

So what happens, Mr. Speaker, under this particular bill, Bill 

116, is we think that the strategy behind this particular bill is 

amalgamation by stealth. They don’t want to put this out there 

for people to pay attention to. And this is why it’s important 

that we invite SUMA and we invite SARM and we also ask the 

question from CAPP. We also ask the question from CAPP is, 

what did the government promise CAPP to reduce the 

bureaucracy, according to CAPP, to reduce the bureaucracy 

attached to many of the municipalities in the areas that they 

want to invest in? What did the government promise CAPP to 

ensure that they had minimal municipal interference? That’s the 

question, Mr. Speaker. Because CAPP wants to invest, and 

we’re all for proper investment, making sure it benefits 

Saskatchewan and it benefits us for many, many years, as many 

years as possible, Mr. Speaker. But we have to do it in concert 

with our municipal partners. That’s what the minister spoke 

about earlier. 

 

So what happens now is you have industry and you have the 



4178 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

chamber of commerce on one side of the argument, and you 

have the municipalities and some of their support base within 

SARM, so how do you do this? How does the government do 

this, Mr. Speaker? Well first of all they make promises to 

CAPP, and they make promises to industry that they will 

minimize any kind of interference by the municipal structure in 

the province to encourage investment of their particular 

industry into the province. 

 

Now we on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we believe 

that investment’s crucial. We understand that investment into 

any particular industry is fleeting, that Saskatchewan has to 

make sure that they’re well positioned to try and attract as much 

of the capital investment as possible. We understand that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the same time, you can’t throw out the baby with the 

bathwater. You’ve got to engage in municipal partners. You’ve 

got to be fair. You’ve got to be upfront. You’ve got to be honest 

with them in saying, look this is what our challenge is. This is 

what our challenge is. We want the investment, but according to 

some our investment potential partners, they’re saying you guys 

are interfering with the process of rules and regulations and all 

these different issues that some of the small towns and villages 

and hamlets have. The government looks at that as interference. 

So how are they going to address it, Mr. Speaker? They’re 

simply going to address it by getting rid of those that are too 

small to defend themselves and getting rid of those that had put 

years and years of effort into strengthening not only their 

community or their RM but their region as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you look at this particular bill and it really, 

really, from our perspective, really smacks and certainly reeks 

of amalgamation, something that they would never ever 

mention when they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker. Every 

single day they’d get up and accuse the NDP government of 

trying to force amalgamation on the municipalities, and they’d 

make some arguments about how some of these RMs are doing 

so well on their own. Why are you getting rid of these RMs that 

are operating so well? These are some of the arguments that 

they used to make when they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But now the challenge and the weight of being government is 

they have to make certain choices. They’ve got to make certain 

decisions, Mr. Speaker. When they’re caught in the middle of 

industry investment versus municipal amalgamation, what are 

they going to do? What are they going to do, Mr. Speaker? 

What they’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is they’re going to 

throw municipal governments under the bus. You see that with 

this particular bill. Bill 116 is clearly, from my perspective, is 

talking about amalgamation because every section that the 

minister made reference to in some of the bills clearly are 

talking about the negative aspects of operating municipalities 

with minimum population. He’s talking about mill rate 

infractions, Mr. Speaker. He’s talking about statutory 

obligations. He’s talking about some of the complaints that 

somebody might have when it comes to local accountability, of 

how you challenge that. All the language, all the language to the 

opposition suggests that this government is on the mandate of 

amalgamation by stealth. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, how could they do that to their partners, 

partners that have long believed that that government over there 

would be a true partner, and you’re finding out through some of 

these bills that this is not the case. They are betraying that trust 

once again, once again, Mr. Speaker. They’ve made a decision 

between CAPP and industry investment versus municipal 

involvement in designing the economy of Saskatchewan 

overall, and their choice is to go to CAPP and to go with what 

the chamber of commerce says is important that we do for the 

province overall. 

 

Now from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that 

we point this out, that the chamber of commerce gives us some 

very good advice, very good advice. And so does CAPP. 

There’s no question that CAPP gives us good advice as well. 

It’s important as a government to listen to the advice, but you 

do not take one particular set of advice from one group and not 

respect the other group’s take on that particular issue, Mr. 

Speaker. So you have to go back to the municipalities and say, 

look, this is what we’re facing. Now from our perspective as an 

opposition, we think we should have true engagement, true 

engagement with the municipal sector and ask them all the 

questions that is asked of us as a government from the various 

players out there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, CAPP and the chamber of commerce have a 

lot of important issues. They know that there are some 

impediments to attract all kinds of investment into our province. 

They know how to do business well, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

been at it for a number of years. And government should 

actually be paying very close attention to what these players are 

saying to the government overall when it comes to attracting 

investment and building a strong, long-lasting economy, Mr. 

Speaker. They should listen to that advice. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you don’t need to create enemies within the 

municipal sector to be able to accomplish what CAPP and some 

of the members of the chamber of commerce want. You don’t 

have to do that. You don’t have to compromise our municipal 

partners, whether they’re in SARM or SUMA, that there are 

ways that we can properly engage them. And there’s a lot of 

work to do to do that, but there are ways to accomplish that, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s exactly what we talk about on this side of 

the Assembly when we talk about smart growth, that you do not 

have to compromise one group over another to ensure that 

there’s benefits for Saskatchewan people. You’ve got to do it 

simultaneously with respect to both parties. 

 

And this bill simply does not do it in the sense of trying to build 

that partnership, Mr. Speaker. Because as I mentioned at the 

outset, there’s a lot of negative language in this bill. And the 

intent, as clear as we can see it from here, is to amalgamate 

some of the villages and towns and RMs, and some of the 

smaller ones at the outset, Mr. Speaker, some of the smaller 

ones at the outset because they’re in this Sask Party 

government’s way. They’re in the way, so guess what? You’re 

going to be amalgamated. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the other issues that was mentioned 

in this particular bill, the municipal district part of the bill, 

where they’re encouraging some of the partners in 

development, so to speak, whether it be an RM or whether it be 

a town or whether it be a city or a combination of three, that 

they’re saying that perhaps it might be a good idea to have these 

three entities voluntarily begin to form a municipal district, Mr. 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4179 

Speaker. 

 

Now from our perspective, that needs a lot of study. That needs 

a lot of study because we need to know, where are the potential 

municipal district opportunities? Is there one close to the city 

here? Is there one north? Is there one in the East? We need to 

find examples of what they would suggest actually become a 

municipal district opportunity. We need to know where these 

opportunities exist and what happens to the partners’ dollars 

because obviously a town might have some savings, the RM 

might have some savings, the city obviously has money. So you 

look at three of these groups and you start talking about, how 

would you divvy up some of their savings? How would you 

address some of their concerns? How would you build an 

economic office for all three organizations? There are tons and 

tons of questions that we have. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we also need to know is, from the 

partners that are out there like SUMA, how many municipal 

bodies out there actually have dollars in which they’re able to 

contribute to the process of building a global economy overall, 

not only for their communities but their region and the province 

as well? The RMs, how much have they got in savings, Mr. 

Speaker? As a collective, I’m assuming they have hundreds of 

millions of dollars within each of the areas, between the bigger 

cities, the towns and villages and the RMs. Now they do have 

those resources available to them. What would happen to their 

savings? Would they be able to have a say as to how this money 

is to be utilized properly? These are some of the things that we 

ought to find out before we come along and support some of 

these bills. We need to know that information. We need to 

know the hard data. We need to have these numbers. We need 

to have collaboration from SUMA and SARM. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we should also engage the administrators 

because, in my career as a mayor, the administrative team that 

was in place in Ile-a-la-Crosse were invaluable. They taught me 

so much and gave me such great advice that had it not been for 

that team, Mr. Speaker, I would have made many, many more 

mistakes than I made. But certainly, from my perspective, you 

could learn a lot from the administrators of any RM or village 

or town or city. 

 

So that being said, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important that 

this government be very, very careful when they do this 

amalgamation by stealth. There are people within SUMA that 

are watching. There are people within SARM that are watching. 

The administrators that work for each of these partners are very, 

very sharp. They are very, very knowledgeable. They’ve seen 

some of the activity happening in the past that they’d become 

concerned about. But on the flip side, you see the chamber of 

commerce, you see the organizations like CAPP, they also have 

a vested interest in making sure this works. 

 

So my argument is, why would you want to ignore one 

particular partner over another? And if you chose to be 

respectful, you would never try and do some of these activities, 

some of these activities by stealth. And that is our argument 

from our point when you have an initial look at this bill and we 

see what they’re presenting. There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have a lot of concerns. And I’m sure there’s going to be 

a lot more issues coming forward on this bill. 

 

So I would tell people out there again, the plan is very simple. 

During the fall sitting, which wraps up next week, the 

government gets to introduce their bills and the intent behind 

these bills. And over the next several months, the opposition 

and the different groups that are going to be impacted by this 

bill, they’ll have an opportunity to look at the legislation, to see 

what the government is trying to do, to see if there’s any hidden 

messages in these bills, and to bring forward their concerns. 

 

So I would encourage people that are out there that have any 

questions, any questions on this government’s amalgamation 

plan attached to Bill 116, that they contact the opposition or 

come to this great hall of democracy and express their opinion, 

and express their opinion freely and clearly to this government 

that any effort and any plan to force municipalities to get 

together, Mr. Speaker, is going to be met by resistance. 

 

And the only way you can make Saskatchewan a great place to 

invest and make it an even greater place to invest is if you 

engage the municipal sector, that know that they can add to the 

process and add in the most valuable way, and to engage the 

private sector, whether it’s the chamber of commerce or CAPP. 

You’ve got to bring the two entities together, the two strengths 

of both organizations together to build that bold, brave new 

Saskatchewan. But I fear, Mr. Speaker, this bill along with 

some of the activities and the shortcomings of the Sask Party 

government is doing more harm to the future of Saskatchewan 

than ever before. 

 

But my colleagues will have a lot more to say on this bill as we 

learn more and as we hear more. So I would encourage the 

people of Saskatchewan to participate in this bill, give us your 

advice, give us your information, and we will use it to make 

sure that the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t do amalgamation by 

stealth, that they’re actually exposed for what their plan is. And 

I’m sure many municipalities and RMs would be very upset 

once they find out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 116. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, my colleagues will 

have a lot more to say on this particular bill, so I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 116, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 117, The Municipalities 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. This Act makes an 



4180 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

amendment to one bilingual Act, The Non-profit Corporations 

Act, 1995 as a result of the introduction of the municipalities 

amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The change to The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 is 

required to add a reference to municipal district to the definition 

of municipality. This will ensure that this statute applies to 

municipal districts in the same way as it did to the former 

municipalities that merge to become a municipal district. 

 

As I noted previously, the municipal district amendments 

provide flexibility and choice for interested urban and rural 

municipalities to voluntarily join together to form a new type of 

municipality for the benefit of their residents. Accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 117, The 

Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased to rise on behalf of the opposition to talk about 

this particular bill and to point out to the folks that are paying 

attention to it, because I know that there are many organizations 

that really pay attention to some of the bills that this 

government is preparing for the spring sitting, and, Mr. 

Speaker, I would encourage those organizations to certainly pay 

very close attention to what is happening and what is being 

proposed in some of these bills because obviously this is going 

to have a lot of impact and it’s certainly going to have a lot of 

concern addressed to it if a proper consultation is not 

undertaken. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill 117, Bill 117 is actually a consequential 

part of the process attached to the previous bill, Bill 116. And 

what’s important, Mr. Speaker . . . Again, when we talked about 

Bill 116 and this particular Bill 117, what this is is a veiled 

effort on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party to look at 

amalgamation. We call it amalgamation by stealth. But, Mr. 

Speaker, quite obviously there is a lot of language in there that 

would suggest, that will suggest that that’s the government’s 

plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they ought to have the courage to go forward 

to SARM and to go forward to SUMA and say very clearly, do 

you guys believe in the plan that we have in place, and do you 

guys think that we’re going to get your agreement? And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve had consultation. They’ve had consultation 

according to the minister, but that’s a whole seven months of 

consultation. 

 

Now again, when we look at the language attached to Bill 117, 

it’s all about making sure the definitions are there. And I 

understood that, from the previous bill, that the minister spoke 

about having these regional districts or these districts that would 

look at the voluntary basis where they would be able to work in 

concert and certainly collaborate their regional activities 

overall. So these municipal districts, what I believe the 

consequential Act is, Bill 117, is to define what the municipal 

district would be named. What would it be called? 

And I’m sure as they go down the row of definition, that there’d 

also be a discussion of powers, a discussion of sharing of some 

of the powers that obviously are needed. And I’m sure that 

there’ll be some discussion along the way, when we look at the 

consequential Act, of how do we . . . what contributions do we 

make? The RMs obviously want to make contributions. The 

villages and towns will make contributions. And in the case that 

a city or a larger centre wants to be part of the process, that 

they’ll make consultation as well. 

 

Who’s going to help with some of the effort that is required to 

make sure all the partners are in full co-operation with the 

effort, that they have full knowledge? That’s what’s really 

important, Mr. Speaker, on anything that the government does, 

that people ought to have extensive access to information, 

exactly what the government’s plan is, what their strategy is. 

And the minister keeps talking about definition of these powers 

will be determined by regulation, he said. And people ought to 

know that regulations are a lot different . . . follow a lot 

different process than a bill would. And I’ll give you some of 

the examples, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The example I would use is that if the government wants to 

propose a certain bill, they will propose a bill that explains what 

the bill is all about. And then if they want to sneak something 

through, they’ll say, they’ll use the phrase, we will determine 

those rules by regulations. That’s the phrase that they often use. 

 

Now what happens . . . Who controls the design of those 

regulations, Mr. Speaker? It’s not the Legislative Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. It is not the partners that are out there. It is the 

government. They can design these regulations at their own free 

will when they please to do so, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s 

really important, is that groups and organizations that are out 

there, that if they say they want to define the rules and 

regulations at a later date, be very wary and be very cautious. 

Because what that does, it turns the power back to the 

government to determine through regulations what their original 

agenda is. And so we have this nice bill with the proper 

wording, but then, Mr. Speaker, who controls the rules controls 

the outcome. 

 

So I go back to my earlier statement. You’ve got to have 

agreement by some of the partners, not simply use the phrase, 

we’ve consulted with SUMA. We’ve consulted with SARM, 

Mr. Speaker, does not constitute agreement with either of those 

organizations. And if I was a member of SUMA or a member of 

SARM, the first question I would ask is, what regulations are up 

for discussion? What regulations are you planning on putting 

forward, and do we expect any surprises from those 

regulations? And if there are surprises, we need to know how 

we combat those surprises that we’re not aware of. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what I would do if I was SUMA, 

because obviously this government has to make a decision. 

They’ve got to make a choice between the investment 

community and the municipalities that, from the investment 

community’s perspective, are too onerous on the process of 

investing into a certain sector or into a certain area, and they 

need them out of the way. And they needn’t take that attitude, 

Mr. Speaker, because people of Saskatchewan want to 

participate, as I mentioned earlier. 

 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4181 

So again we need to find out the definition of this bill can be 

certainly clear on paper. But when you talk about regulations to 

be designed later or to be implemented later, what are those 

regulations? And who controls the imposition of those 

regulations? Who designs those regulations? Whose interests 

will be met by those regulations? Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not 

the partners that the Sask Party has so-called consulted with. It 

is the Government of Saskatchewan. It is the Sask Party 

government that will determine those rules and regulations on 

their own, with no consultation, period. And that’s what is 

really important when we look at these bills. 

 

So any time they talk about consultation, remember it is 

consultation on their part. It does not, it does not constitute 

agreement. And they can mention 20 organizations saying, we 

consulted with this group, that group, this group, that group, 

and do a list 20 organizations long. And, Mr. Speaker, it sounds 

impressive to the average layperson, but on the Assembly floor 

and to the opposition, it doesn’t mean anything that they’ve 

consulted with these groups unless they get agreement from that 

group, Mr. Speaker. That’s what’s really important. 

 

Unless they get agreement from that group, they should not use 

the word consultation attached to that group. It’s got to come 

with the word agreement with that group. And you’ll notice, 

Mr. Speaker, they never do. It’s always consultation they talk 

about. They never talk about agreement. 

 

And the final point I will make, Mr. Speaker, on this bill is 

where you begin the process of determining the outcome of any 

bill is how you design your rules and regulations. The rules and 

regulations are actually . . . if anything in the bill could be the 

framework, the rules and regulation is actually doing all the 

inside work, adding serious meat to the bones so to speak. 

That’s kind of where all the action begins, Mr. Speaker. When 

the government says, here’s a bill, it looks good, we’ve 

consulted and we’ll do all the regulations later on — that’s 

when people should begin to worry, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

when they should begin to pay very close attention. 

 

So on this particular bill, Bill 117 where the minister’s talked 

about determining rules and regulations at a later date, I would 

encourage people to pay very, very close attention. Because 

when we talk about defining regional districts, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a lot of challenge and a lot of issues that people have to 

be aware of. And we need to take the time to discuss these bills 

and to make sure that as an opposition we tell the partners that 

are out there, pay very close attention and advise us if there’s 

issues of concern. Because we will raise them in the Assembly. 

That’s our job. That’s our effort here as the official opposition, 

and we’ll certainly raise the concerns from the partners out 

there that wish to express it. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, it’s a consequential Act, and 

there’s a lot of rules attached to it. We need to pay attention. 

And so therefore I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 117. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 117, The Municipalities Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Great. Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to rise to move second reading 

of The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act, Bill 118. This new Act 

marks a milestone in the history of the Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology or SIAST as it is more 

commonly known. SIAST is our province’s largest public 

institution for post-secondary technical education and skills 

training. It is also a key player in helping to meet the labour 

market needs of Saskatchewan’s growing economy, an 

economy today that, Mr. Speaker, offers more than 12,000 jobs 

on the saskjobs.ca website. 

 

This legislation supports SIAST as it evolves formally into a 

polytechnical institution. Polytechnics tend to be degree 

granting and help to foster economic growth by helping to, first, 

foster smooth transitions between learning and earning for 

students and, second, by helping to fuel regional and provincial 

growth through applied research and innovation, research that 

connects directly to small- and medium-sized businesses right 

across the province and therefore really helps to focus on 

regional economic development across the province. 

 

Another notable feature in this legislation is to change SIAST’s 

legal name to Saskatchewan Polytechnic. This better reflects the 

emerging status of SIAST as a polytechnic as reflected across 

the country. The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act also clarifies 

SIAST’s ability to fundraise for property. This is increasingly 

important. In fact just last week, we saw that SIAST was able to 

attract very significant dollars from Husky. When combined 

with the province’s Saskatchewan Innovation and Opportunities 

Scholarship, Mr. Speaker, that meant $1.5 million for SIAST 

and SIAST students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also helps to ensure that other educational 

institutions can not use the term polytechnic in any way without 

approval from the Government of Saskatchewan. The 

legislation will also clarify the mandate of SIAST to reflect 

membership in Polytechnics Canada. For example, it outlines 

that SIAST may conduct applied research and scholarly activity 

and indicates that SIAST may grant degrees in accordance with 

The Degree Authorization Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes and others which are what could be 

termed relatively routine in nature will not substantively alter 

the solid relationship between SIAST and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SIAST is the newest member of Polytechnics 

Canada and joins other prestigious organizations, including the 

British Columbia Institute of Technology, the Southern Alberta 

Institute of Technology Polytechnic, and the Northern Alberta 

Institute of Technology, as well as Red River College. 

 

There are many benefits through SIAST’s membership in the 

association. Students earning credits at one institution will have 

them recognized by its peers. As well there are enhanced 



4182 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

promotional activities from both Canadian and international 

students. Furthermore, SIAST’s ability to advocate for research 

and development, especially in Ottawa and with industry 

partners, will be enhanced significantly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out that with the proclamation of 

The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act, the existing Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology Act which is 

currently the guiding framework that operates . . . that allows 

the institution to operate, will be repealed. 

 

The Ministry of Advanced Education has had extensive 

discussions with SIAST in developing The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Act, and in fact this action that we’re taking today, 

this second reading is inspired and helped to be guided by 

SIAST itself. 

 

[15:15] 

 

We have consulted widely with our partners in the 

post-secondary sector, including those at the University of 

Regina, the University of Saskatchewan, our regional colleges, 

the Dumont Technical Institute, the Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies, and the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship 

and Trade Certification Commission. 

 

SIAST has also consulted with its student association, SIAST 

Faculty Association, and SGEU [Saskatchewan Government 

and General Employees’ Union] Professional Services. That’s 

the bargaining unit. 

 

Over the years, SIAST has earned a reputation for the delivery 

of quality education for both students and for industry employer 

partners. This legislation further supports the mandate of SIAST 

as it continues to evolve to best meet the needs of the new 

Saskatchewan, especially our students and our employers. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the Minister of Advanced Education 

that Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act be now 

read the second time. It is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased on behalf of the official opposition to give the 

initial comments that we have and some of the concerns we 

have in reference to Bill 118. And, Mr. Speaker, from our 

perspective, we look at the government and we try and figure 

out what exactly their plans are when they talk about trying to 

meet the demand for skilled workers, when we talk about the 

fact that there are many families that are struggling with high 

debt load when it comes to education. We look at some of the 

challenges with the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system, 

Mr. Speaker, some of the Aboriginal communities’ 

perspectives. All these issues are really important to the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And every day when we sit down and talk to the government 

about some of these issues, Mr. Speaker, you know, the high 

tuition costs — I think we’re the second-highest tuition costs in 

the country, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not something we should 

be proud of as a province overall — I think we need to begin to 

address that.  

 

And when the government comes along with great fanfare and 

says, well we’ve got a bill, and Bill 118 is going to be talking 

about SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], we on this side of the Assembly, we think, okay 

great. Maybe they’re going to address some of the challenges in 

collaboration with the Minister of Education on the K to 12 

system. Maybe there’s going to be some good collaborative 

efforts there. Maybe they’re going to address some of the 

challenges within the Aboriginal community. Or maybe they’re 

going to address some of the high tuition costs that many of our 

families and young students struggle with. 

 

So as we sit here and we listen to the particular bill, Mr. 

Speaker, Bill 118, you know, Bill 118, which I think is the 

cornerstone of that government’s post-secondary agenda. Mr. 

Speaker, all they’re doing today under this bill — again they’ve 

announced it with a great fanfare — all they’ve done is they’re 

going to change the name. They’re not going to change policy. 

They’re not going to change direction. They’re not going to 

radically implement some new way of doing business. All 

they’re simply going to do is their agenda, their agenda in this 

bill, and to address all the issues that we’ve raised in the 

opposition. All they’re going to do is change SIAST to the 

name Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 

 

That’s what the bill is all about, Mr. Speaker, pure and simple. 

They have decided that their agenda for the next number of 

years when it comes to post-secondary education is, again with 

great fanfare they announce, we’re going to change the name of 

SIAST. That’s what this government is saying. We’re going to 

change the name of SIAST. 

 

And we’re sitting here on this side of the opposition and 

wondering, well what’s all that about? We’ve been talking 

about tuition costs. We’ve been talking about K to 12 

challenges. We’ve been talking about child care to help with 

some of the young families trying to take training. We’ve been 

talking about the Aboriginal education gaps. We’ve been 

talking about the opportunities to engage many First Nations 

and Métis people in the economy overall. And what does the 

Sask Party government bring forward as their agenda to address 

all that? Well they’re changing the name of SIAST to 

Saskatchewan Polytechnic. That’s the agenda of the Sask Party 

when it comes to post-secondary strategies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We were all excited on this side because we heard that the 

Government of Saskatchewan was going to make an 

announcement around SIAST, so we all wanted to hear what the 

announcement was. And again all my colleagues here were 

really debating what it might be. And, Mr. Speaker, what 

disappointment today when all that they have for 

post-secondary in terms of their announcement, with so many 

resources, with so many resources, they’re going to change the 

name of SIAST and that’s it. They’re changing SIAST to a 

polytechnic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s a shame to see that kind of response to some of the 

issues that we’ve been talking about over and over and over in 

this Assembly. We’ve asked this government to deal with the 

high tuition costs that many of our families are suffering from. 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4183 

We’ve asked the government to deal with the Aboriginal 

education gap which they have not addressed, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve asked the Government of Saskatchewan to start talking 

about the challenges within the kindergarten to grade 12 issues, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked about educational assistants. We’ve 

talked about the disregard for teachers. The fact that they have 

not moved on meeting some of the demands of this economy, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

All they have done with this bill, with great fanfare of 

highlighting what their agenda is for a post-secondary, is 

they’re going to change the name from SIAST to Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic. And that’s it, Mr. Speaker. What a disappointing 

response to the challenges that were brought up by this 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, to the challenge of trying to meet 

some of the needs and the demands that we’ve all identified 

time and time again when it comes to post-secondary. 

 

So today I’m telling the people of Saskatchewan, Bill 118, 

which we waited for, we wanted to see what was in the bill. We 

were actually hoping, Mr. Speaker, the opposition was hoping 

that there’d be something substantial, something innovative, 

something exciting, something groundbreaking, something that 

we can all talk about. And maybe even if it’s something that 

was so innovative and exciting and so dynamic and so 

important and would meet some of the needs that we’ve been 

speaking about, maybe even then the opposition would be 

excited about it. 

 

But what they have done, Mr. Speaker, is great fanfare. And the 

only thing missing, Mr. Speaker, are lights. The only thing 

missing, Mr. Speaker, is the parade. 

 

But what they’re doing today to address the issues is they’re 

going to change the name of SIAST to Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic. So we’re saying, okay. There’s got to be more to 

this bill than that. There’s got to be more to this bill than that. 

And we keep looking for it, Mr. Speaker. It’s a one-pager. It’s a 

one-pager. 

 

And so the big deal, the big agenda in 2013, despite this 

government inheriting billions of dollars in the bank, a booming 

economy, a growing population, and all the hard work that was 

done previously, instead of inheriting all those resources, all 

those resources, all that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, all that 

money, despite getting everything gift-wrapped and handed to 

them, Mr. Speaker, gift-wrapped and handed to them, Mr. 

Speaker, all they could to do to address some of the issues that 

we’ve been talking about — and again with great fanfare — is 

they’re going to change the name of SIAST to Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about regional and 

provincial growth. And we talk about, well how about P.A. 

[Prince Albert] north? Are they part of the process? How about 

Moose Jaw? Are they part of the process, Mr. Speaker? How 

about some of the areas of the province that this government 

has forgotten about, Mr. Speaker? Are they important? Is P.A. 

and northern Saskatchewan important to this government as I 

mentioned earlier? And the obvious answer is no because they 

have not addressed the challenges attached to that particular 

city, Mr. Speaker. They’ve allowed a great opportunity to 

bypass the city because the Assembly would not deal with the 

infrastructure needs that the city clearly identified, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now I can hear some of these guys, some of these guys 

chirping from their seats, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at P.A. bridge 

as an example. Let’s look at P.A. bridge, Mr. Speaker, now that 

the member from Melfort is chirping from his seat. Your 

colleagues that ran for the Saskatchewan Party said that they 

would build a second bridge for P.A. if they were elected. The 

phrase that they used was, it was inevitable. It was going to 

happen, Mr. Speaker. It was going to happen. They promised 

the business community of P.A. and Melfort’s area that they 

were going to build a second bridge. They were going to build a 

second bridge. And what happened, Mr. Speaker? The election 

was on. They got elected. And I always say, I always say that 

the Saskatchewan Party romanced P.A. and area and all they 

ended up with was a bad hickey, Mr. Speaker. That’s all they 

ended up with was a bad hickey. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the 

members want to talk about regional growth, as the minister 

mentioned in this bill. You want to talk about regional growth. 

You better get serious about regional growth, and you should 

follow up on the campaign promises that you make. When you 

say you’re going to build a bridge for P.A., well you bloody 

well better build a bridge for P.A. or the people of P.A. are 

going to come back and send you a message. They’re going to 

send you a message very, very, clear. And they might even 

send, the business community might even send a message to the 

people around Prince Albert. So absolutely, absolutely, Batoche 

is going to be impacted. Shellbrook is going to be impacted and 

for sure Melfort’s going to be impacted as well. 

 

Because you shouldn’t be making promises to people and then 

turn around and you stifle the economic opportunity around 

Prince Albert by simply doing one thing that the P.A. people 

did not want you to do, and that was to break your commitment 

and promise for a second bridge. And that’s exactly what the 

Saskatchewan Party have done. They betrayed that trust. They 

turned their backs on the business community and the many 

citizens that are doing their part to build this economy. You 

have turned your backs on them. And I say come 2015 or 

whenever the Premier calls an election, P.A. will have the 

opportunity to turn their backs on the Saskatchewan Party and 

say, enough of that. Enough of that. 

 

If you’re talking about regional growth attached to your bill, 

attached to your bill, then you should back it up. You should 

back it up and do your part. Otherwise stop talking about the 

second bridge and simply admit that you failed to bring forward 

that particular issue and you failed as an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly]. And the whole region ought to know 

this, that the whole regional part of Prince Albert — that 

includes Melfort; that includes Batoche; that includes 

Saskatchewan Rivers; that includes Shellbrook — you have all 

failed as a collective group of MLAs to deliver on the one 

crucial piece that was important to the economy of that whole 

area, and that was a second bridge for Prince Albert. 

 

Dangerous goods travel on that bridge, Mr. Speaker, the current 

bridge. And there’s also hundreds of opportunities in tourism. 

Businesses use that bridge, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a bottleneck. 

You’re choking and you’re stifling the opportunity in that 

region. Why? Because the current MLAs in that whole area 



4184 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

failed to deliver. That’s the bottom line. They’ve failed to 

deliver. That’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the minister brings up any kind of reference to 

regional and provincial growth, which he’d done on this bill — 

the minister talked about regional and provincial growth — he 

forgot, he forgot about one little, small thing. Oh, the P.A. 

bridge. Didn’t we run on that? Didn’t we campaign on that? 

Didn’t we campaign on that? Absolutely they campaigned on 

that. They promised every, every person in that community they 

were going to build that bridge. And when they had the 

opportunity and they had the resources and they had the power 

for seven years, did they deliver? They told the people of Prince 

Albert north a flat no. You do not deserve a bridge because this 

is no way that we’re going to . . . They weren’t going to help 

Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why when the minister talks about regional and 

provincial growth, we talk to him and say to him right today 

that P.A. and the northern part of Saskatchewan and Moose Jaw 

and many other areas are really beginning to feel the effects that 

this government is ignoring those areas. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

ought not to do that. 

 

The other thing that the minister made reference to is the 12,000 

opportunities on saskjobs.ca. He mentioned that. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that 12,000 figure’s been up there for a while. So our 

argument again when you talk about post-secondary, shouldn’t 

that number actually start going down with people filling these 

jobs that have the adequate training? Shouldn’t those numbers 

actually, instead of going up it’s . . . Obviously they’re not 

training enough people to fill those jobs. Otherwise those jobs 

would start going down. I’m beginning to believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that the 12,000 jobs that they brag about every single day that 

are on saskjobs.ca, I’m thinking that they’re keeping those 

people there so they can brag about those numbers, but those 

people don’t want to have . . . They want to fill those jobs. And 

in order to fill those jobs they need adequate training. 

 

And that’s exactly what we thought as the opposition — hey, 

you know, they’re going to be talking about post-secondary 

today. They’re bringing a bill, Bill 118. It’s talking about 

post-secondary. And we thought, oh my goodness, this might be 

it. As an opposition we thought they might finally take our 

advice, that they might finally learn something of the same 

group of people along with the people of Saskatchewan that 

actually gift-wrapped the economy for them. Maybe they’re 

going to listen to some of the advice we have on how to build a 

stronger economy, a longer lasting economy, a smart growth 

economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But no. What they’re doing today, Mr. Speaker, with great 

fanfare, and the only thing missing are the bells and the 

whistles, and the only thing missing is the parade, because 

today we saw and we heard from the minister that Bill 118 — 

again Bill 118 on the future of Saskatchewan’s post-secondary 

opportunities in 2013 — the Saskatchewan Party today unveiled 

they’re changing the name from SIAST to Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So we’re sitting here on this side kind of saying, well what is 

that about? Well, that’s their great vision? That’s their great 

plan, Mr. Speaker? And the people of Saskatchewan are 

severely disappointed. Because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a bunch of people that were upset and angry that they 

did not deal with the crucial issues and the issues that matter to 

many families, that they have been stubbornly dismissive of 

recognizing that they have the second highest tuition rate. They 

have ignored the issue of P.A. and north economy by talking 

about the bridge issue. They talk about these 12,000 jobs on 

saskjobs.ca. Why aren’t they training those people to fill those 

jobs so those numbers go down, so people are working, paying 

taxes, and building themselves a bright future, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We think on this side of the Assembly that there’s a lot more 

work to do on post-secondary. Given all the resources that they 

inherited, given all the money and all the dollars and all the 

opportunities and all the work that was done, all the things that 

was gift-wrapped to them, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan ought to deserve a better response on the future 

design of post-secondary simply by talking about changing the 

name of SIAST to Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly once again, we 

tell the people of Saskatchewan, the Sask government, the Sask 

Party government has failed you. The Sask Party government, 

despite the dollars that was handed to them, they have failed to 

deliver. Despite that the Sask Party government has been 

bragging left, right, and centre of all the money they have, they 

have failed to deliver on many fronts. And, Mr. Speaker, after 

all that failure and after the shortcomings . . . And again, they 

do a lot of back-patting on that side, Mr. Speaker, and they try 

to hoodwink the province, Mr. Speaker. A lot of PR [public 

relations]. A lot of spin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And after all this activity, the nine of us in the opposition — 

and many others are joining our quarters now — are starting to 

say, this government’s not a very good government. This 

government is confused. They don’t know what exactly they’re 

doing, Mr. Speaker. Despite all the great opportunity, all the 

great opportunity that they inherited — don’t forget, they didn’t 

work for this; they simply inherited this, Mr. Speaker — about 

all they have to offer today when it comes to post-secondary 

was to change the name of SIAST to Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s severely disappointing to us in the 

sense of not the message or not the name change. Name change, 

what’s in a name? It’s important that the people of 

Saskatchewan know what’s in a name. And if we wanted to 

modernize the name, fine. We can live with that. But they ought 

to modernize their approach when it comes to meeting some of 

the needs that Saskatchewan people have long indicated are 

challenges when it comes to tuition, when it comes to K to 12 

issues, and when it comes to engaging First Nations and Métis 

people overall with, you know, with the economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again with great fanfare, flash, and the only 

thing missing here is the parade, only thing missing here is the 

parade, about all this government is doing when it comes to 

recognizing the issues attached to post-secondary is changing 

SIAST to Saskatchewan Polytechnic. Mr. Speaker, a name 

change can happen, but I think you’ve got to change the 

government and change the strategy. Because quite frankly all 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4185 

the information’s before us. All the evidence is before us. This 

government doesn’t have a clue how to govern. They’re 

bungling from one issue to another and, Mr. Speaker, it’s time 

to get rid of them. So on that note, I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 118. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Athabasca has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 119. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

118. Sorry. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 

The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the minister 

in charge of Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013, Bill 119. 

This legislation arises as a result of The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Act, which received second reading earlier today 

and of which we’ve just heard some curious comments about 

from the members opposite. 

 

While these consequential amendments are required in various 

pieces of provincial legislation and regulations to change the 

name from the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology to Saskatchewan Polytechnic, they are informed by 

the support that SIAST receives from the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This support manifests itself in many ways. For example, Mr. 

Speaker, in this year’s budget there’s a 3.1 per cent increase in 

its operating budget. Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen those budgets 

increase from 2007-08 as we had the privilege of forming 

government at $119 million to now over $147 million in the 

current budget, Mr. Speaker. And we know there’s more to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this stands in stark contrast to the NDP, despite 

the rhetoric of the member opposite, where tuition increased at 

SIAST by more than 336 per cent, by more than 336 per cent 

between 1991 and 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m a little bit surprised to hear the member 

opposite offer his negative opinions here recently because just 

last week, Mr. Speaker, on November 21st in this House, the 

member for Regina Elphinstone said this about the polytechnic 

Act. He said, “. . . which looks to be a good piece of legislation 

and a signal to the good work that is done by SIAST,” Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we wanted to make sure that we had that 

on the record, Mr. Speaker, because apparently the members 

opposite are not singing in unison or from the same song sheet 

when it comes to this matter, Mr. Speaker. There are obviously 

legitimate questions, Mr. Speaker, and we look forward to 

helping to address those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, specifically these consequential amendments 

apply to two bilingual enactments: The Education Act, 1995 and 

The Teacher Certification and Classification Regulations, 2002. 

Importantly these amendments are strictly technical in nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act will come into force on the day of which 

section 1 of The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act is proclaimed, 

which is expected to be in the spring of 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move second reading of The Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Advanced Education 

that Bill No. 119 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m quite pleased on behalf of the official opposition to stand up 

and talk about Bill 119, the consequential Act as it relates to the 

name change that’s being proposed by the Saskatchewan Party 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in the Assembly a long time, and 

this is the first time I’ve ever heard a minister in his 

introduction of his bill begin to debate statements made by the 

opposition. That’s highly unusual, Mr. Speaker, because 

obviously the point of introducing your bill is to make sure that 

you read out the bill and you read out the intention of the bill. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you start beginning to spur debate, 

when you start getting debate in the introduction of their bills, 

you begin to wonder, what is this government up to? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again we point out that we have to make 

sure, we have to make sure that when you look at some of these 

bills, that people out there ought to know that we need their 

engagement. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have to understand that in 

Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan there’s a lot of great 

opportunities. And we think that those great opportunities 

should be afforded to as many families as possible, to be 

afforded to as many families as possible in all sectors, in all 

areas. And, Mr. Speaker, those areas include P.A. north, and 

they include in around the Moose Jaw area. They include the 

Melfort area. They include everyone, Mr. Speaker, because our 

provincial motto is “from many peoples, strength.” And what 

we see happening, Mr. Speaker, is only certain sectors and only 

certain people being engaged by the Saskatchewan Party 

government. 

 

Now Bill 119, the consequential amendment Act, in terms of 

changing . . . allowing the government to change the name from 

SIAST to polytechnic, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is 

that we, from our perspective, we’re not being critical of the 

name, Mr. Speaker. We’re not being critical of the name — 

very important to point out. What we’re critical of, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that there are many shortcomings to this 

particular government in recognizing the name. That’s what’s 

important. They’re just simply changing the name when we’re 

asking them to change their gears. Stop coming forward with 

excuses and stop doing the spin and stop doing the . . . giving 

the people of Saskatchewan the runaround with some of the 



4186 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

issues. That was my point, Mr. Speaker. And it’s highly unusual 

to get a minister who’s introducing an amendment to his 

particular Act to begin to debate the bill prior to the bill being 

introduced. 

 

So I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that when you’re changing 

the name from SIAST to Saskatchewan Polytechnic, my 

argument is go ahead and change the name. I don’t think the 

name change is something that we’re concerned about, as my 

colleague certainly made reference to. 

 

What we’re concerned about is your lack of action to that 

institution. That’s what we’re concerned about. Your lack of 

action to some of the challenges on the K to 12 system, Mr. 

Speaker, your lack of action when it comes to having some of 

these students having the second highest tuition cost, that’s 

what we’re concerned about. The fact that there’s a disconnect 

between the Aboriginal community’s desire to be part of the 

process of higher learning, which many people have taken 

advantage of already but many others want to. We are 

concerned about the challenges with child care when it comes to 

some of the families, young families or single-parent families 

that want to take advantage of some of the educational 

opportunities and thus the economic opportunities. That’s what 

our issue is. 

 

So when my colleague makes references saying yes, changing 

the name is a great idea, we’re not arguing about the name 

change. We’re saying that you ought to change the channel 

when it comes to trying to make sure that the people that we’ve 

made reference to, that their issues are finally being addressed. 

They’re finally being . . . Change your focus. That was the 

point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again the reason why we have 12,000 jobs under the website 

of saskjobs.ca is we’re proud of that. As the province, we’re 

proud of that. We want to see the economy continue moving 

forward. Nobody in this Assembly wants to see Saskatchewan 

suffer. We want to see that economy continue moving forward 

to build and to strengthen for years and years to come. But in 

order to be able to achieve that, Mr. Speaker, what’s important 

is that you have to have a government that encourages that, that 

fosters that attitude, and that builds on that, that plans for it, that 

prepares for it, Mr. Speaker. And about all we’ve seen from this 

particular government when it comes to the issues that we’ve 

addressed as an opposition is they’re going to change the name 

from SIAST to Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 

 

So we say again, and I echo the sentiments of my colleague, we 

say again, change the name. We certainly don’t see no problem 

with that. But you ought to change your attitude in dealing with 

post-secondary to meet some of the issues that we’ve debated 

on this floor, time and time again. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, 

I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 119. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Athabasca has moved a motion to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

119. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Lobbyists Act. Mr. Speaker, on 

December 7, 2011, this Legislative Assembly passed a motion 

to refer the issue of lobbyist legislation to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice for review 

and to report back to the legislature. The standing committee 

was tasked with making recommendations on a legislative 

model for the new legislation, for new legislation in 

Saskatchewan that will ensure that the public is informed and 

aware of who is lobbying public office-holders in Saskatchewan 

while ensuring that free and open access to government 

decision makers is not unduly impeded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on May 16, 2012, the standing committee tabled a 

majority report with a minority objection. While there was 

considerable consensus around preparing an Act based largely 

on the Alberta and British Columbia legislation, further 

consultation with stakeholders were considered desirable prior 

to introducing a government bill. Mr. Speaker, this bill is based 

on the recommendations of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs, as well as further consultation with 

stakeholders conducted with respect to this proposal. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will do a number of things. It will 

establish types of lobbyists. It will create registration 

requirements for lobbyists. It will establish reporting 

requirements, including filing deadlines for lobbyists. It will 

appoint a registrar as an independent officer of the Assembly to 

oversee the Act and investigate complaints and offences. It will 

authorize administrative penalties by the registrar. It will restrict 

lobbying by former public office-holders. It will create a public 

registry. It will create exemptions from the operation of the Act 

and create offence provisions for failure to comply with the Act. 

 

The additional consultations have resulted in changes from the 

committee’s report that would exempt local authorities 

including universities, SARM, SUMA, and the SSBA 

[Saskatchewan School Boards Association] from the operations 

of the Act; provide in the regulations that in calculating whether 

the 100-hour threshold for lobbyist registration has been met, 

travel time and preparation time as well as time spent 

communicating will be included; making recommendations to 

the post-employment restrictions for cabinet members to 

continue the restrictions already in place in The Members’ 

Conflict of Interest Act; and restrict employees in the ministry 

of Executive Council or the Office of the Premier from 

lobbying any ministry or government rather than just the 

ministry they were formerly employed with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill reflects a focus on private sector and paid 

lobbyist activities. That is where the risk of influence is most 

acute and where there is limited public disclosure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this matter was first referenced to the 

committee it was noted, free and open access to government 

decision makers is an important matter of public interest. 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4187 

Lobbying public office-holders is a legitimate activity when it is 

conducted appropriately. 

 

I would like to thank the committee for the excellent work that 

they have done in completing their report. I believe this bill 

strikes the appropriate careful balance between allowing 

continued access to public office-holders while ensuring that 

such paid lobbying activities is routinely disclosed to the public 

to ensure transparency and accountability. And with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to moved second reading of The 

Lobbyists Act. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is a motion by the Justice and Attorney General that 

Bill No. 120, The Lobbyists Act be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 

the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very again pleased to be able to participate when we look at this 

particular bill, Bill 120. I think one of the important things, Mr. 

Speaker, is the people of Saskatchewan ought to know that The 

Lobbyists Act is something that we’re going to be paying very 

close attention to. 

 

And people that might not know, what the Act entails is that 

obviously as you travel, and many people approach, not just 

MLAs, but in particular they approach the cabinet and they also 

approach the Premier, that they always provide the opportunity 

for them to sell their goods or present their case on a number of 

issues. 

 

And I noted that some of the points that were raised at the 

outset when the minister was introducing this bill is I think that 

the lobbyist industry in general is also in the public’s interest. 

There’s no question that as you get advice, as you get advice 

from an industry leader or you get advice from a particular 

company, that advice is invaluable. 

 

Certainly as cabinet and certainly as the Premier, I think you 

would certainly be better suited to understand what their 

industry is all about, and therefore overall the public interest is 

certainly maintained. And something that I think from the 

perspective of being able to hear from lobbyists, I don’t think 

you’re going to get a lot of opposition from that. 

 

But as the minister spoke about making sure that it’s done 

properly and fairly and that there isn’t any undue influence 

that’s being placed in some activity that’s not proper, that’s 

what’s really important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a lot of information on this bill, and I know that my 

colleagues, that there’s two members of the opposition that 

were part of the process when the committee was looking at this 

bill, that they participated as well. And both of my colleagues, I 

believe, issued a different perspective on some of the hearings 

that they attended and some of the information that they got, 

that they presented their own perspective. 

 

Perhaps that perspective, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that 

people ought to appreciate in the sense that, as the opposition, 

we have different takes on how the government should 

approach certain things, and we have different values. So I 

know that my colleagues that participated in the committee to 

discuss this bill, that they also issued a separate report saying, 

the government is doing this. We propose that they add these 

issues on to make sure that this lobbyist Act, to make sure it’s 

done properly, is open, it’s transparent, that it’s accountable, 

and that it is effective. 

 

So I think that certainly from the two committee members from 

the opposition that participated on, they will have a lot more 

information to share and a lot more to say on this particular bill. 

And I know the people of Saskatchewan and those that are 

paying close attention to this file, that they’ll have the 

opportunity to hear their perspective, based on some of the 

hearings that they attended as a committee member. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 120 . . . And again I point out that if 

lobbyists are doing this job correctly and fairly and open and 

transparent, then I think the ability for industry or a business or 

a group of people to approach somebody from cabinet or to 

even approach the Premier or even approach an MLA, that this 

information should be presented or the opportunity to present 

that information on behalf of their company or a group of 

people, that that opportunity exists. However, as was indicated, 

you’ve got to make sure it’s done fairly, proper. And you’ve got 

to make sure it’s done legally because we get subjected to so 

many opportunities and so much information that you’ve got to 

be careful that you don’t do this thing improperly. 

 

So the principle, the principle behind allowing lobbyists access 

to the Premier or somebody in cabinet and even MLAs, I think 

is a fair principle as long as it’s done in the public interest and, 

we believe, the public interest that it be done transparently, 

within the rules, and within the guidelines. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to be very careful on this front 

because obviously, you know, as you travel and you go to meet 

the different organizations, especially if you’re in cabinet, you 

get subjected to a lot of information. You get subjected to a lot 

of proposals, and you’ve got to make sure that you do this 

properly. And I hope that as you look at this lobbyist Act itself 

that there are processes, that there’s policies and procedures that 

are hammered home with members of cabinet that this is what 

you do when you bump into somebody that is lobbying you for 

a certain particular benefit. We hope that there is a manual that 

many of these folks would be able to access to make sure that 

they can’t come along and say, oh we didn’t know about that 

rule or we didn’t know about that procedure. 

 

So (a) I don’t think the opposition’s arguing with the ability of 

the people to lobby their government, which I think is 

important; but (b) that we be very specific on the rules and the 

process and the procedure when you do have somebody 

lobbying you as a member of cabinet or even the Premier. I 

think if you’re very transparent and fair with that process, then 

people can’t be critical of it. However if they don’t understand 

the process to make sure you document that a lobbyist has 

spoken to you, then I think that the Saskatchewan government 

has to make sure that that process is clearly understood by every 

single member of cabinet. Because if it’s not understood, then 

they can simply say, well we didn’t know. And that’s not good 

enough, Mr. Speaker, because this particular activity with 

lobbyists is rife with problems if it’s not done properly. 

 



4188 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

So I think there’s going to be a lot of information being shared 

with folks out there. And to those that are paying an interest — 

the lobby sector, people that are actually paid to lobby 

government, to educate government, and to work with 

government — we think that activity is important and certainly 

in the public interest as the opposition. We believe that that role 

should be protected and that that opportunity should be 

protected as well. But we’ve got to make sure we do it fairly, 

that we do it transparently, and that we do it within really solid 

guidelines. 

 

And about the only thing that we see right now, Mr. Speaker, 

that would prevent, that would prevent this particular bill from 

being effective is if we see the Sask Party play around with 

rules or not follow the proper procedure when dealing with the 

lobbyists. And, Mr. Speaker, we hope that they don’t do that. 

We hope that they don’t do any injustice to this bill because we 

think that sitting and talking to lobbyists is a critical part of 

building a strong, new economy. And if we do it right, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan would accept that. 

 

So we have a lot of information that we want to share with 

different groups and organizations out there. We were 

concerned at one time that it took the Premier almost two years 

from the day that he mentioned he was going to bring this Act 

forward. And the public has waited two years. We still have 

problems with it. We still need more consultation, and we want 

to get some collaboration from some of the industry players. 

And once we do, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be able to give a better 

perspective on what this lobbyist bill is all about. So I think we 

have some other avenues and certainly some other venues to 

bring forward more information. 

 

I’m quite excited that two of my colleagues are going to be 

presenting their own perspective and their own take on the 

committee hearings that they participated in when it comes to 

dealing with lobbyists. I think there’s some very good 

information that they will present. And the information that 

they’re going to present will strengthen this bill. It won’t hurt it. 

And we just hope that there isn’t any kind of kickback or a 

certain . . . I shouldn’t use the word kickback, but if there’s any 

kind of an argument from the Sask Party to strengthen The 

Lobbyists Act, I think, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan, public interest would be better served and well 

served if you’d take both perspectives — the opposition 

perspective and the government perspective — to meld it into a 

really solid lobbyist Act for many other jurisdictions to follow 

and to try and emulate. So I think it’s important that we 

undertake that kind of attitude. 

 

So on that notion, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill 120, The Lobbyists Act. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Athabasca has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 120, The 

Lobbyists Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 112 — The 

Accounting Profession Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

the debate on Bill 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Looking 

at the minister’s second reading speech and some of the 

information he shared with and some of the discussions I guess 

about the process . . . And we have three bodies that are coming 

together to form an organization, I said to work together, and it 

sounded like take some of the best practices that they have, 

work out. But I want to talk a little bit about that. 

 

And clearly, you know, CAs [chartered accountant], CMAs 

[certified management accountant], CGAs [certified general 

accountant], the three bodies will be coming together. I think 

they represent about 4,400 professions and about 970 students 

he refers to. And it sounds like through the process, through the 

I guess comments the minister made about the conversations, 

maybe the consultation, listening to what the industry, the 

profession, the professional industry had to say about merging 

the three into one organization is a good thing. And it sounds 

like they’ve done the work that was needed to do. 

 

And if that’s the case, that they’ve truly gone out, consulted 

with the industry, the professions, the students, and are saying, 

yes this is what we think. We agree with the industry, the 

professions, and we’re going to support . . . And I think some of 

the comments we made earlier, yes if it makes sense, common 

sense to support that on this side as well, it is. You want to 

make sure we have a profession that does . . . 

 

And many, you know, whether it’s entrepreneurs, large, small 

businesses, you know, they use these accounting firms, and the 

accountants to do the work that they need to do. And whether 

they’re private or, like, small, it’s done that way. And they take 

care of that. And the public wants to be protected. And they 

want to make sure that the accountants that are using it, so 

there’s some provisions. And we know further down, as they 

come together, and before . . . And I know you want to get into 

that part of it. First I want to make sure I’m clear about the 

process, to make sure that the industry supports this. And it’s 

fine to say that. We have to make sure. 

 

And on our side, some of our colleagues have had meetings and 

probably opportunity to talk to some of the accounting firms 

that are out there. There’s some of them large, small, and, you 

know, have that. Some of them might be a smaller, a family 

business. But at the end of the day, still I think, all firms and 

anyone in the profession that’s being merged has that 

opportunity to voice their concern. Or if they want to improve 

things, they should have that ability. And it’s good, and I think 

it’s good when you have legislation coming forward where you 

consult, you make sure you’ve talked to the people that would 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4189 

be impacted. That’s a good thing. And I commend any 

legislation that comes before this House. If it’s used that 

practice, it’s good that you have. 

 

And I just want to talk about some of the legislation. This 

government, the Sask Party government, the government, 

current government, let’s be very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

did not go through the process properly to consult. And I think 

about some of the First Nations . . . And I know La Ronge 

Indian Band has voiced its concern when it came to, you know, 

the provincial park. It had concerns. It voiced that concern 

about, it wasn’t consulted, but here’s legislation that makes a 

new provincial park. But you have a group that’s saying, it’s 

our traditional territory. It’s our land. Here’s our letter. We’re 

concerned about this. So it goes into making sure that people 

are consulted before you pass legislation. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So I want to make it very clear. When you have groups coming 

forward — whether they’re individuals from our province or an 

organization or a First Nations, a Métis community, a 

municipality, whether it’s professions — and they have 

concerns about legislation that this government’s going to pass, 

you have to make sure that you’ve done the due diligence. And 

you can’t just push it your way and, you know, push away at it 

and continue to say, well we’re going to go ahead with it 

because it’s what we want. It’s what we promised in our 

campaigns. We said we’re going to do this. Doesn’t matter who 

doesn’t like it. We’re going to push ahead because that’s what 

we are going to do. You know, it doesn’t matter how big of a 

majority of government we have, we’re going to push ahead 

because we can. The people have spoken. We’re just going to 

ram it. 

 

So I caution the government, when you’re introducing 

legislation, and if you’re doing that and you’re meeting, you 

know, if you’re meeting organizations or a First Nations group, 

Métis, that are opposed to this, citizens that are opposed, to 

bring them and changes to legislation.  

 

So I want to make it very clear. In this process it sounds like — 

from what I’m hearing from the minister, and I have to take it 

for what he’s saying that he shared with us — that the process 

has gone through the three. They’ve talked to the 4,400 

members. They’ve talked to the 970 students. They’ve made 

sure that those, the three bodies, are in agreement and they’re 

coming together in a positive way. If it’s what they want, then 

yes, that makes sense. 

 

But again, I go back to saying, the process. Making sure that the 

process is done right, that individuals that have concerns are 

heard. The government needs to listen when individuals raise 

concerns, whether it’s a traditional territory, or you’re 

impacting their business, you’re impacting their property, 

you’re impacting their quality of life in Saskatchewan by 

passing legislation in this, a House, and let’s make it very clear, 

in the Assembly. 

 

So when I say that, we want to make sure. Now these changes 

coming in, there’s different areas they’re talking about making 

some of . . . and it’s supposed to improve. And they talk about 

making sure that the customer at the end of the day is 

comfortable and satisfied with certain protections that will be 

put into, I guess the regulations, bylaws, that will be developed. 

 

And the government wants to make sure that the body that’s 

incorporated, that’s coming forward, from what I can see, you 

know, and it’s going to be changed. CPA [chartered 

professional accountant] Saskatchewan will be an incorporated 

body. We’ll come in with regulatory bylaws and we’ll give 

them . . . and they’re going to develop those. And it sounds like 

the industry’s going to bring those forward as their 

recommendations to make sure government’s aware. And if 

that’s the case, to protect Saskatchewan residents and our 

business people, that’s a good thing. Nobody’s opposed to that. 

That makes sense. It’s a good process. 

 

But having said that, government’s also said before it proclaims 

this bill, it will make sure that those provisions are there, the 

regulatory bylaws are there in place to protect the people of our 

province, whether they’re business, whether it’s a private . . . I 

guess you have individuals who would do their private income 

tax. You have accounting firms that do that. You have 

accountants who do that, so this group would be doing that. It’s 

to making sure that citizens, residents are protected. And that’s 

a good thing. We want to make sure. 

 

And when I talk about, we’re going to make sure they’re 

protected, but also I know we’ll be talking to accountants out 

there and asking them if this is something that they support and, 

if it is, great. The process . . . And I know, you know, the 

member from Athabasca talked about when it’s good legislation 

and it makes sense, and our leader has said that when it makes 

good common sense to work together with government, the 

opposition will support legislation that moves in a positive way, 

that’s requested by professions, by industry, and it makes sense 

and the argument’s there, you know, we support that. 

 

And I want to make it very clear. I think our party as opposition 

. . . But we make sure that if there’s people out there that are 

concerned of those 4,400 members, the 970 students, if there 

are issues, you can contact, you know, the opposition. You can 

get hold of the members, you know, and that’s clear. We’re here 

to hear their concerns. But you also can let the government 

know that you have concerns. And there’s nothing wrong with 

telling government, we’re concerned about the legislation here 

and the bill you’re bringing in, so we’re going to cc [carbon 

copy] the opposition. There’s nothing wrong with doing that. It 

kind of gives them . . . know that there’s a set on eyes on that, 

and that’s important sometimes. Sometimes that’s very 

important when legislation comes before here. 

 

So we see this . . . Overall we’re hearing it’s being supported by 

the three bodies, and that’s good. And if that’s the case, that’s 

great. We’ll see where we go. But again there’s going to be 

regulatory by-laws that will come into place or effect before it’s 

proclaimed as legislation, and that’s good. That gives some 

protections, we know, as well. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point I think it’s clear that, you 

know, this piece of legislation as it’s presented, it sounds like 

yes. When you look at it, it sounds like it’s a good piece of 

legislation that will take three bodies to one, will create 

protection for Saskatchewan people. We’re hearing that the 

industry was consulted, and I hope so, that they were done the 



4190 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

way it was presented. So at the end of the day, you know, 

there’s some provisions in here to make sure the by-laws are in 

place before it comes into law. 

 

And you know, so having said that, and I want to just kind of go 

back just quickly covering the process, I’ve seen other pieces of 

legislation that did not get the due diligence that I think this 

government owed Saskatchewan people, owed the industry and 

those that were going to be impacted. This government, whether 

it’s traditional territory, did not get the respect that they needed 

and did not get government saying, whoa, we have a problem. 

Let’s sit down. Let’s work through this with the Saskatchewan 

people before we push ahead with this legislation. And there 

has been, you know, since the time I’ve been here, bills, and 

quite a few of them, that this government has not listened to the 

people and just pushed ahead with what they want. They come 

up with their version and that’s it, like it or don’t like. 

 

But I guess when, you know, they say it themselves, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when you have such a large majority, you get 

to do what you want. Well one day the people may say, enough 

of that and we’ll send a message. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having said that . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh you want to hear that again? 

Okay. I’m going to make sure for the member that didn’t hear 

it, you know, with that large majority you keep telling us you 

have, patting yourselves on the back, all the time patting 

yourselves for all the great work you’re doing, you need to 

make sure that you listen to Saskatchewan people that are 

impacted by legislation that’s being introduced in this House to 

make sure those individuals being impacted are listened to, that 

their concerns are heard before you come ahead and ram 

legislation down that does not meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. So they can deal with that for a while, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So at this point I’m prepared to adjourn debate on this bill, and I 

know my colleagues, you know, will have more to say about 

this bill. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Cumberland has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 99 — The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. I’m glad to join the debate today on Bill No. 99, 

The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s always good to stand in this House and 

good to join the proceedings upon the heels of that excellent 

speech on the part of my colleague from Cumberland, very 

passionate, very committed representative from Cumberland. 

 

And I note that the member from Moose Jaw North is now 

chiming in from his seat. And I don’t know if he didn’t get 

enough sleep last night or if he, you know, went to bed past his 

bedtime or something, Mr. Chair of Committees, but you know, 

he’s a member that’s known for not much in this House other 

than yelling from his place. So I guess if you’ve got a talent in 

this Chamber, Mr. Chair of Committees, you know, fair 

enough, follow your passion. But if that’s the sum total of that 

member’s contribution to this Chamber, Mr. Chair of 

Committees, that the member from Moose Jaw North that is 

known for yelling from his chair, but little more, you know, I 

guess that’s sad, but on it goes. Anyway . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I’d like to remind the 

Opposition House Leader to keep his comments and overall 

direction focused on the bill at hand. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. We’ll do our best to stay on task here. But again 

with the repeated yelling from his chair, the member from 

Moose Jaw North, you know, certainly makes an impact on the 

debate that we seek to promulgate in this House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So I’ll do my best. But again if . . . I understand the 

member’s got a passion for yelling from his chair. I understand 

he’s got a passion for interrupting people’s contributions in this 

place. And I understand that he thinks that’s a great thing and I 

hear him going on . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I’d like to remind the 

member, the Opposition House Leader, once again to keep your 

comments focused on the bill at hand, and I would remind 

members on both sides to please give complete attention to the 

speaker on this important bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s speaker with a small S. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. Speaker with a small S, 

as I’ve been reminded by my colleague from Cypress Hills 

across the way. 

 

But returning to the subject at hand, Mr. Chair of Committees, 

Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2013, certainly pensions are of huge importance in the way 

that people keep households together, people keep bread on the 

table, and people plan for their retirement. And certainly to state 

right off the top, Mr. Chair of Committees, I’m a member of the 

public employees pension plan and certainly follow the 

proceedings with what happens with PEPP [public employees 

pension plan] with great interest, Mr. Chair of Committees. And 

again PEPP being the acronym and the way that it’s commonly 

referred to throughout the Assembly. 

 

So it’s certainly something that bears a lot of focus in terms of 

the importance of income security for a lot of different folks. 

But as regards to the public employees of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and again all 58 of us that are members of the 

Legislative Assembly being members of this pension plan, it’s 

certainly an important part of our daily income situation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4191 

Referring to the minister’s second reading speech introducing 

the Act of November 12th, 2013, referencing the fact that as of 

March 31st, 2013, there are close to 53,000 plan holders of 

PEPP with $5.6 billion in assets and including 79 different 

employers, again by the numbers, Mr. Speaker — and good to 

see you in your chair, Mr. Speaker — certainly by the numbers 

demonstrating the importance of PEPP to the province and the 

great sort of reach and scope that it has in the pension situation 

for many different individuals and those 79 different employers 

across this province. Again where the minister in his second 

reading speech referred to member and employer contributions 

being calculated as a percentage of the member’s total gross 

regular earnings; unless otherwise specified in an agreement, 

the contribution percentage being 5 per cent by the member; 

and member contributions being made by payroll deduction, 

that’s certainly the experience for I and my colleagues as we are 

members of the public employees pension plan. 

 

And carrying on, folks, here on the minister’s second reading 

remarks: 

 

Contributions to PEPP are tax deductible up to a maximum 

set by the Income Tax Act of Canada. Members do not pay 

taxes on contributions or the accumulated investment 

income until they withdraw an amount from the plan. 

Contributions are forwarded to the plan and are used to 

purchase units in the PEPP investment option of the 

member’s choice. 

 

. . . PEPP offers members the choice of six asset allocation 

funds . . . accelerated growth fund, growth fund, balanced 

fund, moderate fund, conservative fund, [and the] PEPP 

steps fund. [And] members . . . [being able to] invest in the 

short-term bond fund either in addition to or instead of 

investing in one of the six asset allocation funds. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, just a little bit about the mechanics of the 

fund itself. Nothing particularly earth-shattering there but, as 

with any such pensionable endeavour, or pension endeavour or 

a fund such as this, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the fund 

itself keep up with the times. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And certainly I’m not old enough to have been subject to this, 

but I do know folks that were subject to the old plan versus the 

new plan. Then again, Mr. Speaker, the shift that was made 

from defined benefits to a defined contribution. And certainly 

there’s a fair amount of commentary that exists around the 

sustainability and the relatively thoughtful path that was plotted 

forward with this approach to public employee pensions. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I’m coming from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. One of the individuals that had some of the 

vision and the foresight in terms of introducing this particular 

approach to pensions was then premier of the province, Allan 

Blakeney, in the late ’70s, and certainly the work around one of 

the former members from Nutana, the then minister of Finance, 

Wes Robbins, and the foresight that they had to again go forth 

with this then relatively new approach to pensions. And again I 

think over the long haul it has proven to be a fairly durable and 

reliable pension fund for the public employees of this province 

and again, as represented by the 53,000 plan holders referenced 

by the minister, the 5.6 billion in assets, and the 79 different 

employers involved. 

 

As regards the specific measures being proposed in the 

amendment Act itself, the minister references that they seek to: 

 

. . . clarify that a simple majority of board members is 

required for all decisions made by the board; allow the 

board to undertake short-term borrowings for the purposes 

of the administration of The Public Employees Pension 

Plan Act; allow the Lieutenant Governor, by order in 

council, to designate the default fund into which all 

member contributions shall be deposited unless otherwise 

directed by the member; provide that the Lieutenant 

Governor may order that members who have never chosen 

a fund for their PEPP funds [may] be moved into the 

default fund; and authorize the Lieutenant Governor by 

regulation to permit the plan to receive members and funds 

from a registered pension plan wanting to become part of 

the PEPP and to state which specialty funds members 

transferring into PEPP are eligible for. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, fine proposals as regards maintaining the 

best practices for the fund, making sure that what had 

previously been unforeseen eventualities be addressed as is 

appropriate, and the continual examination of, are you doing the 

best thing around your fund? Are you addressing problems that 

arise as they arise? These would seem to be, on the face of it, 

sensible steps. And again, given the importance of the public 

employees pension plan, not just to we members of this 

legislature but to the 53,000 plan holders and the 79 employers 

involved in the $5.6 billion of holdings, it’s good to see those 

steps being taken to safeguard the appropriate governance of 

that fund. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it would seem in some regards to be 

largely housekeeping legislation, not exactly earth-shattering 

stuff. And again, it’s not that everything has to be a legislative 

rocket ride, Mr. Speaker. But this definitely would seem to fall 

under the heading of housekeeping and again, while it’s 

important that you keep up with the housekeeping, I think 

demonstrates a legislative agenda that’s perhaps a bit more on 

the lighter side than on the substantial side. Again not to say 

that you shouldn’t be doing housekeeping, Mr. Speaker. Don’t 

get me wrong in that regard, but not exactly stopping the world 

spinning on its axis. 

 

As regards the pension situation generally and how PEPP works 

or is situated within that broader context of retirement income 

and questions and the different sort of debates that are being 

had right now around the health and the viability of the Canada 

Pension Plan or around the Saskatchewan Pension Plan — 

again of which I am also a member, Mr. Speaker — again it’s 

important to keep the health and the progressive nature of PEPP 

moving forward and keeping it well secured. 

 

But it’s interesting to see this debate taking place against a 

backdrop where there’s a fair amount of back and forth right 

now between the provinces and the federal government around 

the Canada Pension Plan, and the way that different sort of 

coalitions seem to be coming together or falling apart around 

the Canada Pension Plan, and the great interest with which we 

in the opposition benches are trying to follow where the 



4192 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

provincial government is going and what voice they’re bringing 

to that discussion federally, nationally, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

making sure that CPP . . . again one of the great sort of 

innovations of the time, lifted a great number of seniors out of 

poverty and provided for a secure, stable, decent standard of 

living for many, many seniors in this country when it was 

brought forward, also something where the federal government 

and the provincial governments were able to come to some 

measure of agreement. 

 

We watch with great interest what’s happening right now 

around that debate and what happens to the different sort of 

proposals coming forward from the provinces and how those 

are being received by the federal government. But where that all 

winds up and the different permutations that the provincial 

position out of Saskatchewan seems to have gone through, we 

follow that with great interest as well. 

 

Returning to the question of PEPP itself, in terms of the actual 

legislation, again moving through Bill No. 99 and the new 

section 4.1 where it states the provisions around majority and 

restriction on liability, again to quote from the Act itself, new 

section 4.1: 

 

“Majority and restriction on liability 

4.1(1) Subject to subsection (2), a decision or any other 

action taken at a meeting of the board constitutes a 

decision or action of the board if it is voted for or 

approved by a majority of the members of the board 

present at the meeting. 

 

You know, if I might add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, pretty 

straightforward. Carrying on to section 2: 

 

(2) No member of the board is liable with respect to a 

decision or an action taken at a meeting of the board if: 

 

(a) in the case of a member who was present at the 

meeting, the member: 

 

(i) did not vote for or otherwise approve the 

decision or action taken at the meeting; and 

 

(ii) requests that his or her dissent be entered into 

the minutes of the meeting; or 

 

(b) the member was not present at the meeting at 

which the decision was approved or the action taken”. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, considering what’s brought forward here in 

Bill No. 99 as regards the majority and restrictions on liability 

provisions in the Act and the proper conduct of the board, again 

this would seem to be a measure aimed at keeping up with best 

practice around board governances, particularly as it relates to 

boards of pension plans. So we’d be interested to know if that is 

in fact the case. And if the minister can confirm that for us and 

how this relates to the experience of relevant pension plans 

around the country or as regards, for example, the conduct at 

the board of the Canada Pension Plan itself. 

 

Again considering the legislation, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Section 5 amended 

4 The following clause is added after . . . 5(g): 

 

“(g.1) borrow money for the purposes of the plan, if: 

 

(i) the borrowing is for a term not exceeding 90 

days; 

 

(ii) the borrowing is not part of a series of loans or 

other transactions and repayments; and 

 

(iii) no asset of the plan is used as security for the 

borrowed money except where the borrowing is 

necessary to avoid a distressed sale of assets to 

provide for the current payments of benefits”. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, a fairly straightforward set of 

recommendations and would seem to make good sense and 

would seem to keep up with what may have previously been 

understood to be the case in terms of proper decisions being 

made by the board, but often is not, Mr. Speaker. These things 

need to be refined and perhaps more closely defined in the 

black and white of the legislation. Again going through the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Section 9 amended 

5(1) Subsection 9(1) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(1) Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, the board may: 

 

(a) establish one or more speciality funds by 

allocating part of the assets of the fund to the 

amounts standing to the credit of members who 

elect to participate in a speciality fund; and 

 

(b) designate one of the specialty funds as the 

default fund in which members who have not made 

an election with respect to participation in a 

specialty fund shall participate”. 

 

(2) Clause 9(2)(a) is amended by striking out “elect 

to”. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, seems to be pretty straightforward and in 

keeping with making sure that the governance of the board and 

the decision-making authority of the board as regards allocating 

various funds and the circumstances by which those funds 

might be allocated are properly delineated. 

 

Section 10 amended 

6 The following subsection is added after subsection 

10(4): 

 

“(5) If an employer is designated as a participating 

employer pursuant to subsection (1) and that employer 

is an employer that participates in a pension plan that 

contains a defined contribution provision within the 

meaning of The Pension Benefits Act, 1992, the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by regulation: 

 

(a) terminate the membership with respect to the 

defined contribution provision of: 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4193 

(i) employees who become members of the plan 

pursuant to subsection (1); and 

 

(ii) other prescribed members of the pension plan 

whose employment has terminated; 

 

(b) transfer the amount with respect to the defined 

contribution provision standing to the credit of each 

person mentioned in clause (a) to the fund; and 

 

(c) if the defined contribution provision from which 

an amount is transferred pursuant to clause (b) 

permitted members to make an election with respect 

to the investment of the amount that is transferred, 

provide for the manner in which that election 

applies to the participation of the member in the 

plan”. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have some questions in committee I 

imagine as regards the different classes of people currently 

within the 50,000-plus plan holders to which this might apply. 

Our suspicion is that it wouldn’t be a terribly great number, but 

just how that impacts the membership as it’s currently 

construed, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking for greater clarity on 

that in committee. 

 

Section 26 amended 

 

7 The following clause is added after clause 26(1)(i): 

 

“(i.01) for the purposes of subsection 10(5): 

 

(i) respecting the manner in which the membership 

with respect to the defined contribution provision of 

a pension plan is to be terminated; 

 

(ii) prescribing, from among members of the 

pension plan whose employment has terminated, 

those whose membership with respect to the defined 

benefit contribution provision of a pension plan is to 

be terminated; 

 

(iii) prescribing the manner of transfer to the fund of 

amounts standing to the credit of members; 

 

(iv) prescribing the manner in which a member’s 

election with respect to the investment of amounts 

transferred is applied to the participation of the 

member in the plan”. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, all of which would seem to be fairly, I 

would presume, commonplace kind of powers to be delineated 

for a pension plan and its proper functioning, Mr. Speaker. And 

again while not earth shattering in nature, would seem to be 

more along the lines of housekeeping legislation or addressing 

problems that have arisen in the plan itself as it has been 

practised lo these many years. 

 

[16:30] 

 

That’s about it for my thoughts today on Bill No. 99, Mr. 

Speaker. I know that others of my colleagues are very interested 

in participating in the debate. Certainly not the least for which 

the fact that we’re all members of this plan, but also the impact 

that it has on the lives of the 53,000-odd plan holders and the 79 

employers referenced in the minister’s second reading speech. 

But obviously it’s a fairly significant pension fund in the 

province of Saskatchewan and has a definite impact on the 

livelihood of many. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 99, An Act to amend the Public Employees Pension Plan 

Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The Child 

Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Merci beaucoup, monsieur le Président. Je 

vais parler à un loi maintenant qui a été traduit en français, mais 

je vous assure que je ne vais pas poser tous mes comments en 

français. 

 

[Translation: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will now 

speak to a law that has been translated into French, but I assure 

you that I will not make all my comments in French.] 

 

So I’ll switch to English now, but certainly it’s good to see the 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

difficult to speak when there’s shouting that’s going on across 

the way. So I’ll try and get a word in edgewise here. 

 

This is a law that the Minister of Education rose recently to 

introduce and indicated that it’s one that needed to be translated 

into French, and there are some very important reasons for that, 

Mr. Speaker. And certainly it’s appropriate that this has been 

done at this point in time. And in the comments, he indicated 

that the Conseil des écoles fransaskoises and the l’Association 

des parents fransaskois have asked for this to be available in 

French to ensure that the French children that are being put into 

daycare, and the operators of daycares in French — les 

garderies, I think is the word in French — have also access to 

legislation in French to ensure that the provisions are being 

followed and that the children are being protected under the 

auspices of this child care Act. 

 

So certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that these types 

of translations take place and certainly to provide protection to 

those children and for the parents and for the operators of the 

daycares as well, that they have opportunity to read the law and 

understand the law in their first language or the official 



4194 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

language of their choice, which is something that is available 

here in Saskatchewan, as we’re part of the Dominion of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, with two official languages. 

 

Certainly daycare is something that’s I think fundamental to . . . 

or child care is fundamental to modern society. And as a mother 

of two sons, it was certainly something that was very important 

to me as I was working on my profession and being a parent, 

and with both the parent of my sons and myself being working, 

then it was important that we had access to quality child care. 

We were very, very fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to start off when the 

boys were little in a private care home. And one was a good 

neighbour across the street and another was one that was 

recommended by my cousin. But it’s always a bit of a concern 

as a new parent to know that where you’re going and where 

you’re going to be entrusting your children is a place that is one 

where they’ll be cared for, that they’ll be loved, and that they’ll 

be treated well, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that I think 

many, many parents struggle with. 

 

So first of all, it’s ensuring your children are well cared for. 

Secondly, and one of the biggest barriers I think for many, 

many people, is the cost of daycare or child care. And it’s 

actually prohibitive for many people to enter the workforce 

because of the high cost of child care that is required. So we 

have a lot of barriers to adequate child care here in 

Saskatchewan. And certainly, you know, we’re looking to this 

government to ensure that parents of children are given more 

supports when it comes to entering the workforce. We know 

there’s a lot of demand for workers in the workforce. And in 

order for parents to be able to adequately engage in the 

workforce, they need affordable child care and they need access 

to quality child care. 

 

So when you see this government introduce a bill which is 

called An Act to Promote the Growth and Development of 

Children and to Support the Provision of Child Care Services, 

you’re looking for those kinds of provisions, Mr. Speaker, that 

there’s going to be more supports for parents, perhaps 

assurances that people who choose a career in child care are 

adequately remunerated. And we know that most child care 

workers in Saskatchewan are not making a living wage. 

Basically it’s a labour of love. And there’s certainly a lot of 

writing that I’ve been reading lately that indicates that this kind 

of work, it’s considered soft work and that it’s considered 

secondary work, and that because people love the kids that 

they’re happy to work for less. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly not respecting the work that 

these workers are doing, and it’s certainly not providing a safe 

and secure milieu for families to look as they’re entering into 

the world of child care. So it’s somewhat alarming and 

concerning when we see things like, in the Throne Speech, the 

addition of 500 additional child care seats. But we know that 

several thousand of them aren’t filled right now simply because 

there’s not enough incentive for child care agencies and private 

people to enter into the world of child care. 

 

There has to be a real labour of love in order for people to make 

the commitment to developing child care services here in this 

province. We need more licensed daycare spaces, but we also 

need the spaces that have been created by this government to 

actually exist. Right now they’re just spaces on paper, and 

that’s something I think that, you know, you might want to look 

for in legislation introduced by this government when it deals 

with child care. You were hoping that maybe some of these 

provisions would be there. 

 

We know that in the Speech from the Throne the government 

indicated that they’re going to develop 500 new child care 

spaces, but we know that that’s just a re-announcement of 

something that they’ve already done. So that’s concerning. And 

then secondly, this government is saying that there are 13,700 

spaces in Saskatchewan when we know that’s not right. We 

know many of those spaces are not developed, about 3,000 of 

them. So it’s fine to re-announce things over and over again and 

indicate that there’s progress being made, but we know, Mr. 

Speaker, there just simply isn’t enough spaces available. 

 

And I think in terms of the French community, the francophone 

community here in Saskatchewan, there certainly aren’t enough 

francophone spaces for them to put their children in. And that’s 

something that I think is . . . You know, you would look to this 

government for leadership, and as we heard over and over again 

today, the lack of leadership is concerning. And there simply 

isn’t any kind of legislative leadership in this fall session, as far 

as I can see. 

 

So although we have a nice, new bill here that’s been translated 

into French, of course that’s the result of the work of the good 

people over in the public service, where we know that our 

friends over in the ministry are carefully doing the translation 

that’s required. They’ve also done a number of what you would 

call, I guess, renewal of the language in a number of the 

clauses. But really, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing new in this bill 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — With leave to introduce a guest, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

asked for leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the House, 

Donna Birkmaier who’s in the Speaker’s gallery. And I believe 

she’s probably here for the SIAST reception this afternoon. And 

of course she’s been a real leader in Saskatoon, particularly at 

the municipal level and her leadership on city council. And I’ve 

got to know her husband quite well as well, and actually was 

able to spend Remembrance Day . . . We had a luncheon out at 

the commissionaires, where she’s been very active in the 

commissionaires’ world as well. So I’d like to ask all members 

of the House to welcome Donna to her legislature. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4195 

ask for leave for introductions. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to join the member opposite in welcoming Donna 

Birkmaier to her Assembly. As the member said, she has made 

significant contributions in the realm of municipal government 

and good governance at large. She is doing very, very solid and 

appreciated work on the SIAST board. She’s helped with the 

modernization of this institution and played a very, very vital 

role in the selection of the CEO, Dr. Larry Rosia, who we had 

the opportunity of introducing here last week. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, I’d ask for all our colleagues to join in 

welcoming Donna Birkmaier to her Assembly and thanks for 

her good work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 

sur les garderies d’enfants 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as I 

was discussing, we know there’s been a number of, not 

consequential amendments but housekeeping-type of 

amendments made to this bill. And certainly that is appropriate, 

and again we want to applaud the good work of the folks over at 

the Ministry of Justice for taking care and making sure that our 

legislation, the various laws in the province are updated from 

time to time using appropriate language and reflecting current 

standards in legislative drafting. 

 

You know, as I looked at the legislative agenda this fall, this 

seems to be a lot of what we’re getting from this government is 

just housekeeping and updating and reflecting modern language 

in a lot of bills. Some very, sort of, mundane if I can say, Mr. 

Speaker, types of legislation, and certainly not the type of 

leadership that we’d be looking for in the government at this 

stage of its term. And so I would call it legislation lite in many 

ways, Mr. Speaker. This is the type of legislation that is 

expected every government would deal with. But when we look 

for actual leadership in areas such as child care, we’re simply 

not seeing it at a legislative level coming from this government. 

 

We know that there’s a real need for adequate child care spaces 

and, as I indicated, affordable child care spaces, and also a lot 

more opportunity for parents for example to put their children 

in French daycare or child care if that’s what their choice is in 

terms of language. So it may be a helpful change, this particular 

bill, The Child Care Act, 2013. It really is the old Act almost 

intact except for the French addition, and it’s now been 

translated. 

 

But the only other substantive change, if you can even call it 

that, is that there’s some changes to the investigations portion. 

So you’ll find that in clause 21 of the new bill, and in the old 

bill it was clause 18(4). And the biggest, biggest change in this 

bill from the previous bill that’s been in place for a number of 

years is to expand the ability of a judge to issue a warrant for an 

investigation into also a vehicle — not just a building or 

premises, but the bill has been expanded to allow a search of a 

vehicle named in the warrant. 

 

So I think it’s an important change, but it certainly isn’t earth 

shattering or changing the whole child care provisions. And it 

most certainly isn’t the kind of supports I think that we see in 

other provinces for child care and to assist parents, as I say, 

who have many financial barriers to accessing child care, and 

certainly availability of child care spaces in rural areas and in 

urban areas as well, and in the language of choice as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So at this point, you know, again I think we applaud the 

translation into French. That’s appropriate and necessary and 

helps meet some of the needs of the French community here in 

Saskatchewan. We have the addition of a vehicle . . . now being 

able to stop and search a vehicle if it’s named in a warrant in 

relation to an offence under the Act, and then of course the 

modernization of language and plain language attempts by the 

good people over at the Ministry of Justice to ensure that the 

language is kept current with modern usage. 

 

So I think at that point other of my colleagues will want to be 

able to speak to this bill and provide their commentary as well, 

and so on that basis I would like to adjourn the debate on Bill 

No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — I would like to ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery we 

have royalty with us this afternoon, and so we’re in a position 

where we need to make sure that we introduce them 

appropriately. So I’m very pleased that we have part of the cast 



4196 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2013 

for the Sleeping Beauty play that, Mr. Speaker — I’ll include 

you in my remarks — that we saw the other night at Globe 

Theatre along with the member from Cypress Hills and the 

member for Last Mountain-Touchwood and the member for 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

So in the gallery we have some of the key members of Sleeping 

Beauty. And so I’d like to introduce Queen Adela is Lauren 

Holfeuer from Saskatoon. And we have King Freddie, Aaron 

Hursh; he’s also from Saskatoon. And then we have Princess 

Rosetta, that’s Agnes Tong from Vancouver, Studio 58 

graduate. And we have the villain of the whole operation, which 

is Malefia, is Emma Slipp. She’s also royalty as well, but the 

children warn everybody about her, obviously. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that they could be here 

today. I encourage every member to buy tickets to go and see 

this show, plus all of the people who are watching on television 

this afternoon. The Sleeping Beauty production is a very special 

one, both for adults and for children. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to add 

a welcome to the cast from Sleeping Beauty. I had the honour to 

attend, and it was fabulous. And I would certainly ask that 

everybody else have an opportunity to take in the show. It was 

very entertaining, and you guys are very talented. Thanks for a 

great night. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 100 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill No. 100, an Act to 

amend the Saskatchewan . . . or The Assessment Management 

Agency Act. And it is an important piece of legislation. It does 

provide the vehicle for how municipalities and part of our 

education system is funded. And so it’s something that we 

really need to take some time to reflect on and think about. 

 

And I know one of our audience members in the gallery knows 

an awful lot about assessment because of her role in municipal 

affairs. The folks from the theatre world may find this a rather 

tedious discussion, but I’m afraid that that’s our duty here. And 

it’s close to the end of the day, but we pick it up after 7 if 

you’re interested, but it may be the same type of speech. 

 

But I do want to say how important this is and what this really 

means to a lot of families and people in Saskatchewan. You 

know, as you’re buying your first property or you’re a senior 

and you’re worried about the cost of living and how things, how 

property taxes are eating into your disposable income, this kind 

of topic really matters an awful lot.  

 

Unfortunately though for so many people, and sometimes I find 

myself in this, I don’t really grasp or many people don’t totally 

grasp the significance or the language because it gets very, very 

technical. And tax assessment can be that way. And I think one 

of the things we often hear, I know — I think I can speak for 

many people in the House — that if there was a way that we 

could use plain language in this, it would go a long way for 

people understanding what their tax bills, their property tax bills 

really, really mean because it’s critically important. How do we 

pay for our schools? How do we pay for the streets that we 

drive on? How do we pay for the fire fighters? How do we pay 

for our police protection? That’s critical, hugely important. But 

do we understand the system of how we arrive at that? 

 

And we know other provinces do a much better, much better 

job than we do. But we seem to be stuck in that technical 

language, and it is very hard, very hard for people to get excited 

about it. In fact actually I know many people, their eyes will 

glaze over once you bring up assessment, and they give up. 

They give up on trying to understand this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will make a few comments right away, but I 

think I do want to speak a fair bit about this because I think this 

is this is an important, an important topic. And right off the bat I 

want to say, I want to ask the minister of Municipal Affairs, 

when he brings this forward in committee it will be an 

interesting discussion because I will want to know who did he 

consult with. He did make a point that he consulted with SUMA 

and SARM. And those really are the two primary stakeholders 

in this discussion because this is how they derive so much of 

their income. 

 

But I think we’re forgetting about the other side of the equation, 

those people who are paying the taxes. And was there 

consultation with those folks? I think that’s critically important 

as we see growth in our province and people coming in and 

people who are here who are buying properties and saying, this 

is a good time. This is part of the good times that are here. 

We’re buying new homes and buying new cottages. Farm land 

is being sold. But what is the method of which we do our 

assessment? And is it as efficient or as effective as it can be? 

 

And I think people have a lot of questions about that, and I 

would have a question. And when we were in government, I 

know when we went through some of the taxation issues, there 

were groups who were very interested in this kind of work. And 

I think particularly chamber of commerce, chamber of 

commerce is one group that raised this issue because when 

they’re talking about how do we tax, how do we arrive at 

property taxes, they would have opinions about that. And of 

course they’re looking across the country and saying, how do 

we do it the best way? How do we do it the best way? 

 

And I know this is an issue that the city of Saskatoon is 

wrestling with right now. And it’s an issue of cost of living. 

When rents are high and the cost of mortgages are high because 

of the value of the houses that are becoming more and more the 

norm in Saskatchewan, people want to make sure that they can 

afford their properties, but they live in the neighbourhoods that 

they thought they were going to be living in. And of course 



November 25, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4197 

we’re having a big debate in the House, in the legislature right 

now about P3s. And P3s anyways go to the heart of this issue 

because what we’re trying to do and what they’ve seen in other 

provinces where they’ve tried to put the debt or the costs 

somewhere else because . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — At a higher cost. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — At a higher cost at the end of the day. 

 

And as we heard today earlier, there were questions from the 

taxpayers federation about saying, are we delaying costs for our 

kids further down the road? So we want to make sure the taxes 

are fair and reasonable but they meet the needs that we expect 

from our communities. And that’s both schooling and also our 

communities. And whether that be the most basic things, about 

streets being paved, sidewalks being built, fire protection, 

police protection, our libraries, you name it, it’s a wide range of 

services that we expect, that we expect. But we cannot delay, 

we cannot delay the payment of it. And it should be in a fair and 

a reasonable way, but it should be in a manner that we can, that 

we can understand. 

 

And so I’m pleased to get into this discussion. And I want to 

take a moment to review the minister’s comments from 

November 12th, 2013, when he introduced this bill. And he 

recognized the fact that of course that we raised about $1.52 

billion in 2012. That was the amount that the annual property 

taxes were generated from the assessment system — a very, 

very important amount of money. Nine hundred, over $900 

million went to the municipalities, and about 600 million went 

to the education system. So you can see that this is a very, very 

important process, and it’s critically important, critically 

important that we get it right. 

 

It talks about the consultations with both, with SARM and 

SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and 

it goes without saying it’s key that they be included. But I 

would think that the net should’ve been cast much farther and 

broader because I know there are groups out there, particularly 

in cottage country, particularly in maybe the small acreages, 

that I think would have an opinion about some of these things, 

about what’s really important with SAMA [Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency], and how do we make it the 

best assessment agency that it can be, that it can be? 

 

So they said there were no objections. My question would be, 

did they offer any other comments? Were those comments acted 

on or were they dismissed? Because we see often with this 

government that suggestions that make a lot of common sense 

are dismissed. And it doesn’t matter from which side it can be, 

whether — and I go back to the discussion around P3s — 

whether it’s the construction association, whether it’s the 

taxpayers federation, whether it’s school boards, whether it’s 

parents. 

 

We see in Alberta, comments are coming from all different 

directions, but this government is saying no. We think we’ve 

got it right, and they’re dismissing those comments. So I’m 

hoping that’s not the case in this, in this legislation where 

they’re narrowly focused on the items they put forward in this 

bill because again, as I said, this is a hugely, hugely important 

issue. 

 

So it talks about greater flexibility that the SAMA will be given 

because of the legislation making it more administratively 

efficient for government to make its financial payment to 

SAMA, that type of thing. It will also make miscellaneous 

amendments of a non-financial nature, reflecting the agency’s 

present roles, responsibilities, and practices and respond to the 

change in responsibilities of the ministries of Government 

Relations and Education respecting the education funding 

system. 

 

So that sends up some flags for me, Mr. Speaker, because are 

they saying that we’re going to see more changes in the 

education funding system? What’s going to be happening with 

that? Are we going to be seeing more changes with the 

Government Relations? What’s happening with that? Those 

kind of things should be laid out. I mean it’s a bit of a flag. It’s 

a bit of a worry when they’re saying they’re changing 

responsibilities. Usually you think the responsibilities of the 

government and their ministries are pretty fixed. They don’t 

change an awful lot. So this is kind of an omen, and I’m 

worried about what that might mean, you know. 

 

He goes on and he talks a little bit about the school divisions 

and municipalities. Both may end up forgoing increased 

property taxes because I think this is in relation to the formula. 

He talks about in 2012 property tax revenues were split with 61 

per cent going to municipalities, 39 per cent to education. 

They’re going to change this. The amendments relate to fair 

balances of financial responsibility for assessment services to 

the municipalities and to the province. 

 

So we’re not sure what the impact will be when it comes to the 

municipalities and education. I know that particularly . . . Well I 

think for both of them, they’re very sensitive to any kind of 

change at all, and we’ve seen that just recently. My colleague, 

the critic for Municipal Affairs, raised the issue around the 

change in the funding formula that the cities had been looking 

for, the municipalities had been looking for. And they’ve found 

that apparently, according to the government, there’s been an 

error in the process, the formula, and so the different 

municipalities will not be getting as much as they had been 

planning on and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4165 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4165 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4165 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4173 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4194 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4194 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4195 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4196 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4165 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4165 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4166 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4166 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Riders Bring Home the Grey Cup  

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4166 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4166 

 Thanks to Grey Cup Organizing Committee 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4167 

 International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women  

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4167 

 Lawyer Honoured by Canadian Football League  

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4167 

 Headstart on a Home Program in Watrous  

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4167 

 Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week  

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4168 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4168 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4168 

 Health Care Conditions 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4171 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4171 

 Public-Private Partnerships and Provision of Schools 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4172 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4172 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 116 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4173 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4176 

 Bill No. 117 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4179 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4180 

 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4181 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4182 

 Bill No. 119 — The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Polytechnic Act 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4185 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4185 

 Bill No. 120 — The Lobbyists Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4186 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4187 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4188 



 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4190 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4193 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4196 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




