



















































Hansard: March 27, 2013


 

 

 

 

 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON 

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
 

 

 

Hansard Verbatim Report 
 

No. 9 – March 27, 2013 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

 

Twenty-Seventh Legislature 

 



STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 

 

 

 

 

Mr. Warren McCall, Chair 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

 

Mr. Scott Moe, Deputy Chair 

Rosthern-Shellbrook 

 

Ms. Jennifer Campeau 

Saskatoon Fairview 

 

Mr. Herb Cox 

The Battlefords 

 

Mr. Glen Hart 

Last Mountain-Touchwood 

 

Ms. Laura Ross 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 

 

Mr. Corey Tochor 

Saskatoon Eastview 

 

Mr. Trent Wotherspoon 

Regina Rosemont 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Published under the authority of The Hon. Dan D’Autremont, Speaker



 STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 121 

 March 27, 2013 

 

[The committee met at 10:59.] 

 

Ms. Burianyk: — Good morning, committee members. Since 

your Chair, Mr. Wotherspoon, has resigned his position, it’s my 

duty as Committee Clerk to preside over the election of a new 

Chair. So I’d like to remind members of the process. 

 

I’ll ask for nominations. Once there are no further nominations, 

I will then ask a member to move a motion to have a committee 

member preside as Chair. So I will now call for nominations for 

the position of committee Chair. Mr. Moe. 

 

Mr. Moe: — I would nominate Warren McCall. 

 

Ms. Burianyk: — Okay. Mr. Moe has nominated Warren 

McCall for a position of committee Chair. Are there any further 

nominations? Okay. Seeing none, I will then ask a member to 

move a motion to that effect. Mr. Moe. 

 

Mr. Moe: — I would like to move the motion: 

 

That Warren McCall be elected to preside as Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Ms. Burianyk: — Okay. Mr. Moe has moved the motion: 

 

That Mr. McCall be elected to preside as Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

All in favour of the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Ms. Burianyk: — Agreed. Okay. Opposed? I declare the 

motion carried and invite Mr. McCall to take the Chair. 

 

The Chair: — Thank you very much, Ms. Burianyk, and thank 

you to the committee. Thank you to my nominator, Mr. Moe. I 

think the first order of business is to table the letter of 

resignation from the previous Chair who’d done a fine job for 

the people — the member from Regina Rosemont. Shall I read 

that now, Kathy? 

 

Ms. Burianyk: — Sure. 

 

The Chair: — All right. 

 

March 10, 2013 

 

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan 

 

RE: PAC Chair Resignation 

 

Given my appointment as Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition, I am resigning my position as Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts effective March 

9, 2013. 

 

It has been a pleasure serving in this role. 

 

Sincerely, 

Trent Wotherspoon, MLA Regina Rosemont 

 

Duly tabled. 

 

Well with that . . . I had this long speech that I was going to 

give about the virtues of the Public Accounts Committee but I 

think we’ll save it for another day. 

 

And at this point I’d just say I’m really looking forward to this 

work. PAC [Public Accounts Committee] has a tremendously 

important role to play in the life of our Legislative Assembly 

and the public affairs of this province and I look forward to 

playing some small part in that as your Chair. 

 

But with that I would entertain a motion to adjourn. 

 

Mr. Moe: — I’ll make a motion of adjournment. 

 

The Chair: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Agreed. There we go. Committee stands 

adjourned. 

 

[The committee adjourned at 11:02.] 

 

 

 

 

 

 


