




















































Hansard: March 21, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 37A  THURSDAY, MARCH 21, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2835 

 March 21, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I have the great honour of 

introducing two very important guests from Deveraux 

Developments this morning. 

 

Joining us today are Denis Jones, the CEO [chief executive 

officer] of Deveraux Developments, and Kevin Gelsinger, 

vice-president of Deveraux Developments. I had the pleasure of 

joining with these two gentlemen earlier this morning to 

announce the development of 48 brand new affordable housing 

units for Regina families. 

 

We are working with Deveraux Developments on the exciting 

project and it’s going to open in the spring of 2014. It’s through 

relationships like this one with Denis and Kevin that’s helping 

more Saskatchewan people access affordable, quality housing. 

 

I’d ask all members join with me in welcoming these two 

gentlemen to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join in with the minister welcoming the folks to their 

legislature. It’s always important whenever we see new and 

innovative approaches in solving the housing issues that face 

people in Saskatchewan. So we too would welcome them here 

to the legislature. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in your gallery I’m delighted to introduce three young 

Saskatchewan leaders. We have joining us this morning Chris 

Stoicheff who’s the past president of the USSU [University of 

Saskatchewan Students’ Union] and he’s also on the board and 

actually is the Chair of a foundation called the Emerging Artists 

Foundation, and it plays a really important role connecting 

artists with corporate and community partners. And so to Mr. 

Stoicheff we offer a welcome. 

 

He’s joined this morning by David Konkin, the past president of 

STM [St. Thomas More], student president. He studied in 

McGill and came back to Saskatchewan. We’re delighted to 

help welcome him back. And they’re joined as well by Dale 

Richardson, and Dale was studying down in Alabama. He came 

back to Saskatchewan. He’s doing his master’s degree at the 

Johnson-Shoyama school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all three of these individuals represent the very 

best of Saskatchewan students, making a contribution not 

simply to their campus but also to our communities. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask all members to help me welcome these fine 

individuals to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming Messrs. Stoicheff, 

Konkin, and Richardson to their Legislative Assembly. I thank 

them for their leadership in the community — not just student 

leadership, but moving beyond. Good to see you here today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to rise and welcome a great-looking 

group up in the west gallery from Albert Community School, 

my neighbours across 7th Avenue. There’s a group of 28 grade 

7 and 8 students. They’re accompanied by teachers and 

chaperones Deanna Pelletier, Aaron Warner, Karen Willey, 

Dennis Pepin, Bill Nagel, and Luke Friesen. And I can say not 

just the students and the great part of the community that they 

are, but these teachers and chaperones are people that make a 

contribution not just to the learning and education that goes on 

at Albert Community School but to the community of north 

central that is very much appreciated. 

 

So it’s good to see them here today. Ta wow. I’d like to say 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly. I look forward to 

meeting later on with them, Mr. Speaker. So please welcome 

these students, teachers, chaperones from Albert Community 

School to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 

you and through you, I’d like to introduce a member from 

Regina Walsh Acres constituency, Mrs. Barb Dedi. She’s an 

influential member in the community. She works for Spring 

Free From Racism. She does a lot of work putting that event on. 

And she also works for the Regina Red Sox. And I know, I 

don’t think I quite got her vote last time, and I’m going to work 

hard the next four years to see if I can get it next time. So, Barb, 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to join with the member opposite in 

welcoming Ms. Barb Dedi and Ms. Sharon Pepin and Ms. Barb 

Dedi’s grandniece Colby to their legislature here today. As 

noted by the member opposite, Barb is somebody who is a 

leader within our community, does tremendous work for Spring 

Free From Racism, does tremendous work on a whole bunch of 

other fronts, including the Red Sox. Certainly Sharon Pepin 

does as well. And I ask all members of this Assembly to join 

with me in welcoming these community leaders to their 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While on my feet, I just would like to give a positive shout-out 

to those students from Albert School, those teachers of which I 

know many, and thank you for being here today. Thank you for 

what you do, and looking forward to your bright futures into the 



2836 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

seated in the west gallery is a gentleman that’s no stranger to 

this Assembly. And to you and all members that haven’t met 

him, I would like to introduce John Schmeiser, executive 

vice-president and CEO of the Canada West Equipment Dealers 

Association, to our Assembly. 

 

He is a good friend that goes back a long number of years. He’s 

a pretty good card player, and we affectionately know him as 

Johnny Schmear. He is joined this morning by his very capable 

assistant, Erin Dueck, who I understand does most if not all the 

work around that operation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 

the Minister for the Economy and welcome Mr. Schmeiser here 

today, thank him for his work, and to let him know that we 

won’t judge him by his friends. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, just to add a 

welcome to Dr. Jones. We are certainly grateful that he is here 

today — grateful for not only the housing project that the 

minister referenced but also for his great contribution to quite 

literally the health of the province, the health of the city, and 

also his other entrepreneurial endeavours which are creating 

jobs for families all through the capital city and increasingly 

right across the province. 

 

I also want to say hello and acknowledge my good friend, John 

Schmeiser, in the gallery as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you a young gentleman from the 

constituency of Batoche and my hometown of Middle Lake, 

Mr. Andrew Schmidt who is seated in your gallery. And he’s a 

graduate of the international studies, and I’d like you all to 

welcome him to his Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just noticed 

in the west gallery a good friend, Murray Cheesman who’s 

visiting us from Wood River constituency. It’s not that often we 

get people from Wood River, but Murray and I go back an 

awful long way. When the Saskatchewan Party first started we 

did thousands and thousands of miles travelling together. So I’d 

ask all members to welcome Murray to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

proud to present a petition today on the cellphone coverage 

notice, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service in the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First 

Nations, also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of 

Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nations along with the 

community of Turnor Lake, including the neighbouring 

communities in each of these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the people that have signed this petition to 

bring those cell coverage to all those communities have signed 

the petition from all throughout Saskatchewan — a very 

impressive show of support. And, Mr. Speaker, the people that 

have signed this petition today are primarily from Patuanak, and 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know since the employment Act was introduced in December, 

literally hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been 

carried out in the interest of due diligence. And there is no 

labour relations crisis to fix and no necessity to rush through 

this omnibus bill that will likely govern our workplace relations 

for decades to come. And if it does become the law, working 

people, particularly young workers, migrant workers, and other 

vulnerable workers will suffer from a hasty watering down of 

our current labour standards. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May, and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

I do so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Spring Free From Racism 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today on the International 

Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, I’m pleased 

to highlight a proud tradition that occurs each spring in Regina, 

one that has been going strong for the past 18 years. Spring Free 

From Racism was held this past Sunday, when thousands of 

people came together in our community to celebrate our 

diversity. I was pleased to attend, along with other members of 

this Assembly, and am proud to recognize the strength of our 

rich diversity. This event supports the International Day for the 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2837 

 

Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and does so by 

celebrating and sharing our cultural uniqueness. It’s a day filled 

with cultural dance, festivities, food, and kinship. It’s a day I 

look forward to each year. 

 

The Spring Free from Racism committee was formed in 1995 to 

take action to fight against racial discrimination. Mr. Speaker, 

our province is enriched by our diversity. Understanding and 

respect of our differences gives us strength. It is through 

knowledge, sharing, learning, and celebration, provided through 

events such as Spring Free, that will continue to enable 

important progress — important progress that we must all work 

towards every day. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in thanking Spring Free From 

Racism Chair Barb Dedi, the entire committee, partners, and 

cultural leaders that don’t just make Spring Free a success, but 

make a difference every day in our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we recognize 

the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination, which is observed annually on the 21st of 

March. 

 

On that day in 1960, a peaceful demonstration against apartheid 

in South Africa ended in tragedy. In 1966 the United Nations 

recognized those atrocious events by declaring March 21st an 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 

Proudly, Canada was one of the first countries to recognize this 

proclamation. 

 

We are fortunate to live in a multicultural society where 

diversity is both a source of great strength and the foundation of 

our national identity, and can use this day to reaffirm our 

commitment to fairness and diversity. The first article of the 

Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms that “All 

human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us honour the memory of those who died at 

Sharpeville, South Africa, and other racist incidents by 

redoubling our efforts to eradicate all forms of racism and racial 

discrimination. And above all, Mr. Speaker, we should cherish 

the rich diversity of humankind and respect the inherent dignity 

and equality of every human being. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Shift Work Recognition Day 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, March 20th has been proclaimed 

Shift Work Recognition Day, and this weekend the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour shift work committee is 

holding the fourth annual Innovative Conference on Shift Work. 

 

The conference attendees will have a chance to learn about the 

revolutionary shift work optimization protocol, which targets 

strategies specifically to the worker, their schedule, and 

workplace. They will learn strategies to improve diet and 

nutrition, manage stress, schedule transitions, driving and 

fatigue management, women and family issues, shift work sleep 

disorder, and negotiating contract language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost one-third of Canadian workers are 

involved in some kind of shift work. Shift work has long been 

linked to sleep deprivation, which causes a great range of 

problems including depression and a much greater risk of injury 

on the job. A 2010 study at UBC [University of British 

Columbia] found that people that do shift work are almost twice 

as likely to be injured on the job, and that women are 

particularly susceptible to problems related to shift work and 

sleep deprivation. 

 

The SFL’s [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] shift work 

committee works to achieve a healthier lifestyle and workplace 

through research, education, contract language, and legislation, 

along with their respective employers. They have hosted a 

number of shift work conferences focusing on the stresses of 

shift work issues, and offer some tools needed to deal with shift 

work and societal issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in recognizing 

Shift Work Recognition Day in appreciation and thanks to all 

the shift workers here in our province of Saskatchewan. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Affordable Housing Development 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this morning the 

Minister of Social Services announced the development of 48 

new affordable homes for Regina families. These modern, 

energy-efficient, multi-unit houses are being built by Deveraux 

Developments in the Hawkstone subdivision of north Regina. 

 

This $9.9 million investment is the first announcement under 

the government’s plan to reinvest $53 million into new housing 

for low-income families through the sale of government-owned 

single family units. This initiative will save low-income tenants 

money, as much as $100 a month for many low-income 

families. It will make our social housing system more 

sustainable, saving taxpayers approximately $10 million over 

the next 25 years. And selling the government’s single units 

will create 300 entry-level home ownership opportunities in 

Regina, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the perfect announcement for the day after 

budget because this initiative is all about balanced growth. In 

one single initiative we are improving the quality of life for 

low-income people, helping grow the province by providing 

more housing, and demonstrating fiscal responsibility by 

making the affordable housing system more sustainable. 

 

There is no doubt there is more work to do. That is why the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth included a goal to help build 

12,600 new housing units by 2016. Today’s announcement 



2838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

marks another milestone in an effort to keep Saskatchewan 

growing and improve quality of life for all Saskatchewan 

citizens. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Out-of-This-World Experience 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

rise today to recognize an out-of-this-world experience that 

students in my constituency had recently. On March 11th the 

students at Valley Manor Elementary School in Martensville 

were able to have a live chat with Commander Chris Hadfield at 

the International Space Station. As the highlight of the grade 6 

science class’s unit on space, the students were able to ask the 

Canadian astronaut questions via a live radio feed. 

 

The 10-minute question-and-answer session with Commander 

Hadfield was made possible through months of planning by an 

organization called Amateur Radio on the International Space 

Station, as well as members of Saskatoon’s Meewasin Amateur 

Radio Society. Radio operators arrived at the school in advance 

and assembled a wide variety of radio equipment and an 

antenna on the roof of the school to facilitate the live feed. After 

the event, students were able to ask the radio operators 

questions on how this amazing experience was made possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

thanking all the individuals that made this inspiring and 

innovative experience possible for this grade 6 class, science 

class at Valley Manor School. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Our Village Uganda Worker Receives 

Queen’s Diamond Jubilee Medal 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to bring to 

the attention of this Assembly one very deserving Queen’s 

Diamond Jubilee recipient I had the honour to award recently. 

 

Seven years ago, Terra Lorenz, then Terra Moore, felt the call 

to go to Africa to help some of the neediest people in the world, 

mainly children. At 20 years of age, she set off with a Christian 

mission organization. She found the work rewarding but was 

called to do more, so she set out on her own. 

 

Terra ended up in the village of Bukaye, Uganda. She came 

across an orphanage started by Pastor Elizabeth Mwogeza, now 

very ill. It was on the verge of collapse due to the corruption of 

a man trusted for finances but embezzling donations. 

 

Children were living in terrible conditions when Terra arrived, 

just to help over Christmas. Over the past seven years she has 

come home from time to time to raise funds and awareness and 

enlist the help of her parents, Terry and Linda, among others, 

but returns on what is now called Our Village Uganda, where 

she is the executive director since the passing of Pastor 

Elizabeth. 

 

Conditions and opportunities have vastly improved for the now 

over 150 children, but there’s much more to do. Terra took her 

fiancé to Our Village before they were married, to see if it was 

the life he wanted. His heart broke for these amazing children. 

Her husband, Chad Lorenz, will now be travelling with her 

soon to continue together to give the children hope and a future, 

to show the love, and be the hands and feet of Jesus Christ. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to applaud the Lorenzes, keep 

them and the orphans in their prayers, and go to 

ourvillageuganda.org for more info. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Reaction to Provincial Budget 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 

in the Assembly today to recognize just a few of the positive 

responses for the 2013-2014 balanced growth budget. This 

budget controls spending and continues to make investment to 

ensure a better quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Dennis Coutts, CEO of Habitat for Humanity, said, “We are the 

envy of the country. I applaud the Government of 

Saskatchewan for keeping their commitment for more housing 

to help low-income, hard-working Saskatchewan people.” 

 

Louise Schweitzer, executive director of North East Outreach 

and Support Services stated, “Angel’s Lighthouse, a beacon of 

hope in a moment of despair, will be a reality for women and 

children in the Northeast suffering from domestic violence.” 

 

And finally, to quote Alan Thomarat, president and CEO of 

Canadian Home Builders’ Association, “The Saskatchewan 

government’s initiatives encourage sustainable growth and 

continue previous effective investments in the future of our 

province.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just a few of a long list of great responses to 

our government’s balanced growth budget. This keeps the 

province moving forward. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The budget that we 

heard yesterday fails, Mr. Speaker, where perhaps it’s most 

important. It fails our children and the education that they 

deserve. The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation president, 

Colin Keess, said, “The budget was much ado about nothing.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, teachers know the reality in the classroom. They 

know what their students need and they know what the Sask 

Party government should be providing if we’re serious about 

providing the best possible education for our kids. My question 

to the Premier: why has his budget failed to recognize the huge 

needs in our province’s classrooms? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

thank the Leader of the Opposition for the question, though the 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2839 

 

premise of the question is just incorrect. The budgets from this 

side of the House over the last number of years have been there 

to support education in unprecedented ways in terms of 

operating, unprecedented ways in terms of huge capital 

investments over what we saw from members opposite when 

they sat in these benches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And significantly last year, and right to the Leader of the 

Opposition’s question, last year when there were enrolment 

pressures — and by the way, we didn’t see enrolment pressures 

under the NDP [New Democratic Party] because people were 

leaving the province — but when there were enrolment 

pressures, what did this government, what did this minister do? 

We put together a plan and over $6 million mid-year adjustment 

— Mr. Speaker, also unprecedented — and dealt with the issue. 

 

The best indicator of past behaviour is future behaviour. We are 

there to support a robust education system in the province, and 

we’re here to accommodate more students in a growing 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reality facing 

students, facing parents, facing educators, facing school boards 

in the province, Mr. Speaker, demands so much more than what 

we saw in yesterday’s budget. The Sask Party government has 

talked a big talk about reaching high educational standards, but 

their words, Mr. Speaker, are not backed up with dollars. 

 

The president of the Saskatchewan School Boards Association, 

Janet Foord, had this to say: “The targets for which boards are 

accountable have been mandated by the government. This 

budget does not provide the resources required to achieve those 

targets.” 

 

My question to the Premier: will he admit that his government 

has failed to provide school boards with the resources that they 

need to meet the targets that are actually set by the Ministry of 

Education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there’s specific 

money in this budget, some $5.9 million, to ensure that we’re 

successful in the student achievement initiative. We know there 

is already evidence in province that the student achievement 

initiative will work, that standard-based testing will work. We 

see literacy rates on the rise in the Chinook School Division 

because of it, because there are resources for teachers backed up 

for them to do that work. We see graduation rates increasing in 

Melfort and area, in that school division and in two others. We 

see progress for students because of standardized testing, Mr. 

Speaker, because it is properly resourced. There is a specific 

item in the budget to resource that particular initiative of the 

government and members opposite will know that. 

 

They’ll also know that over their, over the five years previous 

to the ’07 election, their operating budgets, their operating 

budgets were 298 million. From our side, 338 million. From 

their side for the last five years, 160 million in capital. They 

completely neglected schools in the infrastructure requirements; 

from this side, $600 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record of 

the NDP versus this side of the House that has supported 

education to a much greater extent than it ever received when 

members sat on this side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we see in the province right 

now when it comes to pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 

12] education are classroom sizes that are too large. What we 

see, Mr. Speaker, are reduction of educational assistants that 

make learning more difficult for students. What we see right 

now, Mr. Speaker, are teachers and school boards doing their 

absolute best to meet the standards that they want to deliver 

because they love education but, Mr. Speaker, are struggling 

because of the resources that are not being provided by the Sask 

Party government. 

 

If we want to be all that we can be here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, it means providing opportunity to every student, and it 

means improving educational outcomes for First Nations and 

Métis students, Mr. Speaker. And this budget does not do 

enough to improve and close the achievement gap for First 

Nations and Métis students. 

 

The president of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association] had this to say about the resources provided on 

that front: “This is simply unacceptable if the goal of 

eliminating the Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal student 

achievement gap is to be realized.” 

 

My question to the Premier: why did he bring forward an 

education budget that fails to have the resources there so that 

every student in Saskatchewan can succeed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is a lot in that question. 

Unfortunately most of it’s inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

specific initiatives in the budget with respect to the joint task 

force we have with the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] where we’ve looked at pilot projects that are 

delivering better results for First Nations students. We’ve added 

$3 million in the budget to deal specifically with this issue. 

 

Also in the member’s rambling question was sort of the 

rhetorical thought about whether this province can be all it 

could possibly be with this particular budget. When you stack 

up the record of this party with respect to education, with 

respect to health care, with respect to infrastructure, with 

respect to the economy, I think that question is answered. The 

surest way we can ensure . . . The surest way we could see the 

education system in this province becoming unsustainable and 

unable to get the kind of support it needs from the legislature is 

to let that outfit in charge with their $5 billion election platform 

that would mean bigger debts for this province, bigger deficits 

for this province, and less money for education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I remember 2007 when this 

government was elected and, Mr. Speaker, it was about hope 

beating fear. And now we see from these members, Mr. 

Speaker, we see blaming other individuals. We see a stubborn 



2840 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

refusal to accept responsibility, and we see a belittling of 

questions, Mr. Speaker, that are about the future of the 

province: questions that are being brought forward by the 

president of the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], 

questions that are being brought forward by the president of the 

School Boards Association. And we have the Premier just 

slough them off like it doesn’t matter. 

 

That’s not respectful, Mr. Speaker, to the educators in this 

province that are doing their best for our children. The parents 

that I speak with, Mr. Speaker, want the best possible education 

for their kids. They want better classrooms. They want more 

resources in those classrooms. They want the education that our 

children deserve. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he refusing to listen to the 

concerns from teachers, from parents, and students when it 

comes to the huge challenges that our classrooms are facing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I think what this Leader of the Opposition 

will have in common with the previous leader, Mr. 

Lingenfelter, is that he is not going to let facts get in the way of 

his preamble. Mr. Speaker, he stands in this Assembly and says, 

when are you going to listen to parents and teachers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall when enrolments were on the rise in many 

school districts, in some school districts across the province, we 

indicated to those school divisions that because the population 

was growing, because we had more students, that we would 

respond. The minister met with those particular school 

divisions, met with teachers, heard from parents and, Mr. 

Speaker, what did this government do? This government found, 

mid-year in a tight budget, $6.6 million for those school 

divisions that were experiencing those pressures so we could 

build the capital that was needed to accommodate them, so we 

could support teachers in classrooms where it was needed. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what this government did. 

 

What has his party done over the life of its government, over 16 

years on this side of the House? Well they neglected school 

capital: 160 million over their last five years. Compare that with 

600 million from this side of the House. The same is true in 

operating, Mr. Speaker. Those parents and teachers understand. 

They know that on that side you get talk in education. On this 

side you get funding and action. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Budget and Financial Management 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

tabled yesterday something that can be characterized as a credit 

card budget, something that asks students today to pay for 

decisions that are going to tie us well into the future and 

mortgages our tomorrow for short-sighted decisions. It’s an 

irresponsible approach, one we just don’t share, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once again, contrary to the calls of the Provincial Auditor, 

who’s called this government’s books misleading and wrong, 

this government stubbornly pushed ahead, persisted with 

pushing forward books that are misleading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Finance minister: does he not recognize that 

it’s past time, it’s time for a change? It’s time to fix our books 

that have been called misleading and wrong by our Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, again the comments by 

the opposition members are factually incorrect. If he takes a 

look at the document that we presented yesterday, the General 

Revenue Fund statements which the auditor has been wanting to 

. . . for this government to focus more on, it’s not that we don’t 

do it, Mr. Speaker. It’s here. It’s here printed for all to see. The 

summary financial statements are there. They contain every 

organization that was in the summaries. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has asked 

for standardization. He should know that across all of the 

province in Saskatchewan, summary financial statements differ 

from one province to the next province to the next province. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a balanced budget in the summary financial 

basis. It was balanced last year, and it’s balanced again this 

year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s budget was 

nothing but a credit card budget that punts debt onto future 

generations and is sticking the spending tab onto our students, 

our children, the next generation. Punting costs onto future 

generations that include $2 billion of debt growth in just two 

years, all while pretending otherwise with his misleading books, 

Mr. Speaker. Government’s own projections . . . so government 

debt rising to $10.4 billion by the end of this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the Sask Party likes their spin and they 

like their expensive billboards. So my question to the minister: 

will those $2 billion of new debt being added through these two 

years, will that be highlighted on the spring billboards? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at, let’s 

look at the reaction of someone else other than me, Mr. 

Speaker. Let’s look at the reaction of CIBC [Canadian Imperial 

Bank of Commerce]. I’m going to quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Overall, given its relative economic and fiscal 

out-performance and sterling credit rating, Saskatchewan 

boasts a strong following in debt capital markets, where 

its bonds can be expected to continue to trade at a notable 

premium to more indebted provincial peers. 

 

But the quote goes on, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Saskatchewan’s relatively stronger fiscal position means 

that social programs will likely see proportionately larger 

investments than in some provinces still in the red. 

Saskatchewan will also enjoy a fiscal benefit in the form 

of declining debt charges — a dividend linked to both 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2841 

 

earlier debt paydowns and an extremely low interest rate 

environment. 

 

That’s what people are saying about this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a budget with 

rapidly rising debt and an expensive no-money-down, pay-later 

approach to infrastructure. It’s a credit card budget that does 

one thing: it punts the bill to future generations to pick up an 

even bigger tab. And it punts a lot of those hard decisions as 

well — the ones with real consequences in real people’s lives 

— to health regions, to the Cancer Agency, school boards, and 

universities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the P3 [public-private partnership] privatization 

model is really about paying more and paying later. It’s a 

short-sighted, no-money-down approach with huge long-term 

costs. Mr. Speaker, other than for purpose of budgetary tricks, 

why would this minister choose a short-sighted approach that 

has proven itself more costly and ineffective? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Let’s get one thing straight here. Is the 

member opposite questioning the Provincial Auditor and the 

summary financial statements? The numbers are printed. The 

Provincial Auditor has referenced these summaries. And the 

member opposite said this is the auditor’s tricks. This is the 

auditor’s tricks that a summary financial document is presented 

on behalf of the government? I dare say the member opposite 

better get his facts right. 

 

Because, you know, Mr. Speaker, here’s another comment by 

the Bank of Montreal: “As expected, this is largely a 

stay-the-course budget. With firm economic growth, persistent 

surpluses, and low debt levels, Saskatchewan continues to earn 

its AAA stripes,” something that that member would never have 

been accustomed to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — From that outrage was discernible, Mr. 

Speaker, the question of the auditor, Mr. Speaker. And the 

Finance Minister should know; it’s in black and white. The 

Provincial Auditor has called the reporting of this government 

wrong and misleading. That’s a fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this government’s also shirking responsibility. And when 

they’re making decisions, they won’t even own up to the 

consequences of those decisions, pushing those on to others: 

downloading costs onto post-secondary students and our 

institutions; telling health regions and our Cancer Agency to 

find $54 million in more cuts; telling school boards to simply 

cram classrooms a little tighter, to cut some more supports, Mr. 

Speaker, with 350 educational assistants already cut. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government is pretending to make tough 

decisions when really they’re putting them onto others, 

pretending to tell the story about the finances when they’re 

using misleading books. Why are they shirking their 

responsibility to be straight with Saskatchewan people? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A couple of 

reactions from people who are very interested in yesterday’s 

budget. First of all, by Christian Braid from the Greater 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, and he says this: “Achieving 

a balanced budget and continuing on a path towards a 

productive agenda is remarkable compared to other Canadian 

provinces.” One quote. 

 

Second quote, Mr. Speaker, and it’s all about school 

construction, as the member opposite has very little experience 

in that, Mr. Speaker. And it says this: 

 

“The announcement is excellent news for our division,” 

states Dwayne Reeve, Director of Education. “This 

basically provides us with the ability to enter the next 

phase of planning for a new school in Langenberg 

through the development of a design for the facility. 

Senior administration, the Facilities Department and the 

community of Langenberg have already put in many 

hours to get us to this stage and we are very excited at the 

prospect of a new school. It is a huge investment in the 

future of our children,” [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Technology Companies and University 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Despite that that minister’s pretty 

worked up here today, we do have some other questions for a 

few other ministers here today as well. 

 

And it is another day, and another shoe has dropped in the 

IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre for 

geologic storage of CO2] affair of this government. Witnessed 

by many yesterday in this House, this government refuses to 

answer straight questions, refuses accountability, and refuses to 

investigate. And meanwhile alarming information continues to 

leak. 

 

Today it’s been exposed by an investigation by CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] that a mystery private company was 

set up with potential conflicts of interest, a company called Gen 

Five, something that raised “serious concerns” by U of R 

[University of Regina] lawyers in a report. It involves many of 

the same players embroiled in the IPAC affair, some of the 

same directors with conflicts of interest in both IPAC and CVI 

[Climate Ventures Inc.]. It’s a disturbing leak, raising more 

concerns over conflicts of interest for some to potentially gain 

on the backs of taxpayers. 

 

We’ve asked a direct question about how much taxpayers’ 

money has been used, who may have benefited from the IPAC 

affair. We’re received not a single answer. Mr. Speaker, why 

does this minister feel she can deny the answers and 

accountability that Saskatchewan people deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And day 

after day we have answered that member’s questions. But he 



2842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

just doesn’t like the answers, and that’s his problem. And he’s 

demonstrated day after day that he definitely attended the 

Dwain Lingenfelter school of questioning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is nothing more than an unsupported drive-by 

smear. He is doing this daily. If he truly has additional 

information above and beyond the forensic audit report — and I 

repeat, there was a forensic audit report that identified U of R 

employees that were involved in a contract with Climate 

Ventures Inc. — and if he has more information than the 

forensic audit has, and if he has identified someone that 

personally gained from this, he needs to step outside of this 

Chamber. He needs to state who it is that he is accusing of this, 

and he needs to turn the information to the proper authorities, or 

else it is absolutely nothing but rhetoric. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s money that’s been 

wasted. That minister won’t provide any answers. We can go 

talk in the rotunda any day of the week. I’m more than willing 

to do that, and I have before. 

 

I also will say that there’s another minister that won’t answer 

questions. The Minister of Energy and Resources was asked a 

direct question yesterday about why his ministry in 2008 used 

nearly $200,000 of taxpayers’ money to fund the start-up of 

CVI, the tech company that’s now embroiled in the IPAC affair. 

In fact it’s at the heart of the conflicts and the waste. And now 

the controversy over Gen Five involves two of the very same 

directors that were in a conflict of interest and the costly 

start-up of CVI. 

 

Taxpayers deserve answers. Seeing as though he couldn’t be 

bothered yesterday to be accountable or to answer the question, 

maybe he will answer that here today. Why did his ministry 

spend nearly $200,000 of taxpayers’ money to start up CVI in 

the first place, and what’s he doing to investigate wrongdoing 

and wasted money resulting from his costly start-up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, we have been through 

this for several days, and the answers are all the same. We have 

funded the university, Mr. Speaker, to do research. That 

research has been done. In regards, Mr. Speaker, to the 200,000, 

the university wanted to do some work on what they could do to 

commercialize the research that they had, Mr. Speaker. The 

funding was provided for them to do the work on what that 

would look like for them. They did a report. I believe that their 

office, their liaison office between industry and the university, 

Mr. Speaker, has that report. And how they have acted on it, 

Mr. Speaker, is something that the university has or has not 

done. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that funding was provided to the university to 

do the work. A report was written. Mr. Speaker, that was the 

commitment that our government had made. And if the member 

opposite has questions for the university, I encourage him to ask 

them for that information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In last year’s budget 

the Sask Party cancelled the Go Green Fund, one of the few 

climate change projects they’ve ever worked on. They 

eliminated the program even though it was producing results for 

Saskatchewan. In yesterday’s budget this attack on climate 

change progress continued. They cut the climate change 

department in the Ministry of Environment an additional 20 per 

cent. That’s a 73 per cent drop in funding over two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only two weeks ago the Premier ranted on to the 

international media about how “We care about the 

environment.” Mr. Speaker, is this how the Premier shows it? 

Why is the Sask Party government continuing to ignore the 

effects of climate change by cutting its funding by 20 per cent 

more, such a stark contrast to the Premier’s public statements? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to take this question on behalf of the government, Mr. 

Speaker. Certainly this government has done a significant 

amount of work when it comes to addressing climate change in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. In fact it’s quite ironic to hear 

questions coming from the members opposite when the David 

Suzuki Foundation, at the end of that government’s time in 

office, indicated that the NDP orange was turning brown from 

their lack of environmental policies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was in fact this government that in fact 

introduced and passed legislation to regulate and reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions. Mr. Speaker, the office of climate 

change will be up and running later this year, so funds will be 

needed and available in this budget when that office is ready to 

be created, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the Premier 

wrote to the President of the United States in January he made 

no mention of climate change despite his latest new talking 

point and spin, that somehow it’s part of his agenda. Perhaps 

that’s a good stone left unturned, Mr. Speaker, because 

Saskatchewan unfortunately has the highest per capita carbon 

footprint in Canada. This is not an area of leadership we can be 

proud of, Mr. Speaker. In fact there’s nothing in the budget that 

would lower this footprint. 

 

When the Finance minister spoke yesterday, he didn’t even 

mention the words climate change or environment. Mr. 

Speaker, literally there’s nothing in this budget about 

environment or climate change. The world is watching. Why is 

climate change not a priority for this government? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, that member will know or 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2843 

 

should know, or perhaps she could ask her seatmate who was a 

member of the previous government, why emissions rose 70 per 

cent under their time in office, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The member opposite says that nothing’s being done on this 

important file, Mr. Speaker. This government has made the 

investment of $1.1 billion in clean coal, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

leading example of how this province is taking a leading role in 

this important file, Mr. Speaker. We were the government of the 

day in this province when legislation was passed to regulate, 

Mr. Speaker, greenhouse gas emissions, something that the 

members opposite forgot to do in all the 16 years that they were 

the government, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think this side of the 

House needs to take any lessons when it comes to this file. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we know this government is 

working on CO2 research. With all the news on IPAC recently, 

we’re quite aware of that. However carbon capture technology, 

which is still in the future, is only one piece of the puzzle. The 

facts are that this province’s greenhouse gas emissions are the 

highest in the country, and the Sask Party has reduced its 

emission targets, whittled down its regulations, and cut funding 

at every step of the way. Climate change will affect our 

province’s agriculture, our resource sector, and ultimately our 

people and our environment. With all these cuts to the programs 

that might have made a change, what is this government doing 

to implement a plan on reducing greenhouse gas emissions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know it’s a good 

day in Health when we spend 42 per cent of the provincial 

budget, and not a single Health question the day after the 

budget is released. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asked what we’re going to 

do on the support file. We’re going to do the things that the 

NDP forgot to do, like pass legislation to regulate greenhouse 

gas emissions, Mr. Speaker, like invest in technology and 

infrastructure, like the $1.1 billion that we’re spending in 

Estevan on clean coal, Mr. Speaker, showing that this province 

is a world leader in this important file. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter back into budget debate here today and continue some of 

my comments from tomorrow. I do want to focus today a little 

bit more specifically on my constituency and some of the local 

impacts. 

 

But certainly what we did, have categorized this budget, as is 

fair, that being a credit card budget that really is asking the next 

generation to pay for the decisions of today. And it’s tying the 

hands of governments into the future and certainly the next 

generation to deal with the challenges and opportunities they’re 

presented in the most effective way they can. So I’ll get back 

into the budget discussion that’s there. 

 

I do want to at this point in time put a bit of a lens back to my 

own constituency. And I want to thank Ms. Gloria Patrick, our 

constituency assistant, who delivers such exceptional service to 

the people of Regina Rosemont, our boundaries within our 

constituency. The people who come to her in many cases not 

because it’s the first place that they’ve come, but often because 

it’s they’re at their wits’ end and they’re frustrated and they’re 

looking for fairness and they’re looking for action. And Gloria 

does a tremendous job of being able to effectively work through 

what the facts of the matter are, be able to link and liaison with 

abilities and organizations and ministries to bring about 

solutions where possible and to do so with a level of 

compassion and professionalism that is second to none. 

 

So I want to say thank you so much to Ms. Gloria Patrick for 

the contribution she makes in the lives of our constituents and 

the effective work she does within my, within our constituency, 

Mr. . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member for Carrot River on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — I ask permission to make an introduction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Carrot River has asked for 

leave to make an introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the member for letting me make this introduction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to all members of this 

Assembly, I would like to introduce, in your gallery, Shelley 

Meyer and her son Brycen McCrea. Shelley has not only been 

my CA [constituency assistant] since I was elected, but she has 

been a CA for 12 years, Mr. Speaker. All of us in this Assembly 

know how critical it is to have a good CA, and Shelley is one of 

the best that you could have, if not the best. She even makes me 

look good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Her son Brycen is a grade 10 student who not only plays on the 

provincially famous Carrot River Wildcats football team, but 

also is an accomplished curler. In his first year of playing high 

school senior mixed, their team won all their games at NESSAC 

[North East Saskatchewan Schools Athletic Conference], then 



2844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

again at regionals. They placed fifth overall in provincials and 

look forward to bringing home the banner next year to Carrot 

River in curling along with first place in six-man football. 

 

I would like to ask all members of this Assembly to welcome 

Shelley and Brycen to their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to have a 

young athlete in the Assembly here today as well, and a fine 

introduction by the member from Carrot River. 

 

In looking at the budget through the lens of our constituency 

and the needs and priorities of the families throughout, it’s 

noticeable that there’s a lot missing in this budget. And I’m 

willing to give credit where credit’s due, and I’ve done so in 

this budget. But I look through with the lens of the 

hard-working families throughout the constituency — the 

young people that are starting out in life where they’re making 

that step to post-secondary or working those extra jobs to afford 

that tuition and to study and to build out a career; those that are 

buying that first home or working towards buying that first 

home; those that are renting and are dealing with some pretty 

tough circumstances, Mr. Speaker, and certainly deserving of 

better supports and more protection; and those that have their 

full futures before them. Those are some of who I think of when 

I look at this budget. 

 

I also think of our seniors, those that have built this province. 

And in my constituency the unique aspect of our senior 

population is that . . . Of course we have a fairly significant 

senior population by way of some of the housing options: 

Regina Village, Mutchmor Lodge, Benson Manor. And in these 

facilities people have come from all over the province, from 

every corner of the province, from rural Saskatchewan, from the 

Northwest, the Northeast, Southeast, Southwest. And when I sit 

down and visit with these builders of our province, it’s those 

discussions and that listening that also informs my budget 

response and how I assess or analyze the budget. And it’s in 

these conversations with those young families and those 

students; it’s in those conversations with our seniors, the 

builders of our province; it’s in those conversations with those 

hard-working families doing all they can to build out a high 

quality of life for them and their families that I draw upon when 

I look at the budget. 

 

Certainly the analysis and critique that I brought to the floor of 

this Assembly yesterday holds true for my constituency. I think 

of the education and the needs that exist and the opportunity to 

support the classroom. And I look at the missed opportunity of 

this government, the failing of this government on this front, 

and what that means for those classrooms whether at Walker or 

Rosemont or St. Francis, Mr. Speaker, or Martin Collegiate. 

And those consequences are significant. 

 

When, you know, the Premier and others dismiss today the cuts 

to the educational assistants, and there was lots of noise from 

the side opposite when it was raised here today, well, Mr. 

Speaker, we also had visitors to our Assembly here today, a 

group of fine students and teachers for whom I had the chance 

to speak with before coming into the Assembly. And 

unprompted from anything from me, Mr. Speaker, these 

teachers made a plea to please provide the resources they need, 

to please make sure that their classrooms aren’t going to be 

under the strain that they are, Mr. Speaker, and to please make 

sure that the cuts to educational assistants that has gone on 

under this government doesn’t continue, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s all of what we need to keep in mind when we’re looking 

about how we’re building the future that we all should be 

striving for. 

 

I also think of the circumstances around child care and the 

pressures on families. And we need to do a better job of 

supporting early learning, child care, and those supports and 

options for young families that are making very difficult 

decisions, working incredibly hard. And we need to be there as 

an active partner stepping up to the plate to understand the 

pressures and realities they’re facing and bringing solutions to 

bear. 

 

I think of the issue when I look at so many of our families. I 

look at so many of my constituents that are wedged between 

caring for children but then also caring for parents. And I know 

the importance of making sure we’re doing all we can to invest 

in home care and making meaningful expansions and supports 

on that end, and expanding long-term care and supports and 

making sure we’re meeting the needs of, as I say, the seniors of 

our province, our parents and grandparents, the builders of this 

province. But also understanding the strain this places on an 

entire family. And during prosperous times like this with a 

tremendously strong economy, we need to be taking those steps 

and making those improvements for the seniors of our province. 

 

And I see it in the lives of too many, where they’re denied 

access to safe care, to a space, many denied access to space. I 

had a recent story that was heartbreaking, where a senior couple 

had come to me and had been together for over 50 years and 

were forced into a long-term care environment, where one of 

the partners had become quite ill. And a family that had been in 

Regina their entire life, a senior couple for over 50 years, and 

the only option that that minister and that government could 

bring forward, despite my efforts to meet personally and bring 

forward information, was to send the father, the husband, to 

Cupar, 45 minutes to an hour away. Separating a couple that 

had spent their entire life together, Mr. Speaker, while one was 

receiving a little bit of extra care and health attention. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, just two, a couple of weeks later, Mr. 

Speaker, that man passed, you know, and when I’m thinking of 

the family that came in to talk with me before and to talk with 

me after, and to see the heartbreak within that family who 

expressed to me that quite simply, their father was rather 

healthy, quite healthy in fact, and it’s their adamant belief that 

he died of a broken heart, Mr. Speaker. 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2845 

 

And these are the sad and tragic consequences that no 

government and no person wants to place upon anyone, and 

certainly not our seniors. But it makes all too real the tragic 

consequences that so many are facing, and must inspire us to be 

making the changes that we should be working towards, making 

the improvements that we should, taking the opportunity of 

today, the prosperity of today, and making sure that it’s 

allowing us to build something more meaningful for tomorrow. 

And certainly on this front, the budget just simply didn’t cut it 

on long-term care and the needs of my constituents. 

 

The aspect of affordable housing and rent is something I’ll 

touch back into as I roll though some of the critiques that I 

have, but so little attention paid to an issue so critical to so 

many. And I think of our renters that are facing such vulnerable 

circumstances — working two and three jobs, many in 

precarious employment, many that could only dream of having 

an extra dollar in their pocket at the end of the week or the end 

of the month, Mr. Speaker, who are facing massive increases to 

their rent in an unmitigated fashion with no control, no 

protection, no peace of mind from their government. And it 

impacts our young families. It impacts those that are starting out 

in life, and it impacts our seniors who deserve better, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I know government often gets up and they start touting 

numbers, the many thousands that they’re suggesting that 

they’re building by way of what they categorize as low-income 

units, Mr. Speaker. Those low-income units are few and far 

between for one, and the threshold to access these 

market-driven, low-income units are something that far too 

many, Mr. Speaker, just can’t access. And for government to 

think otherwise just displays a level of being out of touch with 

the reality that Saskatchewan families are facing. So certainly 

this is an area that we need to bring forward better action. 

 

When we look at some of the other pressures, I draw upon the 

stories and the experiences on our sports fields and in our 

schools and through our churches and discussing . . . 

conversations that we have with community leaders and 

coaches and volunteers that certainly inform how I assess the 

effectiveness of a provincial budget. And on so many of those 

measures, this budget falls short. 

 

[11:00] 

 

I know for many it’ll be a big concern to understand the debt 

that’s being left for the next generation, the short-term decisions 

that are being made today for the simplistic purpose of making 

effective political billboards for the other side, the self-interest 

of the government, and not the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll always stand on the side of the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people being heard, being 

represented, and government should certainly be doing the 

same. And it’s disappointing to see more spin and more 

misleading books on this front. 

 

I recognize that there’s other areas that require attention 

throughout the constituency. There’s a lot of pressure that’s 

been placed upon residents of Dewdney Avenue, who have 

been bombarded with heavy-haul truck traffic by way of 

rerouting and reorganization of some of our transportation. And 

despite what seemed at one point to be earnest offerings of 

government to work towards providing solutions for those 

residents, we’ve been working now for well over a year or two 

years, Mr. Speaker, to see this addressed, and we see little 

action. And what it has meant is, it’s meant a concern around 

safety, real safety concerns — big heavy freight moving up and 

down those roads while kids are moving back and forth to 

school. And you know, one of the members heckles on 

something like this, Mr. Speaker. The circumstances and safety 

concerns are real. They’re a significant risk to many and we 

have to do a better job. And this government needs to start 

showing some leadership on this file to do a better job of 

mitigating those safety concerns, rerouting that truck traffic, 

putting controls in place to make sure that safety’s there. 

 

Because in fact it’s at the same time, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 

in fact closing a school in the constituency, and I think of 

Dieppe, that they’re forcing many students now to go down that 

very artery by bike, by foot, by car, out on to Dewdney Avenue 

with this heavy freight traffic that’s causing a lot of safety 

concerns. 

 

And it’s not just a safety concern. It’s really, really noisy, Mr. 

Speaker. It shakes houses. It causes lots of concern, so it’s a 

matter of peace of mind as well. And we’re going to make sure 

that this government keeps this as a matter of attention and 

something that requires action. 

 

I referenced Dieppe School. Maybe just a note on it. Of course 

the budgets of this government have caused a lot of hurt in 

education. They’ve cut educational assistants, as we’ve talked 

about. They’ve grown class size. They’ve placed stress on 

students and teachers and parents who desire the best outcomes 

out of our classrooms, and they desire a government to be a 

willing partner. And I think of a school up in my constituency, 

Dieppe, that sadly had its doors closed last year because of 

budgetary measures and because of a hamstringing of this 

government of school boards across Saskatchewan — taking 

full control over school board funding and then underfunding 

those very school boards — causing very difficult, hard 

decisions for those elected members of our school boards who 

serve honourably and do such tremendous work in our 

communities and in our schools, but are left with such a 

difficult circumstance when their hands have been tied, when 

they’ve been hamstrung by decisions of this government to 

impede their ability to best serve their role in service of 

education. 

 

So when I look at a school like Dieppe I certainly don’t fault 

any decision of a school board, but I certainly lay blame 

directly at the feet of a government that has taken over school 

funding, has then underfunded education, and has caused 

closures like this, cuts in our classrooms that simply shouldn’t 

be accepted and simply aren’t in the best interests of 

communities of students and parents and not in the best 

interests of building the kind of Saskatchewan that we all 

desire. 

 

I mentioned earlier the exceptional seniors throughout our 

constituency. And because of being I guess close to some of the 

health services, because of as well having a density by way of 

seniors’ housing, we do have a fairly strong presence of seniors 

throughout my constituency. And I say there’s some of the most 

meaningful conversations are had as sitting down at some of the 



2846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

social times for coffee and, of course, the household visits or 

even some of the pub nights at Benson Manor or Regina Village 

and hearing these stories, these lives of contribution. Whether 

they built their lives on the farm or whether they built their lives 

in Weyburn or from all different parts of the province, they’ve 

come together and they still care deeply about their province. 

 

And I draw upon those conversations in a significant way 

because they remember our history as well and they remember 

decisions of governments previous. And I don’t need to get into 

it all or make that a political statement. They remember the 

history of our province and I guess how we’ve become who 

we’ve become, Mr. Speaker. And those are important, 

important for us all to hear. And I’d like to certainly thank the 

seniors of our constituency for their contributions to our 

community and their life of contributions to our province. And 

those contributions are certainly, certainly many. 

 

I know there’s a lot of concern as well by many in the very 

anti-worker agenda of this government. And I hear it from our 

teachers. I hear it from our firefighters. I hear it from those that 

are working two, three jobs to try to pay the bills. I hear it from 

our construction trades. They really have concerns with a 

government that works in a unilateral way with a heavy hand 

and that fails to listen to those who are impacted, fails to listen 

to those who are impacted most by the decisions made today. 

And those workers that I’ve cited, whether it’s that firefighter or 

that teacher or that person working two or three jobs to build 

their life, they too deserve to share in the prosperity of this 

province. And for this government to push with heavy-handed 

laws and interventions that actively deny their ability to reap 

that reward or share in that benefit is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’ll stand every day in this Assembly, stand in a strong 

way for the middle-class families of this province and making 

sure that we’re building a stronger middle class, that it’s not 

going in the wrong direction, that where they’re not losing 

ground in their own economy, Mr. Speaker . . . It’s nice to hear 

the member from Melfort speak up in this Assembly. We rarely 

get to hear that member speak. He’s shouting from across the 

floor, Mr. Speaker. I do look forward to his chance to provide a 

speech from his feet as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve looked at this budget and, as I’ve said, we laid out clear 

priorities that were important to Saskatchewan people and what 

we expected out of it. We expected improvements in education. 

We expected more choices, more spaces in long-term care, and 

we expected transparency and accountability to be delivered to 

Saskatchewan people. I’ll ask the member from Weyburn just 

to speak up so I can . . . The members are engaging . . . I 

couldn’t hear. 

 

So on those fronts, this budget misses the mark, misses the 

mark. They miss the mark. Whether it’s on education, whether 

it’s long-term care, whether it’s transparency and 

accountability, this government’s clearly missed the mark. And 

further to that, this government has put forward a budget that 

brings forward huge debt to the people of the province. Total 

debt, if you can imagine, is rising this year by $835 million. In 

the year that we’re closing the books on right now, debt’s rising 

by $1.1 billion. 

 

Now you’ll have noticed that something else is printed on the 

expensive, taxpayer-funded billboards of that government, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s only made possible because of the 

misleading set of books that this government utilizes to report 

its finances. And Saskatchewan people deserve better than that. 

They deserve the true, full state of our finances, the straight 

goods. And the straight goods are that debt’s on the rise and $2 

billion over two years is the record of this government 

currently, in fact taking debt up to $10.4 billion in this province 

by the end of the next fiscal year. 

 

Now even more alarming than that is that they’re losing ground 

on the debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio. And this is 

your ability as an economy, as a province to afford the debt 

you’re taking on. And you know, we all know what debt did to 

this province at one point in time, Mr. Speaker, and all people 

have shared in the sacrifice and the work to work towards 

improvements on this front. And for a long period of time we 

saw significant improvements in those debt-to-GDP ratios — 

our ability to pay for the debt that the government has, our 

ability to pay for the debt that the people of Saskatchewan owe. 

 

And so it’s of concern to many — I know many that have gone 

through this budget have noted this to be a significant concern 

— to see a reversal in that trend and to see an actual increase to 

the debt-to-GDP ratio, a worsening of the position of our ability 

to support the debt we’re taking on. And this during very 

buoyant times within our economy. It’s particularly troubling. 

When your economy as a whole is growing and your GDP, that 

side, the fraction is growing or the denominator’s growing, it’s 

unfortunate to see a government outstripping it with debt 

growth and causing us to step into a trend that certainly isn’t a 

trend we can sustain into the future. 

 

It’s the same sort of trend we see in the debt-to-capital ratios of 

our Crown corporations and a direct consequence of this 

government. Over the past five years, we’ve seen over $2 

billion drained and stripped from our Crown corporations to 

cover off spending of this government. That dividend is a 

reasonable measure from a Crown corporation that can afford it. 

But if dividends are being stripped and transferred across for 

spending and simply borrowed on the Crown side, our Crown 

corporations — borrowed by way of debt and then transferred 

across — that’s not sustainable. It’s not in the best interests of 

anyone. 

 

And of course we know the consequences of this are many: (a) 

it undermines the Crown corporations which don’t just have a 

rich history in this province but are pretty key to our future in 

building out the modern economy that we work towards, the 

modern economy that must include strong, private, profitable 

private companies and a strong, thriving Crown sector. And this 

side of the Assembly, the other side, the government seems not 

to understand that formula. They seem to, in fact in a rather new 

way, seems rather committed to directly undermining that 

Crown sector, that very important part of our economy and very 

important tools in meeting the challenges and opportunities of 

people in communities all across Saskatchewan. And that’s 

something that’s disappointing to see for many. 

 

The Crown debt as well comes at a direct price, direct cost to 

Saskatchewan people, certainly by way of potential service. 

And I know sometimes if individuals are suffering from 

inadequate access to power or predictability on these fronts, 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2847 

 

there’s concerns on those fronts. But we all pay for it by way of 

ratepayers through our power bill or through our other utility 

bills that we face. 

 

So for this government to continue to strip the Crown sector, to 

pull dividends or claim dividends that are simply borrowed 

money in the Crown sector, comes at a direct cost to our Crown 

corporations and certainly to the people of this province who 

remember the broken promise of just a couple years ago, or a 

year ago, where this government came forward at budget day 

and said they had a balanced budget, and of course then it 

wasn’t. The auditor verified it was a deficit later in the year. 

 

But they also said on budget day that they weren’t going to take 

any money from SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, not a cent. And they 

did it with great fanfare. They made that commitment. And I, as 

the Finance critic, actually supported that in a very solid way 

and said, we’ll support good work where good work exists and 

not taking a dividend is the right choice from SaskPower. 

Needless to say, it was only a few months later and getting 

close to the end of the fiscal year and this government was in a 

budget crunch, and they stuck their hand right into the piggy 

bank once again of SaskPower and raided it of $120 million, of 

dollars it needed to invest in services, dollars it needed to meet 

the needs of consumers, and something that’s come at a direct 

cost with a big power increase to many. And there’s some 

heckling from one of the members about dividends, and I’ll go 

through this. I’ll go through this one more time. 

 

A dividend, a dividend is an appropriate, is an appropriate 

expectation of a Crown corporation, but not if that money’s 

borrowed money on our Crown corporations. And now I hear 

the Premier actually heckles in here and says something about 

150 per cent. He needs to understand the difference when a 

dividend is being transferred that’s earnings and a dividend 

that’s being transferred that’s all debt on the back of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

Yes I think the Premier should also probably take note and 

think back to years like 2009 when his government actually, 

actually went in and grabbed $755 million from our Crown 

corporations. That’s their record. That’s their record. I’d urge 

members opposite, if they choose to heckle, they should do 

some research on this. I urge government to go back and find 

the last time a government took $755 million in one calendar 

year. I’d urge government, because that occurred in 2009 under 

this government, and I’d urge them to go back and just look at 

when that may have occurred last time. 

 

[11:15] 

 

So our Crown corporations are of concern. Our Crown 

corporations are of concern, and they’re being undermined; 

they’re being raided. And that’s of concern to Saskatchewan 

people. And that’s a concern to all of us. 

 

We also see that we need to be doing a better job of skills 

training and apprenticeship, and going at this in a real 

aggressive way. We’ve really missed an opportunity over the 

past few years during a time of an exceptionally strong 

economy to make the kinds of gains we should for all 

Saskatchewan people, and certainly our First Nations and Métis 

people are included on that front. And the absence of a 

meaningful program or aggressive action on skills training and 

apprenticeship is something that’s been lacking from this 

government all the way through. 

 

I’ve spoken about the lack of affordable housing being brought 

forward by this government. And in fact what they’re actually 

doing is taking steps backward, selling off affordable housing 

units that have been purchased by Saskatchewan people over 

generations past and now selling off those units and giving up 

one of the most effective tools that they had — taking in this 

year almost $20 million into their books, raking that in from the 

sale of these affordable housing units that we need, and not 

replacing them with something that fills the gap. 

 

We see nothing by way of the film tax credit or the film 

economy that’s so important to Saskatchewan, something that 

was a major mistake of this government, something that’s hurt 

families, hurt our economy, and something that we’ve been 

calling upon to be reinstated. And it’s more than just its 

economic place. It’s about who we are as a province and our 

cultural well-being and our quality of life. 

 

We see in this budget no mention of labour, the working people 

of this province, despite its heavy hand in aggressively 

overhauling labour legislation with selective hearing, only 

listening to one side of the equation and a select few, and 

dismissing the thousands and thousands of workers across this 

province who work hard every day to build their lives in this 

province. 

 

We see inadequate dollars put forward as far as flooding and for 

PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program]. In fact when we 

have a high snowpack, one of the highest snowpacks we’ve had 

in years, and a high water table that’s of concern, this 

government didn’t see it in itself to find a budget line to 

adequately and responsibly lay out provisions to respond to 

potential damage or to mitigate that damage. And now let’s 

hope that damage is minimal or doesn’t exist, but certainly the 

conditions are a concern and a worry. 

 

I notice that while this government can’t keep a promise within 

education or to students or can’t keep a promise around 

maintaining our Crowns, what they can keep is a promise 

towards a corporate income tax cut for the largest corporations, 

Mr. Speaker. Now they say, oh we’re going to defer it this year, 

but trust us, we affirm our commitment. I find that interesting, 

Mr. Speaker. At a time where debt’s being added up, where 

government’s scrambling and selling off assets, where they’re 

cutting in the classroom, and causing significant hurt for 

families across this province, where their interests lie and where 

their commitments lie is to give away $200 million a year at a 

time where we need those dollars to be invested back into 

where they matter — building healthier, stronger communities, 

in our classrooms, to balance our books, to leave a bit of a 

legacy for future generations. And I’m all for strong 

corporations, profitable corporations. That’s important. And 

they’re doing quite well in Saskatchewan right now. This is the 

wrong time to give away $200 million, sending it largely 

outside Saskatchewan. 

 

I also recognize some of the cuts to the ethanol industry in this 

province without any consultation with those operations, with 

little impact understood by government. And those producers, 



2848 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

those operations certainly deserve better. They deserve to fully 

understand the decisions of government. And certainly in the 

coming weeks, we’ll be analyzing and understanding what this 

means for those operations. And I hope government 

understands those implications because those are important 

employers and investments in Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s also interesting to see the cut to the labour-sponsored 

venture fund that occurred. They’re cutting the investment in 

our province, the capitalization that occurs from these funds, 

and effectively taking away a very large investment in our 

province that plays a very important role in business succession 

in this province. It also plays a very important role by way of 

employment and generating taxes back to the province by way 

of GST [goods and services tax] and PST [provincial sales tax] 

and income tax and corporate taxes. And to cut the 

labour-sponsored venture funds is an interesting choice of this 

government, one that I don’t support. 

 

I also don’t support what they’re doing where they’re starting to 

monkey around with how those funds can be invested, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know the shareholders across Saskatchewan 

probably have some questions of this government about its 

decision to unilaterally decide how the investments that they’ve 

chosen to make, that are in part there to secure their retirements, 

Mr. Speaker, why this government thinks they can come in —

after they’ve purchased in by way of a prospectus, by way of 

conditions and terms, and for this government to come in and to 

dictate terms around those investments. Now we’ll have more 

to talk about that in the coming days and weeks, and there will 

be more consultations on this front. 

 

But you know, I guess I’ll just say there’s a lot of hard-working 

people in this province that are doing all they can to take care of 

their family today and save a little for tomorrow and hope 

towards a retirement. And those funds are an important tool to 

many in this province. Many individuals have kept a schedule 

and invested every year as part of their RRSP [registered 

retirement savings plan] or in some cases borrowed dollars to 

make sure they can make that contribution. And they’re locked 

in of course with that investment for eight years. And for a 

government to think that it can come in and dictate terms on 

that investment, changing the scope of those investments and 

monkeying around with the kind of return they can expect, is 

something that all hard-working people in this province should 

be — and I know are — questioning as they learn of it. 

 

We’re certainly concerned with the continued sell-off in this 

province, the broken promises to preserve our Crowns. Now we 

see of course our Crowns being undermined, but even our 

profitable Crown corporation being sold off in ISC [Information 

Services Corporation] deriving . . . taking away dollars from 

this government to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, 

taking away $15 million a year in a dividend that’s 

appropriately paid to make those investments back into services 

in this province is now being denied. 

 

And my question to the government is, through these kind of 

short-sighted decisions, where do they think they’re going to 

have the dollars to make these investments if they’re selling off 

the assets, the profitable assets we have here today? And of 

course I talked about the senseless sell-off of affordable homes 

and public land that we have as an important tool to respond to 

challenges. 

 

When I look at the Agriculture budget, I see nothing but cuts 

throughout it, Mr. Speaker. And I know our Ag minister, he 

went up to Whitehorse and he then came out of there and he 

seemed to, you know, suggest that he was disappointed with the 

decisions made of the federal government. I thought, this is 

good. I’m glad he’s standing up here. But what we’ve noticed 

now, because AgStability and AgInvest are cost-share 

programs, is that even though the minister was either upset or 

pretended to protest, he was all too willing to simply let his 

budget be cut because of the cost-sharing arrangement and do 

nothing to fill the gap within his own spending. So this year we 

see tens of millions of dollars that are taken directly out of 

producers’ operations by way of cuts of this government and 

certainly of the federal government as well. We’ll be watching 

the federal budget here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last year in agriculture, agriculture was hammered by the 

federal budget in last year’s budget with meat inspections being 

pushed on to the province, with our shelterbelt being put up for 

sale, with community pastures being punted on to the province. 

And what I did notice that was also absent in this budget was 

any sort of a meaningful plan to put forward some support for 

those community pastures and the solutions that many are 

looking for. 

 

And also no plan, no leadership to take our shelterbelt, that 

actually predates the establishment of us as a province in 1905 

— developed in 1903 — and showed no leadership to step 

forward to ensure that this maintains it as a public good into the 

future. And I suspect we have willing partners in our 

neighbouring jurisdictions who are ready and willing to work 

with this province towards making sure that that shelterbelt, that 

tree nursery, continues to serve the entire region, certainly our 

province. And I’m always mesmerized as I drive across the 

province, looking at that transformation that has occurred across 

our prairie landscape as a result of that historic investment in 

the program many years ago, Mr. Speaker. But it has huge 

value to the future. 

 

I look at changes to introduce pooled pensions, and some of this 

is reasonable. That being said, it’s all voluntary, Mr. Speaker. 

We need meaningful provisions and improvements for Canada 

pension at a time where old age security’s being cut. We need 

to make sure we’re addressing income security in a way that 

impacts all. And certainly the Canada Pension Plan is the most 

efficient, most effective tool to going at that. It’s pan-Canadian. 

It’s portable. And this government’s unwillingness to be a 

strong advocate on the national stage is something that certainly 

hurts Saskatchewan hard-working families and the income 

security they deserve. But it’s a detriment to all Canadians that 

we can’t work together on such an important file. 

 

So I welcome the pooled pension changes, but they will impact 

some people, Mr. Speaker, but not all people and not enough 

people. In fact only a few will be able to participate in those 

programs. We need to do a better job of providing stronger 

income security for all Canadians and all Saskatchewan 

workers and retirees. And certainly the Canada pension is that 

important tool. 

 

We also noticed throughout the budget that there’s a lot of 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2849 

 

money for executive government, for all the executive functions 

of ministries. And there’s a real trend there. I noticed it stood 

out in a galling way in health care where they’re actually asking 

the health agencies or health authorities and the Cancer Agency 

to go out and cut $54 million in services and programs and care 

across our province, punting on, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, those 

difficult decisions that impact real people in a real way onto 

other levels of government, but also other agencies like the 

Cancer Agency. 

 

And when I see then on the other side that this government’s 

actually beefing up its expenditure in a big way, almost 20 per 

cent, in executive management in health, that’s interesting. So 

more money for the top of health care, Mr. Speaker, less money 

for the delivery on the front lines, and cuts for many, and 

leaving the hard work of this budget to be done by many others. 

Those are some of the concerns I’ve stated. 

 

I stated, of course, my concerns by way of the cuts to our 

environment — something that’s critical not just to our quality 

of life, that’s critical to life itself. It’s about acting now to 

protect our environment for future generations, and the fact we 

see cuts to dollars who are already too few to address the 

challenges of climate change are a large concern. 

 

The huge burden that’s being passed along to students in our 

pre-K to 12 system is unacceptable. Just the same, the massive 

increases in tuition and the debt that we’re passing on to 

post-secondary students is a challenge for many, and making 

learning inaccessible for far too many across this province, 

which hurts their future and it hurts our economy. 

 

Our universities are in disarray with a debt burden that’s been 

placed upon them by this government. Our communities are 

looking for meaningful action by way of an infrastructure plan, 

something that wasn’t in our budget yesterday. And of course 

something that’ll come as a direct cost to all Saskatchewan 

people by way of property tax increases, that will result from 

not properly supporting those changes, is supporting the growth 

in our communities, Mr. Speaker. So there’s some of those 

concerns. 

 

I’ve already put on the record some of the stuff I liked in the 

budget. There wasn’t . . . I mean, I wish I would have been able 

to support more that existed there. There were some small 

investments that were made into home care. That’s good. We 

need to do more. I support some of the investments into 

shelters. That’s good. That being said, the need is huge and we 

need to understand the entire need in making sure we’re 

addressing the challenge in a meaningful way. I certainly 

support the investment made into First Link and Alzheimer’s. 

It’s a good investment. We’ll certainly give credit where credit 

is due. 

 

We have a lot of work ahead of us, Mr. Speaker, as a province. 

We have a lot of work ahead of us as the official opposition to 

listen to Saskatchewan people, to discuss their thoughts and 

ideas as it relates to this budget. I thank so many for the emails, 

for the messages that have come in, the questions they want 

asked. I urge them to get an understanding of this budget. 

 

We know unfortunately that because of the choices of this 

government, there’s more pain to come. And that’s where I 

know many individuals sending emails in to me from all parts 

of Saskatchewan — the North, rural Saskatchewan, urban 

Saskatchewan — all parts have concern and anxiety around 

what the impact will be on the services they depend on in their 

neighbourhood, in their schools, in their health services, or the 

cost that will be borne directly by way of this budget. So I thank 

Saskatchewan people for their interest and their care on those 

fronts. I urge them to make sure they’re sharing with us as they 

see some of those impacts occurring in their communities, to 

make sure that we can give voice and do all we can to be the 

advocate for their issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And I guess I would just touch on before closing that it, you 

know, there’s a lot of concern about this budget being nothing 

more than punting responsibility down the road, kicking costs 

onto the next generation, onto the kids. It’s this concept of a 

credit card budget, not supporting education, and compromising 

the futures of young people on that front, entering into tricky, 

costly, risky new funding schemes, private schemes to deliver 

infrastructure that cost us far more through the long term; 

provide a level of uncertainty around that infrastructure — 

something that comes as a big consequence to future 

generations. 

 

And of course future generations and all people should be 

concerned about the growing debt trend in this province, the $2 

billion over the past two years. And not just the fact that the 

debt’s growing. Maybe people should be more concerned that 

their government’s unwilling to be straight with them about it, 

that this government does all it can to manufacture and 

manipulate and spin a different story to print on their billboards 

but has less care, less focus, little care and little focus on the 

true and real financial state of this province, and reports our 

finances in a way that, as our Provincial Auditor has stated, is 

misleading and wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we laid out priorities when we came into this budget in 

health care and the classroom, in long-term care and 

transparency and accountability. Certainly this government 

missed the mark on those 0 for 3, Mr. Speaker. And I can say 

that, you know, a lot of people are questioning that how, when 

Saskatchewan’s economy is doing so well, how is this 

government failing to make the gains it should? How are they 

failing to take advantage of that opportunity and making sure 

that it’s making improvements in the lives of Saskatchewan 

people, making improvements in the financial state of this 

province? So those are the rightful questions I’m hearing from 

Saskatchewan people about this disconnect of about how well 

our province is doing, and then sort of this pay-more, get-less 

budget and approach from this government. 

 

And there’s questions then that are brought about the ability of 

this government to manage that strong economy in a principled 

way that derives benefits for Saskatchewan people, and 

certainly we question that. 

 

So this is a credit card budget. It borrows from our future, 

asking our kids to pay for it, and kicking responsibility down 

the road. And because it’s hard on services that the middle-class 

families rely upon and all families rely upon such as health care 

and education, and fails to be transparent, we will not be 



2850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

supporting this budget. I will not be supporting this budget and 

at this point in time I will move the following motion: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

disagrees with the government for tabling a credit card 

budget that pushes costs on future generations, hurts 

health care, fails students in schools, rolls back the clock 

on environmental progress, denies transparency, and 

relies on short-sighted privatization schemes. 

 

I move that motion. And that motion will be seconded by my 

good friend, and one heck of a voice for the North, Mr. 

Speaker, and for all of Saskatchewan, the member from 

Athabasca. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion moved by the member for Regina 

Rosemont, seconded by the member from Athabasca, is: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Both sides. 

 

disagrees with the government for tabling a credit card 

budget that pushes costs on future generations, hurts 

health care, fails students in schools, rolls back the clock 

on environmental progress, denies transparency, and 

relies on short-sighted privatization schemes. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . He needs to stand up. Seconder goes first. I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we have the opportunity to 

speak about this particular budget. I want to make sure that the 

people of Saskatchewan understand what this budget means. 

 

But before we go there, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that I 

basically advise the people, the young people. And I noticed 

today we had some young business people here, and I believe 

they’re still in the galleries, Mr. Speaker. What’s important 

from our perspective as an opposition is that we encourage the 

young people that are out there that have a great knowledge of 

how business should work, have a great knowledge of what 

deficits are about, have a great knowledge of how to manage a 

business or in this case how to manage the economy of 

Saskatchewan. And the reason I’m going to be explaining all 

that, Mr. Speaker, in a modern, relevant economy, Mr. Speaker, 

you’ve got to have three or four key, key ingredients to make 

sure that you have the positive benefits for the future 

generations to enjoy. And I think a lot of the business people 

that may be here today would understand that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

From our perspective, the Premier spoke about history, Mr. 

Speaker. He spoke about the history of the NDP. And what’s 

the most amazing thing about the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker, is their history began in 1991, when they talk about the 

NDP taking over government in 1991. And for many young 

people out there, many young people, 1991 was so long ago and 

they may not remember the importance of what the NDP had to 

deal with. But before 1991, before 1991, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

know who was in power prior to 1991 because the 

Saskatchewan Party doesn’t want to acknowledge anything that 

happened before 1991, Mr. Speaker. And why? Let me tell the 

people of Saskatchewan why the Sask Party or the 

conservatives across the way do not want to talk about pre-1991 

when the NDP took over government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason why they don’t want to talk about it, the reason why 

they don’t want to talk about that, Mr. Speaker, is because 

Saskatchewan was roughly fifteen and one-half billion dollars 

in debt, Mr. Speaker, when the Conservatives under Grant 

Devine left this province fifteen and one-half billion dollars in 

debt, Mr. Speaker. So the NDP came along in 1991, Romanow 

and the most, the most . . . Mr. Speaker, you can hear the 

conservatives chirp across the way because history will show 

and history will always show that in 1991, based on the budget 

that we’re having here today, that the Conservatives racked up 

fifteen and one-half billion dollars billion in debt for the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of them are sitting over there saying, oh I wasn’t 

there. No you weren’t there, but many of your colleagues and 

many of your conservative cousins were there. And now all of a 

sudden in 2001 we come or 2013 we come along, and now 

they’re talking about the history that they want to gloss over of 

how the NDP didn’t do a lot of things that they wanted to do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The bottom line is, the bottom line . . . And the business people 

are here. The business people are here. When you’re busy 

paying $3 million a day in interest, a day in interest, just to 

service that debt, never mind paying down the debt — $3 

million a day in interest alone, Mr. Speaker — when you see 

your budgets each year, when they eclipse your total 

contribution towards debt and of course paying the principal 

and the interest on that debt, when that interest on the debt 

alone is twice the size of your Education budget, Mr. Speaker, 

how in the world could you manage and rebuild a province left 

in such ruin by the Conservatives? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most amazing thing about that, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the NDP did do that. The NDP did rebuild the 

credibility of Saskatchewan overall, alongside of the people, 

Mr. Speaker. Alongside of the people — it’s very important to 

note that. 

 

So when we sit here and we listen to the Premier talk about 

history, the biggest thing that people notice, and I tell a lot of 

young people, every time the Saskatchewan Party talks, they 

talk about 16 years that the NDP ruled this province. And what 

happened before those 16 years, Mr. Speaker? I’ll ask the 

young people: ask the question of any Sask Party MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] what happened prior to 

1991 when the NDP took over. Who brought this province to its 

knees? Who almost bankrupted this province, Mr. Speaker? It 

was the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know what the worst part of this all, Mr. Speaker? 

Sitting here listening to their . . . as they try and rewrite history 

for their own political purposes, Mr. Speaker. I sit here and I 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2851 

 

listen to them yap about the NDP’s 16 years in power, but the 

fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, it was the NDP and the 

people that rebuilt this province. It was not the Conservatives or 

the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. No way, shape, or form 

did they have anything to do with the economy today. They in 

fact tried to kill off Saskatchewan with that debt before 1991. 

And who saved the day was the people of Saskatchewan 

alongside the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we talk about the 16 years that the NDP were in 

power, it took us 14 of those 16 years to clean up your mess. 

That was the problem, Mr. Speaker. It took 14 years to clean up 

their mess, Mr. Speaker. And when the NDP alongside the 

people started rebuilding the economy, started building hope, 

Mr. Speaker, along come the conservatives and say, oh look 

what we’re doing now. You almost killed off, you almost killed 

off the province, and now you’re returning, claiming credit for 

the economy that the private sector, the NDP, and the people of 

Saskatchewan created, Mr. Speaker. They had absolutely 

nothing to do with the booming economy today, but yet they’re 

benefiting from that economy because they’re claiming that 

they created this economy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really disturbing to us on this side of 

the Assembly is we can’t for the life of us understand the logic 

of the conservatives. And the business people that might be here 

today, they look at that, and they may look at how they’ve 

managed the economy pre-1991 saying, well this spreadsheet’s 

awful. They have more money going out than you have money 

coming in. How could you sustain a province or a business like 

that? 

 

I would encourage the people across the way and many young 

people to study the history, Mr. Speaker. Study the history and 

see how in fact it was the NDP under Romanow, under Premier 

Romanow at the time that helped rebuild the province alongside 

of the people. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, you see the most important point I 

would raise, the most important point I would raise — whether 

it’s the minister of Industry and member from Kindersley who 

sits here and pretends to know the economy and pretends to 

think he can develop the economy, Mr. Speaker — when the 

heavy lifting and the hard work was to begin, along came 

Premier Calvert and many members like Eldon Lautermilch out 

of Prince Albert, people like Eric Cline out of Saskatoon, 

people like Maynard Sonntag out of Meadow Lake, Mr. 

Speaker. I sat within the NDP benches, and I watched these 

people perform. And there was many others, Mr. Speaker, that 

worked very hard. 

 

And what happened, Mr. Speaker, what happened is this 

premier and this government of the day, Premier Calvert and 

company, they started working with the resource companies 

saying, look, let’s figure out how we can strengthen the 

economy. Because I remember Premier Calvert saying, you 

know, we cannot have a social agenda without first having a 

successful business experience. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s when 

we started working on the economy, Mr. Speaker. And all of a 

sudden everybody knew that Saskatchewan was going to boom. 

Everybody knew that Saskatchewan’s turn was coming very, 

very quickly to fruition in terms of being a booming economy. 

 

So what happened is after we slew, after we had slain the deficit 

bill that the conservatives across the way created, we then had 

to turn around and rebuild our Crown corporations. We then 

had to turn around and look for partners, investors, the business 

community to help us stimulate the economy. And all that work 

began in 2001, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can remember the day almost to the day when the headlines in 

The StarPhoenix saying, “Saskatchewan’s star is rising.” 

“Saskatchewan’s star is rising.” And I think all the funding or 

the people that were involved would . . . analyzing, analyzing 

Saskatchewan’s credit rating, analyzing Saskatchewan’s 

investment climate. All of a sudden they saw that the NDP and 

the people of Saskatchewan were ready for that investment and 

that this would make a significant or create a significant 

opportunity for the business communities all throughout the 

country and the world. All of a sudden they’re saying, 

Saskatchewan’s star is rising — 2001. And, Mr. Speaker, guess 

who was in charge. It was the NDP. It was not the 

Conservatives. It wasn’t the Sask Party. They weren’t even born 

yet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the worst part is, the worst part is we sit here. We sit here, 

us nine NDP MLAs along with our membership base. We sit 

here and we say, well you know, what happened here? 

 

What happened here was the worst thing in the world: that we 

sit here and we listen to the conservatives talk about how they 

created the economy and how they’re balancing the budget. Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to the economy, the worst thing that the 

right wing can say today, the worst thing they can say today, 

Mr. Speaker, is they can say that they created it. And they did 

not, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the worst thing today to tell the 

right wing folks. 

 

[11:45] 

 

You can brag all you want about the money you have, which 

we’re now seeing is gone. You can talk about all the business 

opportunities coming to Saskatchewan, the population base. But 

there’s one small factor, one small, nibbling problem that the 

right wingers across the way have. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t 

create that economy. They merely inherited that economy. 

That’s a significant difference, Mr. Speaker. They inherited a 

booming economy. They inherited population growth. They 

inherited money in the bank. The atmosphere was great in the 

province. All it was, Mr. Speaker, all it was was timing. All it 

was was good timing that the Saskatchewan Party took 

advantage of. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to rewrite history. 

They’re trying to forget about their post-1991 years when they 

almost killed this province off. And now they sit up every day 

bragging about some of the money they spend or some of the 

things they’ve done when, Mr. Speaker, all they have done, all 

they have done, Mr. Speaker, was inherit all that great news and 

all that good work on the backs of many good people in 

Saskatchewan including the labour movement, Mr. Speaker, 

including the people of Saskatchewan that really pulled up their 

socks and done all the hard work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let history show, let history show that the Conservatives 

almost killed off the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 



2852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

had almost killed them off before 1991. And the people of 

Saskatchewan said, we had enough of that show. We want them 

out of there. They got tossed out, Mr. Speaker. And along came 

the NDP under Romanow that had to rebuild our province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, to this day, to this day I think the great injustice 

done to Premier Romanow was he never had the opportunity to 

show what he could do as premier because he was so busy 

cleaning up the Conservative mess left behind by Grant Devine 

and those people over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That was exactly what I think the most tragic thing that I can 

think about when we talk about Romanow is he never had the 

opportunity to build the province of Saskatchewan that he had 

envisioned as a premier because he was so busy paying off 

billions of dollars in debt. And, Mr. Speaker, he showed a lot of 

leadership in that particular aspect and the history of 

Saskatchewan, and he never had that opportunity to show what 

he could do. 

 

And to this day, Mr. Speaker, I sit and think about what 

Romanow could’ve done for our province besides cleaning up 

the Conservative mess. And that’s the worst part of it all, Mr. 

Speaker, is that would be his legacy — which is a great legacy 

because he had a great team. People like Eddie Tchorzewski, 

you know, rest his soul, he’d done a great amount of work. 

Eddie had done more work with this province that the entire 

Sask Party caucus today, Mr. Speaker, 49 of them. And I would 

say that there’s one man that really helped Romanow out at the 

time, and that was the Finance minister. And he worked hard to 

rebuild the credibility of this province. 

 

And today you see all that hard work, whether it’s economic 

planning or whether it’s slaying that deficit monster or whether 

it’s paying down debt, Mr. Speaker. All that hard work is for 

naught, because once again the conservatives are back. The 

conservatives are back, Mr. Speaker, and they’re making a mess 

of all kinds of things. They’re making a mess of everything, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I look at this budget. I look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, and 

once again we’re going back into debt. We’re going back into 

debt — $2 billion more in debt over a two-year period. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I say today to the people of Saskatchewan, when 

the conservatives across the way, the Saskatchewan Party 

across the way, start talking about debt, Mr. Speaker, let us 

remember pre-1991 when the Conservatives almost destroyed 

this province, almost killed us off. And now, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re back, enjoying the economy that they didn’t create, they 

had nothing to do with, and now they’re putting us back into 

deficit again, back into debt again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we sit here and we say, my goodness. No matter how hard 

they try to rewrite history, you cannot escape from your 

historical wrongs, Mr. Speaker. You almost killed this province. 

I’m talking about the Saskatchewan Party under the 

conservative rule. You change your name and, voila, 16 years 

later, oh we’re new people. Well now this budget today 

reaffirms to us that they haven’t changed their habits, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And not only are they putting this province back into debt — $2 

billion in two years — now we’re seeing they’re even selling 

off the Crowns. They’re selling off the Crowns. And those 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker, actually helped save Saskatchewan when 

the NDP were rebuilding. The Crowns were an essential part of 

our rebuilding strategy. Well the conservatives are back to put 

us more into debt, the conservatives are back to . . . Last time, 

last time Saskatchewan and the NDP were able to rebuild the 

province because they could use the Crowns as extra income, 

and the NDP did do that, Mr. Speaker. And now they sit here 

and they say, well if we put this province back into debt, is what 

the conservatives say, we better not even allow the NDP back to 

rebuild. So let us kill off the Crowns. Because they want to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. They want to kill off the Crowns. No matter 

what they say over there, with the Premier musing about the 

future of the Crowns, that is their objective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The third thing that’s really important is the working people, the 

working people in our province. The people that maintain our 

streets, the people that protect our children, the people that 

teach our youth — people all throughout the province, Mr. 

Speaker — those are the working men and women that helped 

rebuild the province after the Saskatchewan Party almost killed 

us off in 1991. And one of the things that’s really important is 

that now they have gone to war with the working people. They 

have gone to war with the working people. 

 

And what you see now, Mr. Speaker, the fourth component is 

they want to simply trash the environment, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

seen evidence of that today. 

 

So you look at what the Saskatchewan Party’s doing: (a) they’re 

putting us more into debt with this budget — $2 billion more 

into debt, Mr. Speaker. Secondly, they’re going to war with the 

working people, trying to destroy the working base of our 

province that took years and years to build. Third, Mr. Speaker, 

is that they’re not allowing the Crowns to flourish. If they’re 

not selling off the Crowns, they’re sucking every penny they 

can out of the Crowns to try and appear like they’re balancing 

their books, and they’re failing at that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the fourth thing is they’re actually compromising the 

environment, Mr. Speaker. They’re compromising the 

environment. And that is something that the people of 

Saskatchewan simply are saying, that’s plain silly. You 

shouldn’t be doing . . . shouldn’t be compromising 

environmental protection for the sake of trying to bring some of 

your insider friends to do more damage to our land. We need to 

have that balance. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan are 

saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now you look at the history of the conservatives or the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. Any business student, any 

business student, any businessman looks at their track record, 

very quickly they’ll realize that these guys couldn’t manage 

their way out of a wet paper bag, Mr. Speaker. They do not 

have the skill, the vision. They’re very tied to their ideology, 

which I think, Mr. Speaker, in the long run is going to create 

some significant problems for the people of Saskatchewan.  

 

And as the New Democratic opposition, we want to make sure 

people in Saskatchewan hear this message and hear the message 

loud and clear that the Saskatchewan Party, under the 

conservatives, are back. They’re back. They’re putting us back 

into debt. They’re compromising the environment. They’re 

selling off the Crowns. And they’ve gone to war with, gone to 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2853 

 

war with the working people, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t make any 

sense. Does that make for smart growth? Absolutely not. It 

doesn’t make any sense at all, Mr. Speaker. But that’s exactly 

what they’re doing. 

 

And in the process, and in the process, one of their other fine 

pieces of work, Mr. Speaker, led by the minister of Justice at 

the time, was to add three more MLAs, add three more MLAs. 

And what that process is, Mr. Speaker . . . And they’ll 

gerrymander the constituency boundaries. They’re doing that 

already. And their whole trick, their whole trick here, Mr. 

Speaker, is to try and rejig their constituencies so they could get 

three more seats and trying to retain power. Retain power for 

what? To kill off our province, Mr. Speaker, to kill off our 

working people, to kill off our Crowns, and to kill off our 

environment. And on this side of the Assembly we don’t 

support that one little bit, Mr. Speaker, not one little bit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party opposition . . . I 

would encourage the business people, the students or people 

that are involved with business, to study this conservative block 

over here, to study them, to look at their history and see what 

exactly, what exactly have they done, what exactly have they 

done. 

 

And I notice the Minister of Highways chirping from his chair, 

Mr. Speaker. He can’t get the P.A. [Prince Albert] bridge right. 

He’s messed up that file. He can’t get the northern roads 

strategy in place. He’s messed up that file. And now when we 

have an opportunity on some economic corridors in the city 

here, and he’s going to mess up that file as well, Mr. Speaker. 

So don’t worry. We’ve got some really good information on the 

Minister of Highways, and he’s going to have a lot of 

explaining to do as we go down this path here as to how they’ve 

messed up the opportunity that they simply inherited off the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what we told him not to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in their wisdom and tied to the ideology, the 

Saskatchewan Party/conservatives are back. And they’re back 

in full force. Mr. Speaker, $2 billion more added to our debt, $2 

billion more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now look at the budget. And you don’t have to take our word 

for it. Don’t take our word for it. Let’s take the words of the 

Provincial Auditor, the Provincial Auditor who says their books 

are wrong and misleading. Those were her quotes, Mr. Speaker. 

Those were her quotes. 

 

And now let’s see what some of their other Conservative 

colleagues, the other Conservative colleagues have said. And I 

want to quote here who said what on the Saskatchewan Party 

budget. Mr. Speaker, this was the quote: “Most debt and deficits 

are buried.” First quote. Second quote: “Saskatchewan has 

massive debt.” Now, Mr. Speaker, who said those statements? It 

wasn’t an NDPer. It wasn’t anybody in the opposition. It wasn’t 

even the auditor, Mr. Speaker. Who said those was the Deputy 

Premier of Alberta, the Deputy Premier of Alberta. A 

Conservative is saying that these conservatives in Saskatchewan 

have massive debt.  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if Alberta can tell Saskatchewan 

conservatives you have massive debt, then somebody must be 

telling the truth, Mr. Speaker. And I would suggest, I would 

suggest that the Conservatives in Alberta have a bit more ability 

to lead than the Saskatchewan Party. Because from our 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective, they have 

critiqued it from a distance, and what this individual has said, 

the Deputy Premier of Alberta, the Deputy Premier of Alberta 

has said that Saskatchewan has massive debt and most of the 

debt and deficits are hidden.  

 

That’s what he said. They are hidden, Mr. Speaker. They are 

absolutely hidden. And that’s the point that we’re trying to raise 

today is that the debt that is being created as a result of this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, are being hidden. 

 

Now what I’ll point out, pre-1991, pre-1991, at least Grant 

Devine’s Conservatives, at least they told us they were going 

into debt because we could see the debt rising. The most 

amazing thing about these new conservatives, Mr. Speaker, is 

they’re punting down that debt down the highway. They’re 

saying, oh no, we’re not into debt now. But I can almost 

guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, if one were to analyze this from the 

perspective of who’s paying, I’ll tell you today: our children 

and grandchildren will be paying those bills for the next 25 and 

35 years under these P3 deals to build roads and schools and 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker. The private sector is going to be 

building those roads, and I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan 

that it’ll cost us money. It’ll cost us money in the long run for 

interest and for doing the work, and this Saskatchewan Party is 

simply punting down those expenses to our children and to our 

grandchildren.  

 

So the next 25 to 35 years, I can almost guarantee you that 90 

per cent of us in the Assembly today 25 years from now when 

this bill is finally paid off won’t be here, including me, Mr. 

Speaker. We won’t be here. But what do they care, Mr. 

Speaker? They don’t care. And that to me decries a lack of 

leadership, Mr. Speaker, and people of Saskatchewan ought to 

know that. 

 

So the point is don’t try and run away from your history. You 

have a very poor history in how you managed the province of 

Saskatchewan, very poor. And secondly is don’t try and claim 

credit for an economy you have absolutely nothing to do in 

creating, that you simply inherited all that great opportunity. 

 

And one of the things that I find really funny and amusing, Mr. 

Speaker, when the NDP left office, we left $2.5 billion in the 

bank for the Saskatchewan Party. And what did they do, Mr. 

Speaker? Six months later they put that money onto the debt. 

And then they said, oh look at us; we’re paying down the debt 

40 per cent. I can remember the Premier putting out billboards. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what they had in the bank when they 

assumed government, and now you fast forward five years later. 

Guess how much they’re putting us back into debt? $2 billion. 

 

So what they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is they have really tried to 

fool the people of Saskatchewan by doing these kind of 

activities. And everybody that’s part of that process ought to be 

ashamed. They should be coming forward and explaining and 

being very accountable to the people of Saskatchewan how they 

have mismanaged the economy, how they have not been able to 

manage the boom for everybody’s benefit, and how they’ve 

created more problems than ever for Saskatchewan. And these 

are long-lasting problems, Mr. Speaker. 



2854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

I can remember, I can remember us having discussions in 

cabinet when we were talking about some of the bills left 

behind by Grant Devine. Some of these bills that were left 

behind, Mr. Speaker, we were paying these bills 12, 13 years 

after 1991. I can remember 2003, paying a bill that the 

Conservatives left us. Now how many more years, how many 

more years do we have to pay, Mr. Speaker? We are still paying 

it. We are still paying it. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Now during the election, during the election, people of 

Saskatchewan said, oh well, we’re tired of hearing about the 

debt. We’re tired of hearing about the deficit. Well guess what, 

Mr. Speaker? That was the conservatives across the way. That’s 

all they kept on saying. We’re tired of hearing about the debt. 

We’re tired of hearing about the interest payment. That’s all we 

hear from you NDPers. Well, Mr. Speaker, we were tired of 

paying it, never mind hearing it, Mr. Speaker. We were tired of 

paying it. 

 

But the problem is we had to do what was necessary to rebuild 

the economy and to rebuild Saskatchewan’s credibility from a 

financial perspective, and we had no help and no advice coming 

and no solutions at all coming from the Saskatchewan Party or 

the conservatives, Mr. Speaker. From my perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, I looked at this budget, and already we see that old 

habits are hard to die. Mr. Speaker, old habits are hard to kill 

off. And once again the conservatives are back. They’re back, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re back. They’re going to war with the 

working people. They want to sell off our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 

They want to compromise the environment. 

 

And what’s happening now, Mr. Speaker? They want to put us 

back into debt with this budget. They want to put us back into 

debt with this budget, Mr. Speaker. And from our perspective, 

that’s not what Saskatchewan deserves. They ought to be fair to 

the people of Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan 

should learn and listen from their historical mistakes that the 

Conservatives had made and really analyze what is happening 

today, Mr. Speaker, what is happening today. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, the NDP want to be relevant. They 

want to be modern. They want to be encouraging investment. 

They want to make sure that we work with our working people. 

Because there’s only four or five basic rules that you have to 

follow when you develop a successful, vibrant economy. 

Number one is you’ve got to have people that’ll work. You 

have to have the labour force. And this is where I think the 

working men and women in our province ought to gain some of 

their respect. 

 

The second thing you have to do is you have to have people 

invest in the province. And I think from the NDP’s perspective, 

absolutely we think it’s really, really important that we attract 

investment because we’re rich in all the resources, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re rich in all the resources. We want to attract that private 

investment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The third thing is the people of Saskatchewan expect you to 

protect the environment. You don’t want to see lakes being 

destroyed. You don’t want to see wildlife or whole tracts of 

land destroyed. You want to make sure that you have that 

balance that the people of Saskatchewan deserve, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what’s really important. 

 

And the fourth thing is you want to have a very, very good 

productive set of Crown corporations, Crown corporations that 

can provide you with the necessary power or water that’s really 

regulated well and monitored well to make sure that 

Saskatchewan’s interests are always maintained. 

 

And all through these four or five pillars that we talk about 

within the NDP as what we think is smart growth, none of these 

pillars are being adopted by the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why we see the mess we’re having today 

with this $2 billion debt. It is happening all over the place, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s something that’s really important. 

 

Now what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that under this 

credit card budget is the North was forgotten. Northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, of which me and my colleague 

from Cumberland represent, we have such a beautiful part of 

our province. A lot of people don’t know that the geographical 

centre of Saskatchewan is 75 kilometres north of Prince Albert. 

 

So if you imagine the size of our province, of how rich the 

North is, and we always say in northern Saskatchewan, we’re 

very rich. We’re very blessed. We’re very happy people in 

terms of what the good God has given us in terms of a beautiful 

piece of land, the ability to hunt, fish, trap, and do all the 

traditional things that our ancestors have done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also enjoy things like jobs at the mine 

site, and we also enjoy the training that the mining companies 

offer us. And we continue building our hopes and dreams to our 

children. That’s what the North wants. 

 

But you look at how the North has been treated overall, Mr. 

Speaker. The Premier talked about this budget opening up the 

doors for the North. So we all sat here on budget day 

anticipating that there’d be something exciting like perhaps a 

road strategy. Mr. Speaker, there was none. None of that was 

ever spoken about when it comes to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The only reference that the Sask Party made when it came to 

northern Saskatchewan was that we’re working with the 

uranium companies. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a given. You 

have to work with the uranium companies. And over the years 

. . . And I tell a lot of people that when you see the Sask Party 

just simply talking and not doing anything for northern 

Saskatchewan people, then the people become very angry.  

 

And what happens when that anger becomes to a point in 

particular, I’ll use a particular example of our highway system, 

of our highway system in northern Saskatchewan. The people 

that drive on some of those highways, they get very angry, Mr. 

Speaker. You know why they get angry? Because they see 

uranium trucks hauling out the yellowcake, hauling out all the 

resources out of our North and banging up the roads on their 

way out, from hauling out all the resources, of which we have 

to travel on, Mr. Speaker. So when they get angry because the 

government isn’t doing anything, and some of that anger spills 

over to the corporations that are operating in the North, they get 

angry about that stuff. And, Mr. Speaker, all of sudden the 

corporations are saying, why are people angry with us? That’s 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2855 

 

because they see the resources being extracted and no benefits 

coming back in. 

 

So once again this budget shows that the Saskatchewan Party 

look at the North as a place to simply suck as much as they can 

out of the North, every penny they can out of the resource base 

out of northern Saskatchewan, and try to get away with not 

putting anything back. The same principle that they treat the 

Crowns, they’re treating the North, Mr. Speaker. And the 

people of the North have had enough. I think a lot of people are 

going to get more and more angry, Mr. Speaker. And they 

ought to listen to the northern people when they ask for basic 

things like decent schools, decent housing, decent roads, things 

like cellphone coverage, which we talk about every day here. 

And that’s all they ask, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what does Saskatchewan get in exchange for all that? They 

get billions of dollars over the years out of northern resources, 

out of the gold sector and, Mr. Speaker, the forestry sector, the 

tourism. There’s all kinds of opportunities in the North. And I 

say to the people of Saskatchewan this: we certainly hear you in 

the Assembly. The Saskatchewan Party hears all your concerns. 

People are not very . . . They’re not shy about voicing their 

concerns. They’re going to be voicing their disagreements more 

and more and more. 

 

And their message to the Saskatchewan Party, and I think a lot 

of the mining companies are hearing this and I can almost 

guarantee you — I’m not privy to any discussions with Cameco 

or Areva or any of these other companies — but I can almost 

guarantee you that these mining companies are telling the 

Saskatchewan Party government, you better have a northern 

agenda when it comes to roads or cellphone coverage. You’ve 

got to do something here because the people are getting angry at 

us because of the Sask Party’s inability to help northern 

Saskatchewan out despite the incredible opportunities that the 

northern part of the province provides to many people in 

southern Saskatchewan and to the province as a whole. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I prefaced my comments by saying the 

North is rich. The North is rich. We’ve got a beautiful piece of 

land, and there are literally billions of dollars taken out of the 

North, Mr. Speaker — uranium mining, like, gold mining, 

tourism — the list goes on. As to the incredible opportunity that 

the North provides to the whole province, the North is pushing 

far above their weight in terms of contributions to the provincial 

economy as a whole. I can almost guarantee today when the 

minister or the Premier is talking about 44 per cent of the 

people that work at the mines are from the North, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re proud of that. We want to see that number build. 

 

But the other 55 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Guess where they’re 

from? They’re from Prince Albert. They’re from Saskatoon. 

They’re from all throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

from all throughout the province. So they all go to work at these 

northern mines. They’ve created an incredible economy in the 

North. And, Mr. Speaker, nobody’s arguing with the fact that 

we want to create opportunity for all. 

 

And the point is the North is willing to share their wealth and 

their resource opportunity with jobs for many, many people. 

And all we ask for exchange from this government or for any 

government is to at least afford the region in which you’ve 

taken out all these resources decent roads, decent schools, and 

decent services to help build the economy, such as cellphones 

and schools and training programs, Mr. Speaker. That’s all 

they’re asking. They’re not asking for the moon. 

 

And what happened once again? The Saskatchewan Party, in 

their archaic thinking, look at the North as a place they can 

simply take out all the resources and not put anything back. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that action is going to create problems for 

the Saskatchewan Party sooner than later. 

 

And I know that the mining companies are getting angry with 

this government. And I know that the mining companies are 

telling these guys, do something. Because what happens if this 

government doesn’t start doing anything, Mr. Speaker? The 

peace in the valley that’s created over the years under a smart 

growth thinking is going to be gone, Mr. Speaker. People in the 

North are going to get angrier and angrier and angrier. And 

some of that anger’s going to spill over to the corporate sector. 

And is that good for the provincial economy, Mr. Speaker? 

Absolutely not. It’s not good. 

 

Do we want to see that industry hurt? And in the long run, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s exactly what’s going to happen if the 

Saskatchewan Party does not wake up to meet the needs of 

northern Saskatchewan people. Because I’m telling you right 

now today that one of the first volleys, one of the first fires or 

volleys across the bow of the Saskatchewan Party and the 

Conservative government overall was the Idle No More effort, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Idle No More effort, Mr. Speaker, is going to really inflame 

a lot of groups and organizations and say, look, the Idle No 

More movement really created . . . woke up a lot of the 

Aboriginal community and they started fighting back. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see 10 times that effort when 

the people of the North finally stand up and say, we’ve had 

enough of this disrespect. We’ve had enough of this non-action 

by the Saskatchewan Party government. We’re going to start 

standing up and we’re going to start telling the government 

you’d better start doing things, otherwise there will be major 

problems in the future. And as an MLA, I don’t want to see any 

of that activity, Mr. Speaker, because a lot of my people, my 

constituents’ livelihood are attached to the mining sector. We 

want to see that continue, but in a sustainable, thoughtful, 

respectful way, Mr. Speaker, not the way the Saskatchewan 

Party treats the North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when they made an announcement on 

highways in northern Saskatchewan, there was one highway 

mentioned, Mr. Speaker, and that was the highway between two 

mines. Now you look at the investment, the private sector doing 

that, we don’t have a problem with northern development, Mr. 

Speaker. The uranium mining industry is exciting for northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I’ll go back to, the historical perspective is, who developed 

that mining sector in the ’70s, Mr. Speaker? It was the NDP. It 

was the NDP that bought the North, Mr. Speaker, under the 

then MLA Fred Thompson, he ushered in a new era of 

development for the North. And the uranium companies were 

part and parcel and partners of that effort with the government 



2856 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

of Saskatchewan of the day, which were the NDP. So when the 

Sask Party get up and the Premier gets up and says, oh you guys 

are against uranium development — absolutely not, Mr. 

Speaker. Why would he say something like that that was 

factually incorrect? Who ushered in the uranium development 

in the North? It was the NDP, Mr. Speaker. So we’re not going 

to take no lessons from anybody in terms of trying to develop 

the North. 

 

And the simple thing at the time, Mr. Speaker, at the time under 

the NDP, they asked for decent things like decent roads. And I 

remember the road being paved. And now it’s such an 

incredible opportunity for the people of our area, and who led 

that charge was Mr. Thompson. So I go out and I make that 

statement again today: that people of Saskatchewan respected 

that man for years for what he’d done. 

 

And there’s no question today that the message remains the 

same, is you cannot continue to take resources out of northern 

Saskatchewan without putting anything back. And you’ve got to 

figure that out, otherwise it’s going to create more problems for 

that government down the road, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to 

create major problems, and not only for that government, Mr. 

Speaker. Because if there’s a disruption because the anger 

overspills and the corporations get involved, you’re going to 

disrupt an environment for good investment. You’re going to 

disrupt jobs and opportunities for people in southern 

Saskatchewan. And then what, Mr. Speaker? We have an 

opportunity to send some of the resources to China and, Mr. 

Speaker, I think people applaud that effort because we want to 

see the industry flourish. 

 

But what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s roads that are 

being used in the North. I talked about the roads today. What 

would happen, Mr. Speaker, if the road that’s being used to haul 

yellowcake, and all of a sudden these roads aren’t up to 

standard, Mr. Speaker? The roads aren’t up to standard. And I 

think one of the things, one of the things that’s really important 

is that if the roads aren’t up to standard, Mr. Speaker, what 

happens if there’s a spill? What happens if there’s a massive 

accident that involves a truck hauling hydrochloric acid to the 

mine or hauling yellowcake out? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know these roads are not built to 

industrial standards. We know that. I’ve travelled these roads. 

I’ve travelled many roads in the North and even Pinehouse’s 

road, Mr. Speaker, the community that’s working very closely 

with the mining sector. And I applaud that effort. I applaud that 

effort. But, Mr. Speaker, what happens if there’s a spill? What’s 

happens if there’s hydrochloric acid spilled on some road near 

the community of Pinehouse or at Beauval? 

 

Last year I provided a bunch of petitions to these guys, the Sask 

Party guys, to fix the main road going through Beauval because 

that’s one of the main routes that people are hauling a lot of 

dangerous chemicals. And, Mr. Speaker, the mayor has asked 

us to fix the road. It’s only a 7- or 8-kilometre stretch that he’s 

asked to fix the road to make it safe for the people of Beauval 

because there’s all kinds of trucks flying by there, hauling 

things in and out of the mines. And he’s worried that there’ll be 

problems. 

 

Now never mind, never mind those two examples. There are 

examples all throughout the province. Let’s go even to Prince 

Albert, which is a direct connect to the North. They have been 

asking for a new bridge. And, Mr. Speaker, I remember the 

Premier going there and alluding to the fact that P.A. needed a 

new bridge. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s all he said. There was no 

commitment whatsoever. And I think the people of P.A. 

deserve better than that because you don’t just go to a function 

and say, you guys need a new bridge. You’ve identified the 

need. You’ve also got to provide the solution. You don’t simply 

identify the need. 

 

And that’s the point that I would say to the people of 

Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Party is so eloquent at 

identifying problems when the people of Saskatchewan are 

asking for clarity on solutions. And that’s where the leadership 

ends, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party is so adept at 

blaming others and pointing fingers at everybody else except 

themselves. They stubbornly refuse to accept responsibility as a 

government on many fronts. 

 

And you look at this budget, Mr. Speaker. They’re telling the 

regional health authorities we need $60 million; you guys figure 

it out. Well, Mr. Speaker, and the same goes with the Cancer 

Agency. We need all these cuts, but we’re not going to do them. 

We’re going to give you guys less money and you guys figure it 

out. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not leadership at all. And from our 

perspective, I say to the people in Saskatchewan that the 

Conservatives of the ’80s that almost killed off this province, at 

the very least the 15 and a half billion dollars we had in debt. 

We could actually pick up a document, Mr. Speaker, and we 

could actually read it. We could actually see that the 

Conservatives in the ’80s were putting us into debt. 

 

Now the conservatives are back, Mr. Speaker. They’re back. 

And the reason why they’re back, Mr. Speaker, is it’s all about 

timing. And they hijacked the agenda, Mr. Speaker. But that’s 

fine. That’s fine because people of Saskatchewan will certainly 

learn. And they’ll learn about the history of debt that the 

conservatives have put this province under, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ll hear about the North being forgotten. We’re seeing the 

evidence they’re starting to sell the Crowns. They’re looking at 

the privatization through a process to P3s which are costly, 

costly, costly. They’re looking at this credit card budget as 

another example of their inability to govern and to manage. 

 

You look at the $2 billion increase in our debt over the next two 

years, Mr. Speaker. And to the people of Saskatchewan, I can 

tell them we’re heading back into debt. The conservatives are 

back, and they’re once again attacking the working men and 

women. They’re attacking the Crowns. They’re not concerned 

about the environment, Mr. Speaker. And above all else, above 

all else, Mr. Speaker, they’re not being truthful and accountable 

and transparent to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When our own Provincial Auditor, who’s independent . . . She’s 

not a Sask Party person. She’s not an NDP person. She’s an 

independent member of this House. She does her job, and she 

criticizes the Saskatchewan Party for presenting two sets of 

books — one for the public and one for themselves. And, Mr. 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2857 

 

Speaker, her analogy of how they manage the budget of 

Saskatchewan, and the words that strike out wholeheartedly 

from her perspective as a professional person, is that they’re 

wrong and misleading, wrong and misleading, wrong and 

misleading. That’s not the NDP words, Mr. Speaker. That is the 

Provincial Auditor’s words about how the Saskatchewan Party 

has been managing this budget. 

 

And we’re not done yet, Mr. Speaker. We are not done yet. We 

have a lot of comments on this particular budget. They’re going 

to be tons of presentations by my colleagues as to how this 

particular government has ignored, has ignored the basic 

principle of running a good solid business is that you’ve got to 

have more money coming in than money going out. You can’t 

compromise the assets that you have; you can’t sell your house 

because you have to pay a bill. Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to learn 

to manage these assets well. You’ve got to learn to protect your 

investments. You’ve got to learn to make sure you have the 

proper environment, and I give tons of examples today. And 

you’ve got to know what you’re doing. And, Mr. Speaker, I say 

again that the Saskatchewan Party simply do not know what 

they’re doing. 

 

Now I’ll point out my earlier comment about the fact that some 

of the P3s that they’re undertaking, some of the P3s, all they’re 

doing is punting that debt down the road. Like, the Deputy 

Premier of Alberta is absolutely right. We have huge debt, Mr. 

Speaker. And the debt is hidden and so is the challenges of the 

P3. All that is hidden. They don’t show that in this budget. So 

the Deputy Premier of Alberta is saying, Saskatchewan has 

massive debt and Saskatchewan’s hiding their debt. Now he’s a 

Conservative, a fellow conservative. You would generally think 

that they’d help each other but somewhere along the line, these 

conservatives in Saskatchewan got it wrong. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan are going to start 

paying very close attention to exactly what the Saskatchewan 

Party’s doing. And as much as they’re rehashing old 

announcements here today, they’re rehashing old 

announcements, the fact of the matter is you look at how they 

have selected the people to be part of cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s nobody north of Saskatoon in this cabinet. And you 

wonder, why is that? The North is such a rich opportunity. 

Nobody from Yorkton, nobody from Meadow Lake, nobody 

from North Battleford, nobody from P.A. Those are vibrant 

parts of our economy. They’re huge cities. And shouldn’t 

anybody in the North warrant a cabinet posting, Mr. Speaker? 

And that’s my point about the North in general, that the North is 

being forgotten. 

 

And when you forget and ignore and turn your backs on some 

crucial areas of this province, it’s going to spell trouble, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s going to spell trouble in the long run. And what 

we in the NDP want to make sure is that people know that there 

is an option, that there is an opportunity to make sure that 

Saskatchewan does things right, Mr. Speaker. And that 

opportunity is coming up in a couple of years, and it’s called an 

election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Sask Party know this. The Sask Party know this. And 

that’s why they’ve gerrymandered a new process to create new 

MLAs, why they put this photo ID [identification] stuff. It’s all 

about voter suppression tactics, Mr. Speaker. That’s all it’s 

about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan will see 

right through that. They’ll see right through that, and they’ll 

say, okay, conservatives, enough of that activity. We tried you 

guys. You guys had a great opportunity. You had a great 

inheritance party. You blew all your wad, though. You blew all 

the cash. Now all of a sudden you’re going to start seeing your 

friends disappear on you. 

 

You had such an excellent opportunity. You had such a great 

start because you had the money in the bank that the NDP left 

you. You had a booming economy. You had a growing 

population. You had optimism. You had investment. You had 

this great opportunity. And they blew it, Mr. Speaker. They 

blew it. 

 

You know why, Mr. Speaker? Because they’re tied to their 

ideology. They don’t make any common . . . they have no 

common sense on how to do things. Number three, they went to 

war with the working people. You shouldn’t do that. Number 

three, they’re ignoring crucial areas like the North, like P.A., 

like Meadow Lake, like North Battleford. They’re ignoring all 

these regions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what’s going to happen is I think you’re going to see a 

collapse very soon of that particular government because right 

now there’s a massive amount of confusion over there. And Mr. 

Speaker, from my vantage point, the confusion is that half of 

them don’t know what’s going on in terms of how this debt’s 

going to hurt us. 

 

And the other problem we have, Mr. Speaker, as a the result of 

their privatization agenda, as a result of their P3s, as a result of 

their P3s, Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent of us in this room will not 

see some of those bills attached to P3s paid off in our lifetime. 

And that’s the sad reality of this budget, Mr. Speaker. We are 

transferring that debt on to our children and on to our 

grandchildren. And that’s not a good conscience to have. At the 

very least, the pre-1991 Conservatives, at the very least, they 

stood up and said, here’s our debt. And they showed the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

These new conservatives are hiding that debt, as expressed by 

the Deputy Premier of Alberta. They’re hiding that debt so the 

children and grandchildren that we enjoy today, they’ll be 

paying off that debt, Mr. Speaker. And to me, that’s my point. 

And my most valid point is, why would you do that? Why 

would you do that to the children and grandchildren of our 

province? 

 

We went through this exercise in the 1990s already. We went 

through all this. We had the pain of rebuilding the economy. 

We had the pain of paying back the banks and reclaiming the 

banks. We went through all that already. Why are you coming 

back to put Saskatchewan people through that? And it’s not so 

much Saskatchewan people today, Mr. Speaker, but 

Saskatchewan children and Saskatchewan grandchildren who’ll 

be paying off the debt left behind by that Sask Party 

government through these P3 exercises. 

 

They ought to come clean. At the very least, they ought to come 

and tell the people, be accountable and transparent, say, okay 



2858 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

we’re building a road through a P3 process and here’s the cost 

going to be for the next 25 years. Total cost is X amount and 

total cost for the 25 years of interest is X amount and all the 

management fees and the maintenance fees X amount. They 

have to come out and get the figures right down to the penny, 

Mr. Speaker. And this description of what the costs will be for 

years to come will never be afforded by the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s all about their insiders and their friends, of 

who to give these special sweetheart deals. And once again the 

NDP will be forced to come back and clean up yet another 

conservative mess. 

 

I tell the people of Saskatchewan, we don’t have to afford 

another 10 years of mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. We don’t 

have to afford another 10 years of myths and untruths when it 

comes to being accountable about our books. The Provincial 

Auditor says they’re wrong and misleading. The Deputy 

Premier of Alberta is saying that they’re hiding all this debt, 

Mr. Speaker. So you don’t have to take the NDP’s word for it. 

Take a totally neutral officer of this Assembly’s word for it, or 

take the colleague from Alberta’s word for it. He knows or she 

knows that this year’s budget is hiding debt. It is punting the 

responsibility of paying some of these P3s down to the backs of 

our children and grandchildren, and that’s not a very pleasant 

sight. 

 

So from the business perspective, Mr. Speaker, from a business 

perspective, these guys inherited a thriving business. They 

inherited a thriving business. And right away they went to war 

with their employees — not a good thing to do. And right way 

they compromised on environmental protection on that business 

— right away, Mr. Speaker, not the thing to do. And right away 

they started trying to privatize certain sectors of this business. 

Mr. Speaker, the business was thriving because the sectors were 

working together, such as the private sector, the Crown sector, 

and so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they inherited a thriving business, Mr. Speaker, one that they 

didn’t create. And that must really be problematic for a lot of 

conservatives because they go around claiming the 

Saskatchewan economy is doing great; everything is fine. But 

the only problem is why don’t they say, but we didn’t create it; 

we inherited this booming economy? Because they did, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the fact. They inherited it. 

 

And what’s really problematic for conservatives across the way 

is now they know they’re messing it up. Now they know they’re 

messing it up because they couldn’t manage it properly. They 

can’t manage the growth properly, Mr. Speaker. They cannot 

even manage our books properly. And no matter how many 

times they yap and try and interrupt my discussion here today, 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is the conservatives have never 

done anything good for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They never 

will, and their history will always repeat itself. Their history 

will always repeat itself because their ideology, it really begins 

to trump common sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll say this at the outset, that I know it’s very difficult for 

many families and many regions and many organizations that 

were left out of this budget, people like education — education 

where we’re talking about portables, you know, portable school 

classrooms, Mr. Speaker, and where they’re talking about 

teaching kids in the classroom, where the only option that the 

Minister of Education has offered to the education institutions 

and to the education of our children is standardized testing. 

That’s what he’s offered. Standardized testing is not even useful 

as a distraction from the fact that they’re not funding our 

schools properly and supporting our kids properly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I notice as well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at some of the 

challenges overall when it comes to engaging a lot of the people 

when we talk about sharing the benefit, a lot of people are 

saying, well if Saskatchewan’s booming, the economy is going 

great and everything is really good, why aren’t certain regions 

benefiting? Why are we going $2 billion more into debt? 

There’s a disconnection from people. They’re trying to figure 

out, how does that work? How come when we pick up the paper 

every day and we read that things are going well for 

Saskatchewan, and yet we see a budget that has $2 billion more 

added to the debt? We see portable classrooms in place of nice 

schools, Mr. Speaker. And we see roads that continue to 

deteriorate, Mr. Speaker, and we see people’s hope fade. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the last thing that the Saskatchewan Party 

can mess up, and I hope it never happens, is I hope they don’t 

start putting in an environment in which business is not 

encouraged to come here. And I see a lot of evidence of that, 

Mr. Speaker, just by the way they’re treating people overall. 

And the North is a good example of how the people up north 

have simply have had enough. Either this Saskatchewan Party 

government starts delivering benefits to the North or we will 

see some major, major challenges in the future when it comes to 

northern resources being extracted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m encouraging people in the North. I’m 

encouraging the mining companies. We appreciate both. We 

both have to exist in the North. We both have to co-exist. There 

are many good people that work in the mines and I support the 

mining sector 100 per cent. I support the mining sector because 

of the great opportunity that they create. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the mining companies don’t build roads; the 

Government of Saskatchewan has the obligation to build roads. 

And the northern mining companies don’t have to build 

schools; the Government of Saskatchewan has to build schools. 

And, Mr. Speaker, even when it comes to cellphone coverage, 

Mr. Speaker, the mining companies are helping out, helping out 

certain communities. I know that. But the problem is, is other 

communities will want help as well. So do the mining 

companies start getting into that? Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

corporations, the mining companies pay taxes and royalties and 

the workers pay taxes to this government. So shouldn’t this 

government have some obligation to the North when it comes to 

roads, schools, and things like cellphone service? Absolutely, 

Mr. Speaker, absolutely. But they steadfastly refuse to deal with 

the North and, Mr. Speaker, that is going to create a lot of 

problems in the future. 

 

So I’ll point out today that from our perspective, the NDP have 

watched the Saskatchewan Party the last five years, we’re 

totally unimpressed with their ability to manage our economy, 

to manage the province as a whole. From the business 

perspective to managing a successful business entity that they 

inherited, they get a big fat F, big fat F for lack of vision, lack 

of ability, and lack of managerial style, Mr. Speaker. They 

simply did not know what they were getting into. 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2859 

 

[12:30] 

 

I’ll go back to my earlier point, Mr. Speaker, that we look . . . 

As the NDP, we talk about smart growth. We talk about smart 

growth in the sense that we have to make sure that part of the 

work to attract investment into our province doesn’t necessarily 

only end at royalties, it also ends at making sure you have a 

good labour force, to making sure that you have peace in the 

valley with different players and different organizations in 

which area you’re going to work in. You’ve got to be able to 

say that, with all integrity, that environmental stewardship is 

important to that company, to this government, to the people. 

It’s all got to be co-existing. It all has to be copacetic, as they 

say. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is I don’t think 

the Sask Party get that at all. They don’t get that in any way, 

shape, or form. So I think between their history of debt — they 

can’t escape that; they’ve forgotten about the North; their 

privatization agenda, selling off the Crowns; their credit card 

budget, punting that debt down to our children and 

grandchildren; the $2 billion increase in our debt over the next 

two years, well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, the conservatives are back. They’re back. 

 

And now it’s up to all of us to not let them make the same 

mistakes that they made in the ’90s where it’ll take the NDP 

another 16 years to clean up their mess, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 

do not want to clean up any more conservative mess. They want 

to be able to build on a vision of hope and a vision of 

co-existence, a vision of where we all share in the benefits, a 

vision where the private sector is modern and engaged, a vision 

where the Crowns are strong and vibrant, where our families are 

strengthened all throughout the province, not just insider friends 

and people that the Sask Party know. We’ve seen evidence of 

that time and time again. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at the very least when you look at the history 

of the NDP premiers, whether it’s Romanow that never had the 

opportunity or Calvert that built the economy, our next leader, 

the member from Saskatoon, we ought to give him the . . . We 

ought to afford him as New Democrats and people who believe 

in that vision, at the very least, the ability to do things exciting 

for the province without worrying about debt all the time and to 

be able to build on the successes of people like Premier Calvert 

and recognizing the challenges that Premier Romanow had 

when he was in office. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more information that I want to 

share. But again I’ll go back to my final comment on this 

particular bill, what the Provincial Auditor said about the Sask 

Party’s management style — wrong and misleading. The 

Deputy Premier of Alberta, a Conservative, who said, “Most 

debt and deficits are buried.” And also Saskatchewan has 

“massive debt.” So the Conservatives in Alberta are warning 

the conservatives here. The Provincial Auditor is warning the 

conservatives here. The NDP are warning the conservatives 

here. The people of Saskatchewan are warning the 

conservatives here. And, Mr. Speaker, they still stubbornly 

refuse to listen to the people and that stubbornness is going to 

cost a lot of political capital come next election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan is the NDP are 

modern; we’re relevant. We’re not going to destroy the 

economy; we’re going to help build it, Mr. Speaker. After all it 

was the NDP alongside of the people that really built the 

economy to begin with. And I will tell people every time the 

Saskatchewan Party member says 16 years of NDP rule, 

remember what we always say: what happened before 1991? 

What did the NDP inherit? They inherited fifteen and a half 

billion dollars from the Conservatives in debt. What the 

conservatives inherited from the NDP in 2007 was two and a 

half billion dollars . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind the member to refer to 

the political parties by their proper names, not by names that are 

not elected in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would point out 

that I am very pleased to second the amendment by my 

colleague, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s really important that 

the people out there know that we are going to continue 

bringing forward the issues that we think compel the people of 

Saskatchewan to pay very close attention to what the 

Saskatchewan Party’s doing. So I guess my final comment I 

would make, Mr. Speaker . . . I have a lot more I’d like to say 

but obviously time is of essence here. So I want to point out that 

I’m pleased to second the amendment made by my colleague. 

So I will be voting for the amendment made by my colleague 

from Regina Rosemont, and against the main motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The debate will carry on concurrently. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m not certain whether my colleagues are that pleased to have 

me stand up, or just to see a bit of a break in the action on the 

other side. I did have a request from our guest, Mr. Speaker. It 

was the first one of its kind that I’ve received, and they were 

wondering if a Page was around and could bring them blankets 

and pillows because they were just beginning to settle in for that 

filibuster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to stand and speak directly in 

support of this balanced budget. I’m honoured to second this 

budget motion. Likely it will be the only balanced budget in 

Canada. And I know, for colleagues on this side of the House, 

we support the work and the efforts of our Minister of Finance 

and Treasury Board members, of course of our Premier and 

cabinet and for everyone on this side because we know the 

significance of this balanced budget. 

 

I’m especially honoured to stand up today on behalf of the 

people of Saskatoon Greystone. It’s a special riding in the 

province. We would all feel that way about our respective 

constituencies. It runs along Boychuk and then turns down 

Taylor, back on Munroe, and then runs along 14th, along 

campus to . . . it doglegs back up on to 8th Street. And the 

geography is important, Mr. Speaker, but we know what’s most 

important — each and every one of us do in here — regarding 

our constituents. And within Saskatoon Greystone there are 

vibrant families, working families, and a whole broad range of 

people that reflect the very best of Saskatchewan — seniors and 

working, community-minded families, including military and 

cadet families. 

 



2860 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

Greystone is home to students and remarkable teachers, 

academic, legal, journalistic and communication leaders, 

cultural and entrepreneurial leaders, people who serve their 

community in a number of fashions, people in the trades, and 

builders, doctors, specialists, a broad range of health science 

professionals, including nurses, firefighters, police and security 

officers, a range of civil servants, just to offer an initial list. 

 

Saskatoon Greystone is made up of extraordinary volunteers, of 

athletes, and sports fans, fans of the Riders, the Blades. You 

know the Blades are going to be hosting the 2003 MasterCard 

Memorial Cup. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Winning it. 

 

Mr. Norris: — And as my colleague optimistically says, and 

certainly they’ve been able to demonstrate that, here we have 

every confidence in their success. 

 

We have people that participate in swimming, in martial arts, 

cycling, in golf, and a number of other endeavours. 

 

We’re also home to leaders of and ambassadors and proponents 

for a whole suite of cultural and creative initiatives in the arts, 

endeavours that are increasingly enriched by the cosmopolitan 

blend of languages, cultures, and foods that are on display in 

our many schools, our parks, within our restaurants and stores. 

We’re a home to among the most vibrant parts of 8th Street, 

among the most vital of commercial arteries in the province. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, the residents of Saskatoon Greystone are 

engaged. They’re active. They’re attentive and articulate 

contributors to this province, to their city, and to their 

community. They’re appreciative of our past, focused on our 

future, including the vital contributions that our First Nations 

and Métis people continue to make for our shared future — a 

future, Mr. Speaker, that the constituents of Saskatoon 

Greystone are helping to shape. And they pay particular 

attention to the deliberations, the debates, and the decisions 

arising from within this Assembly, for which I am grateful to 

listen to them, to learn from them, and to appreciate their input. 

 

I hesitate to highlight one couple, but I’m obliged to. Their 

familial duties have likely expanded here in the last few weeks. 

Their smiles have likely broadened. They are the parents of the 

Leader of the Official Opposition, to whom I offer my 

congratulations in the hope that we provide him an opportunity 

to undertake his work for a very, very long, long time in that 

role. All kidding aside, Mr. Speaker, I wish the Leader of the 

Official Opposition congratulations and extend that to his entire 

family. 

 

The reason for this extended or detailed description of 

Saskatoon Greystone, which I think is reflective on a number of 

ridings across the province, is that there’s a new energy that’s 

apparent and evident in Saskatoon Greystone, just as there is 

right across the province. That energy manifests itself in a 

number of ways, if you want, in a number of indicators. 

 

We can think about the population that’s just been announced 

— nearly 190,000 people in Saskatchewan — a figure that was 

unfathomable just a few years ago. We can also think about 

having the lowest unemployment rate in the country of 3.8 per 

cent, with the knowledge that there’s more to do especially 

within key areas and for key communities. I’m thinking 

specifically about First Nations and Métis people. But these 

help to capture a sense of the energy and activity across the 

province. 

 

There’s another way of expressing that and that’s been 

summarized recently in a new book called The Big Shift: The 

Seismic Change In Canadian Politics, Business And Culture 

And What It Means For Our Future by Darrell Bricker and John 

Ibbitson. They say of Saskatchewan . . . Ibbitson of The Globe 

and Mail, Bricker who’s a pollster with a great and varied 

background regarding public affairs. They say the province of 

Saskatchewan, and I quote: “has reversed years of population 

decline and is growing again robustly.” They go on to say, 

“Saskatchewan used to share with Manitoba a sense that it was 

in the midst of a long period of decline,” and continue to say, 

“although both provinces are doing better, Saskatchewan is 

doing much better.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is significant. How do we begin to explain 

this change? Some will point to the significance of the 

resources that we have inherited, like governments past. And 

we know the significance of those resources to our future today 

and to future generations. Others will speak about the evolution 

of global markets, whether we think about the rising middle 

class in China and India, in Indonesia and Bangladesh, to name 

but a few. Still others will highlight — and rightfully so — the 

character and quality of Saskatchewan people, that adding value 

and sharing opportunities at home and around the world reflects 

our very best. And of this there can be no doubt. 

 

But we also get a sense from feedback that we’ve received from 

people that public policy matters, that government and 

governance matters, that the state can facilitate or inhibit growth 

and it can help to shape the results; that is, the benefits of that 

growth and where they flow. 

 

Recently in an article in the esteemed journal Policy Options, 

Dr. Greg Poelzer, Sr., has offered this about the orientation of 

governance in Saskatchewan today: 

 

Although more supportive of private enterprise than the 

New Democratic Party, the Saskatchewan Party is guided 

by a strong attachment to community and socially 

responsible development. 

 

It’s one of reasons, Mr. Speaker, that this budget matters. It 

does matter that it’s balanced, especially when we look across 

the country. 

 

There’s also a significance in this budget in its connection to 

The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth, a document entitled Vision 

2020 and Beyond, produced and published last year by our 

government, led by our Premier, produced in large measure 

based on feedback that we received from constituents in 

Greystone and right across the province. 

 

[12:45] 

 

This budget has a very solid foundation. That’s not an opinion. 

It’s something that simply we’re offering and repeating. Dr. 

Michael Atkinson, the executive director and professor at the 



March 21, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2861 

 

Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public Policy highlights 

this connection between the two documents. He said in 

yesterday’s StarPhoenix: 

 

. . . the government’s plan for growth, which was released 

in the fall, is likely to be a “blueprint” for any budget 

initiatives and that the budget will be “completely 

consistent” with the growth plan. 

 

In that plan for growth, an important component that helped to 

inform its content and the contours of that document was a 

statement that reminds us that we’re not simply focusing on 

growth for growth’s sake, but we’re trying our very best to 

address a fundamental question about the purpose of prosperity, 

an eternal question. The document reads, the purpose of growth 

is to secure a better quality of life for all Saskatchewan people 

of which there are six core activities that as a government we 

will work to undertake to foster economic growth and to 

address the challenges associated with growth: investing in 

infrastructure; educating, training, developing a skilled 

workforce; ensuring the ongoing competitiveness of our 

Saskatchewan economy; supporting increased trade; advancing 

Saskatchewan innovation; and “ensuring fiscal responsibility 

through balanced budgets, lower debt, and smaller, more 

effective government,” Mr. Speaker, this latter point being a 

fulcrum upon which the other points rest. That’s why this 

budget is so significant. 

 

As our Minister of Finance stated clearly yesterday, this is a 

balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, Steve McLellan of the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the CEO, said yesterday, 

yes, we are overall very, very pleased. Quite frankly we are still 

one of the only provinces in the country that have a balanced 

budget, and we can’t forget about the significance of that. 

 

That means there’s a General Revenue Fund pre-transfer 

surplus where revenue exceeds expense of $64.8 million and a 

summary financial statement surplus of $149.8 million. And the 

treasury board worked to ensure that our expenses increased 

modestly, that our investments were focused and purposeful. 

Year over year we will invest more than eleven and a half 

billion dollars into various programs and initiatives. This 

investment is up $346.6 million or 3.1 per cent from last year’s 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thought what I’d do is focus on some of the 

quality of life investments that this budget offers, offers to the 

people of our province, offers for a way of ensuring that we’re 

balancing the budget and balancing priorities. Not surprisingly, 

given the scope and scale of the health care budget, it seems 

appropriate to start there. Our health budget is about $4.8 

billion. It will go up $161.7 million — that’s a 3.5 per cent 

increase — and it will occupy about 42 per cent of our 

expenditures. 

 

What’s important in this are some of the details. Mr. Speaker, 

we see that there is an $11.9 million net increase in the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency funding for a total of $150.7 

million. We know how significant this is, Mr. Speaker, because 

we know how significant the work of that centre is and how it’s 

appreciated by people right across our province. 

 

There’s new money for expanding the Alzheimer’s First Link 

services. There’s $131.8 million increase, or a 4.5 per cent 

increase, for our regional health authorities for their base 

operating funding for health care and staff and other associated 

operating costs. There’s an additional $10 million for a total of 

more than $70 million for the Saskatchewan surgical initiative 

to reduce surgical wait times, something that our government 

works and certainly, through our very talented minister, we 

continue to make real progress on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from Health we can turn our attention to 

Education, and we can see the significance of our Education 

budget. It’s $1.7 billion, an increase of $107.5 million. There 

are some items, Mr. Speaker, that are worthy of highlighting 

here that in such a large budget could easily be overlooked. But 

when we think about $100,000 to provide access to online 

talking books for people with perceptual disabilities, we’re 

speaking to people right across this province and trying to 

ensure that we’re enhancing their quality of life. 

 

We can think about a $17 million increase to support the 

forecasted school enrolment increases. We know how vital 

these are as our population continues to grow. And as we’ve 

said, we understand that there are challenges associated with 

growth, and at the same time these are the challenges that we’re 

willing to roll up our sleeves and help to address, and these new 

dollars will assist in that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see new child care spaces, 500 new child 

care spaces, and we also see that there are 15 new 

pre-kindergarten programs, Mr. Speaker — new dollars to 

support young students at very, very formative stages and ages 

of their development. 

 

We also see the $5.9 million to initiate a new student 

assessment program. And, Mr. Speaker, this is important, as the 

Premier’s highlighted today. The members opposite will 

attempt to draw us into a discussion that there’s some kind of 

dichotomy between teaching and testing. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what we’re really focused on with these resources is to ensure 

that students succeed and that student success continues to 

increase in the new Saskatchewan. That’s absolutely vital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from Education, we can turn to post-secondary 

education, and we know how significant post-secondary 

education is within the province. We can think and see that 

there are now $117.4 million in student supports, an increase of 

$19.6 million or 20 per cent for our post-secondary students, 

helping to ensure that there’s greater accessibility and 

affordability for our students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see that there are new dollars, 4 million 

new dollars, for the University of Saskatchewan’s health 

science facility. And that’s absolutely essential for us to 

reinforce and to highlight. 

 

We also see new dollars so that we can enhance the number of 

nurse practitioners that are being trained in Saskatchewan. We 

see that money continues to be invested to help ensure that 

we’re increasing the number of medical residency seats, and 

we’re able to move forward on commitments not simply on 

those medical residency seats but also on the medical 

undergraduate seats. 

 



2862 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, our commitment to post-secondary education has 

been and remains significant. We see, Mr. Speaker, that young 

people in Saskatchewan are being encouraged to study in 

Saskatchewan, to succeed in Saskatchewan, to stay in 

Saskatchewan, and through incentives like the graduate 

retention program, help ensure that they can then put their 

contributions back into Saskatchewan. That makes a lot of 

sense. And it stands in stark contrast to where we were about a 

decade ago when, as we saw and heard yesterday, the news 

release from the then-governing NDP was about ways of 

slowing the out-migration. Today we are celebrating the growth 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to highlight a few aspects. I’d like to turn 

to work that our Ministry of Justice is doing. And we see that 

within this ministry, again quietly but importantly, especially 

when we think about ways to help combat and overcome 

domestic violence, there is $7.6 million, including an $800,000 

increase in operating support for women’s shelters across the 

province, including a new transition house — the first one in 

more than two decades — in Melfort, and to support expansions 

that have occurred at existing facilities in Regina and in Prince 

Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from a news release that was issued yesterday by 

the North East Outreach & Support Services group, to quote 

Louise Schweitzer, “With this announcement comes a new era 

for the North East in combating domestic violence.” These 

dollars go directly towards those that are in need within our 

communities, Mr. Speaker, and that is vitally important for us to 

continue to maintain a focus on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to draw attention to the arts and 

creative industries. Mr. Speaker, this is vitally important 

because it also draws its own commentary. The commentary, 

Mr. Speaker, has certainly been led by members opposite. But I 

hope that they will give some pause and see other responses 

because we see in the budget a $5 million investment to provide 

to the new Creative Saskatchewan investment fund to support 

growth and development in the creative industry sector. I’ll 

quote from Mr. Chris Stoicheff, who tweeted, “As Chair . . .” 

and I quote, “As Chair of the Emerging Artists Foundation, 

very pleased to see the Government of Saskatchewan invest in 

Creative Industries.” Mr. Speaker, we know how important that 

is. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker, where the members opposite have 

perhaps missed the mark a little bit in some of their initial 

analysis. And so from Saskatoon Riversdale, the member 

opposite has suggested that regarding these new funds, that is 

$5 million, I quote, “. . . It does nothing for the economy, and 

that’s the bottom line.” This comes from an article entitled, 

“Budget allocates $6.5M for Creative Saskatchewan fund.” Mr. 

Speaker, regarding this new fund and these dollars, I think it’s 

at best premature for the member from Saskatoon Riversdale to 

draw such a stark conclusion. And instead of helping to ensure 

that the debate and dialogue remains constructive, she’s simply 

written off not simply the money, Mr. Speaker, but those artists 

and all those that endeavour to succeed with this significant and 

substantial government support. 

 

If that wasn’t her intention, I think she needs to clarify that, Mr. 

Speaker, because it certainly appears that she has written off not 

simply the money, not simply the economic benefits that would 

come out from the work in this creative sector and others, Mr. 

Speaker, but perhaps unintentionally she has also spoken about 

the work of those artists that will participate and benefit from 

this kind of investment. I hope in the coming days we can get 

some clarification of what she meant with the suggestion that 

“. . . It does nothing for the economy, and that’s the bottom 

line.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know that there are a number of other 

investments that the budget makes that are absolutely worthy of 

discussions and deliberations, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to make 

sure that one of the areas that we highlight is the overall $184.8 

million, a $10.8 million increase in targeted funding from 

government ministries across government for First Nations and 

Métis people including a $3 million fund that’s going to be in 

place as we receive the joint task force within the coming 

weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of adjournment, 

this House stands adjourned. 

 

[Applause] 

 

The Speaker: — I know people are anxious because of the 

roads to get going, but I didn’t realize it would be so popular for 

adjournment. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2835 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2835 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2835 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2835 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2835 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2835 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2836 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2843 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Spring Free From Racism 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 

 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2837 

 Shift Work Recognition Day 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2837 

 Affordable Housing Development 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2837 

 Out-of-This-World Experience 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2838 

 Our Village Uganda Worker Receives Queen’s Diamond Jubilee Medal 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2838 

 Reaction to Provincial Budget 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2838 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2838 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2838 

 Provincial Budget and Financial Management 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2840 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2840 

 Technology Companies and University 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2841 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2841 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2842 

 Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2842 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2842 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2843 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2850 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2859 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


