




















































Hansard: November 19, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 15A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4065 

 November 19, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave of 

members of the Assembly for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave for an extended 

introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 

colleagues, for the leave. Just over a year ago, actually on the 

morning of the government’s release of the growth plan in 

Saskatoon, a very good friend of mine, a friend of many people 

in this province, and a leader in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Randell Morris, passed away suddenly in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Randell was at the time the president of the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, one of the finest 

technical schools you’ll find anywhere in the country, frankly. 

And under Randell’s leadership some very exciting things were 

happening then and continue today on that particular campus, 

not the least of which, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that Randell 

Morris, in working with the government, would often bring 

proposals to us for training and education for Aboriginal 

students, for First Nations and Métis students, and 

non-Aboriginal students. And Randell’s proposal would always 

have a career on the other end of those proposals. He had 

partnerships with industry, and so he came with the request for 

funding. But his vision was always engagement in the 

economy; it was always a career. And, Mr. Speaker, so his loss 

remains a great loss to the province. 

 

The good news is this: we have great leadership today at SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] that are 

continuing in Randell’s way, in his leadership. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we also have wonderful students at SIIT, and we want 

to welcome three students, scholarship winners in fact, to the 

Assembly. 

 

I had the chance to say a few words at Randell’s funeral, and 

prior to that to his wife Gayle and daughter Alex, and indicated 

that the government would like to fund and name, in his honour, 

a scholarship for students attending SIIT. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to welcome the first three recipients 

of the Randell Morris Scholarship who are seated in your 

gallery. And maybe they would just stand and give us a wave as 

I introduce them to members and to you. Clarissa Ballantyne is 

here, Laurie McAdam, Nadia Nichol. They’re joined by the 

director of marketing and communications for SIIT as well, 

Robert Daniels. 

Mr. Speaker, the scholarship is open to all full-time SIIT 

students from a single-parent family. And Gayle, Randell’s 

wife, his widow, has helped develop this scholarship. And so 

she couldn’t be with us here today, but we want to thank her for 

her input into the scholarship. We want to thank everyone — 

the faculty, the staff, and the students at SIIT who continue to 

do amazing work. And we want to especially wish these three 

students the very best in their studies. They will know that they 

are following in the footsteps and benefiting from the legacy of 

a great Saskatchewan leader. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming this delegation of leadership and 

students from SIIT. 

 

And the Premier very accurately captured the ongoing legacy 

that Randell Morris will have in Saskatchewan for SIIT, but for 

the entire province. And I would like to congratulate and 

commend the three women who are the recipients of this 

scholarship, to say, well done, and to say we look forward to 

your contributions that you will make to our province and what 

this scholarship and the path that you are pursuing will mean for 

your families and your communities. I want to commend you 

for your effort and thank you so much for coming here today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce five 

great ladies from Yorkton — well, four from Yorkton, one from 

Ebenezer — in your gallery. They’re ladies of the Yorkton 

chapter of the Red Hat Society or Scarlet Chapeau chapter from 

Yorkton. 

 

With us today are the queen, Frances Mroczko. Give us a wave, 

Frances. There’s Katherine Kuemper, but I know her better as 

Kay Kuemper; Lorraine Flunders, Kathy Reese, and Judy 

Lowe. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell members of the Assembly, if 

they’re not familiar with the Red Hat Society, they’re basically 

ladies of 50 years of age or over that are given a red hat at that 

age, and their basis is having a lot of fun, just sometimes being 

silly and having a lot of fun. I can tell the Assembly though 

that, knowing these ladies, their background goes far, much 

deeper than that. They’re very involved in their communities, 

have been for years, continue to be just great contributors to the 

community, and very big, just very big people at giving back. 

 

And I can tell you as well that I got to bring greetings at their 

annual convention here in Yorkton this past summer. And being 

only 49 at the time, I was given a pink hat because I couldn’t 

have a red hat yet — pink and lavender. Today they awarded 

me a red hat, Mr. Speaker. They came to visit me today here. 

And I’m just so blessed to have them and know them and just 

have really good guidance from them back at home. So I would 

ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 



4066 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the other 

members of the Legislative Assembly 65 grade 10 students 

from Winston Knoll here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, they are 

accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Michelle McKillop, Ms. 

Kim Lawrence, and Ms. Vonnie Schmidt. 

 

Their teacher, Ms. McKillop, has been very diligent in bringing 

her grade 10 social science class to the Legislative Assembly. 

So it’s a real pleasure to have them again. Their class is here so 

welcome to all of them, and I think they’re going to enjoy the 

Legislative Assembly today. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, I have the honour to introduce four 

guests that are seated in your gallery. I’ll begin with the two 

who are my constituents from the Weyburn-Big Muddy 

constituency. Joining us are Kim Reeve — maybe have Kim 

give us a wave, stand — and Tanya Kwochka. 

 

And they are joined by two young ladies who are visiting 

Saskatchewan and staying in Saskatchewan on an exchange, 

Mr. Speaker, and they’re from Quebec, the province of Quebec. 

They are Emma Halley-Nadeau, and Emma is from 

Saint-Remi-de-Tingwick and she goes to school at École 

secondaire Monique-Proulx. And so that’s Emma, and I think 

she already gave a wave. And Lydia Trudel is from Quebec 

City. She attends school at Courvilloise. I hope I said that right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be staying with Kim’s family and 

Tanya’s family while they’re in Weyburn on an exchange. And 

I believe in February, Kim and Tanya both have daughters who 

will be going to Quebec on their part of the exchange. And so 

they’re here in the city to tour the legislature, to observe some 

of the proceedings, and do some other fun stuff while they’re in 

the city. And so I’d ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you and to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I would like to, in the west gallery, introduce a good 

friend of mine who is originally from the Carrot River Valley, 

or originally from Carrot River, is Bill Gowen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill Gowen moved to Saskatoon I guess so he 

didn’t have to put up with me being his MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] anymore. However his . . . I was 

honoured, honoured last summer on July 1st to give his mother 

the Premier’s award of excellence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bertha Gowen did a lot of work in our constituency and did a 

lot of volunteerism. Bill’s following the same trait; he’s a very 

good person. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I also had the 

privilege of giving the eulogy at Bertha’s funeral on Saturday. 

And I feel bad about that because we lost a great member of our 

community. So I would like everybody to welcome Bill to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 

with the member from Carrot River and welcome Mr. Gowen to 

the Assembly. As his new MLA, I’m pleased to see that he’s 

moving up in the world. And I’ve had a lot of that type of 

growth in my constituency from Silver Springs and other 

constituencies around the city and would like to welcome him 

to the finest constituency in the province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind members not to bring 

other members into disrepute. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of anti-bullying initiatives. 

And we know that bullying causes serious harm, and the 

consequences of bullying are devastating, including depression, 

self-harm, addictions, and suicide. And we know other 

provinces have brought forward legislation and various tools 

and programs showing swift and effective government action. 

And we know that this government is not doing enough to 

protect Saskatchewan youth. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives 

of young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Many northern residents benefit from the rental 

purchase option program, also known as RPO. These families 

are very proud homeowners in their community. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Sask Party 

government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan, allowing 

them the dignity of owning their own homes and building 

community in our province’s beautiful North. 

 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4067 

It is signed by many northern residents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred 

Heart Community School. 

 

The petitioners bring to the Assembly’s attention the following: 

that the gym at Sacred Heart Community School in north 

central Regina is now quite literally falling apart and has been 

closed indefinitely, no longer being safe for students or staff. 

While there’s a temporary solution that has been reached — 

refurbishing the sanctuary of the old Sacred Heart Church — 

the desire is for a permanent solution. 

 

The petitioners point out that Sacred Heart Community School 

is the largest school in north central Regina, with 450-plus 

students, 75 per cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. They 

point out that enrolment has increased steadily and has 

increased by 100 students over the past four years, and that 

attendance and learning outcomes are steadily improving as 

well. And they point out that as a matter of basic fairness and 

common sense, Sacred Heart Community School needs a gym. 

 

In the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause this government to immediately replace the 

gymnasium of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens of 

Buchanan, North Battleford, and Kindersley. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

First Nations Youth Summit 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the privilege 

of attending the Assembly of First Nations Youth Summit on 

Treaty 6 territory in Saskatoon. I thank the hosts, Montreal 

Lake Cree Nation, and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, for the invitation and the opportunity to bring 

greetings. It was inspiring to see a young crowd of First Nations 

leaders from across Saskatchewan and from all over Canada 

gathered together focused on what matters. 

 

It was an honour to be there, Mr. Speaker, but as I said to them 

this morning, the true measure of our commitment to our shared 

futures is not whether we show up at events. Rather the true 

measure of our commitment to our shared futures is what we 

actually do. It’s whether we seek to bring people and 

communities together or whether we choose to exploit division 

and misunderstanding. It’s whether we extend opportunity to 

more and more people or whether we put up barriers. It’s 

whether we speak out against racism or don’t pay attention to it 

or, even worse, play a role in it. Those are the real measures of 

our commitment to our shared futures. Those are also the real 

measures of our commitment to building a stronger 

Saskatchewan and a better Canada for generations to come. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 

those involved in the AFN [Assembly of First Nations] Youth 

Summit and thanking them for their leadership here in 

Saskatchewan and all over Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Global Petroleum Survey Results 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

take this opportunity to acknowledge the recently released 

annual global petroleum survey. The annual report done by the 

Fraser Institute surveys petroleum industry executives and 

managers regarding the competitiveness and barriers in oil- and 

gas-producing jurisdictions worldwide. I am happy to report 

that the survey ranks Saskatchewan as having the best policies 

in Canada for attracting investment in oil and gas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you might be asking, what did Saskatchewan rank 

worldwide? Well out of 157 jurisdictions, our province was the 

third best jurisdiction in the world to invest. 

 

Industry has shown its confidence in our province as we 

continue to offer stable and competitive resource royalties. And 

the evidence is in the numbers. Last year, Mr. Speaker, we 

produced over 172 million barrels of crude oil. We drilled a 

record number of horizontal wells. Industry has also made new 

investments in our oil sands and oil shale. More directly, there 

are over 34,000 people working in Saskatchewan’s oil and gas 

industry. 

 

Saskatchewan’s recent growth has been aided by the 

investments made in oil and gas. With over 47.8 billion barrels 

of initial crude oil in place, we look forward to many more 

years of oil production in our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

India Canada Association Supper Night 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 

recognize the good work of the India Canada Association of 

Saskatchewan. ICA [India Canada Association] is a non-profit 

dedicated to promoting Indian culture and multiculturalism. 

 

The ICA held its 32nd annual supper night on October 5th this 

year. The fundraising event includes lively Indian entertainment 

and incredible cuisine. Stephanie and I were pleased to attend 

the sold-out event once again and were called upon to show off 

our Bollywood dance moves or, in my case, lack thereof. 

 

The ICA recognizes the supper night would not be possible 

without the commitment of sponsors, special guests, volunteers, 

and venue staff. I’d like to thank the dinner’s Chair, Ms. Renu 

Kapoor, as well as MCs [master of ceremonies] Lorie Lindsay 

and J.C. Garden. 

 

This year’s event was stellar and raised more than $58,000. The 

funds will be donated to and support the good work of Big 



4068 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

Brothers of Regina. 

 

I’d like to extend a special thanks to the India Canada 

Association of Saskatchewan, the event organizers, for 

continuing to raise cultural awareness through their charitable 

work. The ICA has raised $550,000 for community causes over 

the years. I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

recognizing the remarkable community leadership of the India 

Canada Association and all those involved in making this year’s 

India night gala another huge success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 18th to 

24th is Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week, which 

coincides with National Addictions Awareness Week. Each 

year this is an opportunity to remind people about addiction 

issues and the assistance available throughout our province by 

supporting healthy lifestyles and reducing the risk of use of 

alcohol and drugs. 

 

This year’s awareness campaign targets the misperception that 

drinking and doing drugs is just a social activity. In fact what 

appears to be just doing a bad habit can easily become a 

harmful addiction in disguise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government provides addiction services in 

every health region. One example of this is the new in-patient 

family treatment centre located in Prince Albert, which is 

complete with an on-site child care service. This centre provides 

treatment for women with young children who experience child 

care as a barrier to addiction treatment. 

 

We are also supporting projects like Youth Action for 

Prevention to help people encourage their peers to choose 

healthy lifestyles. We also have enhanced the work to prevent 

fetal alcohol spectrum disorder with improved diagnosis, 

assessment, and community support. In addition the 

cross-ministry mental health and addictions action plan, which 

has already had more than 2,000 people offer their input online 

. . . This will help guide our long-term plans for preventing and 

dealing with addictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize all the tremendous work 

that is happening across Saskatchewan. Our government wants 

to thank those who work in the addiction field and their ongoing 

efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Saskatoon Partners Win Arts Award 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For the 

second consecutive year, a Saskatchewan partnership has won 

the artsVest Outstanding Partnership Award. Saskatoon-based 

PAVED Arts, the Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra, and Affinity 

Credit Union were recognized for their innovative initiative at 

the Business of Arts Awards gala held last Friday evening in 

Toronto. 

The Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra served a large audience of 

music lovers, and PAVED Arts is a non-profit, artistic-run 

centre for contemporary media arts. The core series of a 

two-part concert series that took place during the 2012-2013 

season . . . The Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra performed 

contemporary sound pieces by local and international 

composers, accompanied by video arts specifically selected for 

each piece and produced by PAVED artists. Affinity Credit 

Union came on board as the presenting sponsor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a really good example of how artsVest 

program works. Business and organizations come together to 

support the arts and culture in communities around the 

province. In the program’s first two years, a total of 421 

business partnerships were established. This resulted in more 

than 2.4 million in supports for the arts and culture sector and 

brought money into local economies. That is why this May, 

artsVest Saskatchewan was extended for another two years with 

renewed federal and provincial funding. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in congratulating PAVED 

Arts, the Saskatoon Symphony, and Affinity Credit Union on 

their award-winning partnership. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Police Officer Retires After 29 Years of Service 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise in the Assembly today to recognize the career of an 

accomplished RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officer 

and friend of mine, Sergeant James Morton. 

 

Earlier this month, I had the pleasure of attending the retirement 

service for Sergeant Morton who left the RCMP after 29 years 

of service. And I can tell you, at the retirement ceremony there 

was some talk about his tactical takedown technique, and I can 

personally attest to witnessing it at one point in my past at a 

party. So it’s very effective. 

 

James proudly worked in Saskatchewan for the entire duration 

of his career where he strived to serve and protect the citizens of 

our great province and country. His work with the RCMP 

included organizing and facilitating RCMP courses and 

working with various integrated drug units. And at the time of 

his retirement, he was a sergeant with the RCMP general 

investigation services. 

 

Highlights of his career include being a team commander and 

being in charge of the medal security for the medals plaza at the 

Vancouver Olympics and media centre and captain of one of the 

tactical vessels at the G20 summit in Toronto. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to his work, James is passionate about 

giving back to the community as a volunteer. He has been 

involved with several community organizations, including 

Kinsmen and Special Olympics. He has also coached minor 

hockey and taught water safety and small vessels operators 

courses to the public. 

 

While he has retired from the RCMP, he has not left the work 

world altogether. He is now the sheriff and local registrar at the 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4069 

local Court of Queen’s Bench in Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

accomplishment of the career of Sergeant James Morton and 

wish him the best with his future endeavours. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

A Plan for Agriculture 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Leader of the Opposition likes to talk about putting more eggs 

in more baskets. Supposedly this is the foundation of his smart 

plan. No one would know though because no one has seen this 

imaginary plan. 

 

What we do know is that his smart growth plan doesn’t include 

the most important basket, our bread basket, agriculture. Mr. 

Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition didn’t even bother to 

mention agriculture in his Throne Speech reply, even though 

Saskatchewan exported a record 11.2 billion in agriculture 

exports in 2012, leading the country for the second straight 

year, and even though our agriculture exports account for 

one-third of all the exports from Saskatchewan and even though 

our producers just harvested what is to be expected a record 

crop. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government believes that the best indicator of 

future behaviour is past behaviour. And because the Leader of 

the Opposition doesn’t have a plan, we can only assume that his 

plan for agriculture is the past plan of the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know what that plan did. That plan tore up 

GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] contracts, increased 

crop insurance premiums while decreasing coverage, and closed 

31 ag offices in rural Saskatchewan. The member from Regina 

Lakeview, a former NDP leader, even stated he would take 

money from municipalities and the agriculture initiatives to 

support other priorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has a plan which includes 

increasing crop production by 12 million tonnes by 2020, 

record investments in ag research, and increasing the value of 

agriculture exports from 10 billion to 15 billion by 2020. Mr. 

Speaker, our farmers deserve to know where the NDP stands. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Funding for Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been 20 days 

since the deadline passed for health regions to submit business 

cases in order to access this government’s one-time payment 

fund for seniors’ care facilities. Can the Premier tell us the total 

cost of the requests submitted by all health regions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is correct. It was, I 

believe, October 20th in fact when we released the results of the 

province-wide review of long-term care facilities in this 

province, the first of its kind, Mr. Speaker. That’s when we also 

indicated that the government had allocated $10 million for an 

Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we told health regions is take the time through the month 

of October, Mr. Speaker, to put forward business plans, identify 

what those urgent issues that they believe a portion of the 10 

million could identify, Mr. Speaker. What I also indicated is 

that we would take the month of November to identify those 

projects, prioritize them, determine which ones we could fund. 

And we look forward, Mr. Speaker, to allocating the funding in 

early December, but we are still evaluating the proposals at this 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The question to the Premier was, what’s the 

total cost of the requests submitted by the health regions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 

before, we would take the month of November to evaluate the 

proposals. And, Mr. Speaker, from the proposals that have been 

coming in, some would have specific requests in terms of 

perhaps an updated WanderGuard system that would have an 

identified dollar amount, Mr. Speaker. Others would be more 

general in terms of the requests that they would be looking for 

and wouldn’t necessarily have a dollar amount attached to 

them, Mr. Speaker. We are evaluating those proposals, Mr. 

Speaker, in this month, and that will be continuing for the 

remainder of this month, and then awarding the dollars in 

December, as I have stated previously. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the dollars for this one-time 

payment fund are set to roll out in about a couple weeks, so 

surely the ministry has done the analysis on these requests from 

the health regions. 

 

We’ve already heard, Mr. Speaker, that health regions are 

concerned about the amount of funding they will actually 

receive from this one-time fund for care facilities. My question 

to the Premier: can he outline how much was requested by each 

of the 12 health regions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — As I said in my previous response, Mr. 

Speaker, the Ministry of Health is looking at all of the proposals 

as they came in. Some would have clear identified dollars 

attached to them, others would have a general direction in terms 

of where they would access money, Mr. Speaker, without a 

direct dollar amount attached to them. We are evaluating, as the 

Ministry of Health we are doing our due diligence in terms of 

evaluation of the requests, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be prioritizing 

them, determining which ones we can fund within the $10 

million request, and allocating those dollars in December, Mr. 



4070 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last week we brought forward 

concerns from the Saskatoon Convalescent Home about a call 

button system that was not working. The Health minister 

acknowledged that this was one of the proposals put forward 

from this one-time payment fund, Mr. Speaker, to address a 

faulty call button system at the Convalescent Home. 

 

What I’ve heard from Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, is 

that they simply cannot understand why it is that care facilities 

have to make a business case for something as essential as a call 

button system. This is about patient safety. This is about patient 

dignity, Mr. Speaker. This shouldn’t be about the bottom line. 

 

My question to the Premier: how many other care facilities have 

had to put forward business cases for something as vital as a 

call button system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 

record of this government over six years, in the first six years of 

our government, the members well know that we have spent $1 

billion in health care capital, Mr. Speaker, knowing that there is 

much more work to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would have a far different situation in this 

province in terms of the health capital and the state of some of 

the health capital in this province, Mr. Speaker, if the members 

opposite had spent more than $300 million in their last six years 

of government. A billion dollars on this side of the House, $300 

million on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were years that went by in the NDP 

government where there were zero dollars attached to 

maintenance, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have funded in fact 

in this government, in one of, I believe, our first year of 

government, $100 million in health capital maintenance, Mr. 

Speaker — unprecedented in this province. It’s a shame, Mr. 

Speaker, that the members opposite didn’t do the same type of 

investment. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government is supposedly 

going to be rolling out dollars from a one-time payment fund in 

about two weeks, but this government is unable to say how 

much was actually requested from health regions, unable to say 

how much from each health region they’re asking for for things 

for care facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the CEO [chief executive officer] tour identified 

many problems with lifts and ceiling tracks. Again having 

proper lifts and ceiling tracks, Mr. Speaker, is about patient 

safety and it’s about patient dignity. It shouldn’t be about a 

bottom line of a business case, but this government, Mr. 

Speaker, is forcing care facilities to make a business case for 

such things. 

Can the Premier tell us how many care facilities have had to put 

forward business cases for something as vital as lifts and ceiling 

tracks? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it has always been the practice 

with health regions, including when members opposite were the 

government, it’s always been the case that health regions are 

going to back up their requests for funding with a case. They 

will make the case for specific requests of the government. That 

is exactly what’s happening here. The government’s responded 

to a need here in terms of the urgent requirement for $10 

million of additional funds and also some mid- and long-term 

measures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to continue to do that analysis and continue to 

provide the health care that Saskatchewan people deserve. I 

wonder if members can . . . The Leader of the Opposition might 

want to share with this Assembly what kind of business case 

went into closing 52 hospitals, Mr. Speaker? What kind of 

business case did the NDP do when they shut down the Plains 

hospital, which today causes trouble in the ERs [emergency 

room] in this city? 

 

I’ll tell you what the business case was under the NDP. They 

said closing the Plains hospital would save $10 million on the 

budget. Mr. Speaker, we’ve saved twice that leaning out blood 

inventory management. This government will continue to put a 

priority on health care capital, on ensuring that we’re doing 

health care capital maintenance in this province, unlike what 

members opposite did in those long, long, dark years of NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here we have a government that it 

likes to talk about being ready for growth, but once again, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a Premier come into the Chamber and ready 

for excuses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re rolling out dollars supposedly in a couple of weeks for 

care facilities, but they’re unable to tell us how much was 

actually requested in total, unable to tell us how much each 

health region is asking for, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just call 

buttons. It’s not just lifts. It’s not just ceiling tracks, Mr. 

Speaker, where we’re having problems with care facilities. 

CEOs have identified that bathtubs are aging or obsolete and 

need to be replaced. Having proper bathtubs in care facilities, 

Mr. Speaker, is essential. It’s about patient safety. It’s about 

patient dignity. So Saskatchewan people are confused, Mr. 

Speaker, when care facilities have to make a business case in 

order to have a proper bathtub in the facility. 

 

My question to the Premier: can he tell us how many facilities 

have had to put forward business cases for something as 

important as proper bathtubs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about dollars 

over and above the allocated budget. We’re talking about 

funding beyond what was budgeted for any of these institutions 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4071 

by the regions. So we know there are a number of needs in a 

number of the regions in a number of the care facilities. They’re 

going to make their case to the regions, and in this case to the 

government, for additional funds, Mr. Speaker. And when they 

do, when they make that case . . . And by the way, this is 

exactly the same process that members opposite used for any 

additional funds over and above what they would have 

budgeted, the same thing notwithstanding the Leader of the 

Opposition’s shock about it all. It’s precisely what they did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s some more facts that he should be more 

surprised about. In our first six years of government, the 

Saskatchewan Party government invested $1 billion in health 

care capital. We’re opening long-term care facilities. They 

closed long-term care beds. We’re opening hospitals in 

communities across this province, Mr. Speaker. They only 

announced the hospitals. We had to actually fund them and do 

the opening. A billion dollars in our first six years versus 300 

million in their last six years. Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to 

do, but I think the people of the province understand which side 

is ready for growth and ready as for what’s needed in the health 

care system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Access to Emergency Rooms 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, a Canadian Association of 

Emergency Physicians report released yesterday is of particular 

interest to Saskatchewan. It says that overcrowding problems in 

emergency rooms is not just a matter of inconvenience, it’s a 

public health emergency. I’ll read from that report’s conclusion, 

Mr. Speaker: “Crowded EDs are associated with poor outcomes 

including increased mortality for patients seen during crowded 

periods.” 

 

To the minister: what is this government doing to address the 

bottleneck in Saskatchewan’s emergency rooms? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what that report also 

mentions, and what was highlighted on the front page of the 

Leader-Post this morning from the individual from the CAEP 

[Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians] who spoke to 

the Leader-Post, is that this has been a problem growing for 20 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will look at the recommendations very 

carefully. Mr. Speaker, we know that today in Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert, in the last year, 250,000 people 

attended to the emergency room, Mr. Speaker. We know that in 

the city of Regina, for example as estimated by the region, that 

15 to 20 per cent of those individuals don’t in fact have an 

emergency situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re doing things like the innovation 

site at the Meadow Primary Health clinic to expand the hours, 

to extend the hours, to give people another option, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we’ve announced the hot-spotting in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, where we know that those high-use 

individuals are using ERs, Mr. Speaker, rather than other 

services. We’re going to take services to them. And that’s why 

we’ve invested in Home First/Quick Response in this city, in 

Saskatoon, and in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, to help divert 

some of those seniors from emergency rooms who don’t 

necessarily need emergency services. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what Dr. Andrew 

Affleck, a co-author of the report says: 

 

If you have significant overcrowding in your emergency 

department, then there is an effect on the retention of 

physicians . . . Every day, if you go to work and you’re 

struggling to find a stretcher to see a patient over and over 

again because it’s blocked by an inpatient waiting to go 

the floor, it grinds on you and it is a retention issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t just have a recruitment problem, we also 

have a retention problem. And overcrowding is making 

retention even more difficult. To the minister: instead of just 

being ready for excuses, when will this government be ready to 

address overcrowding in emergency rooms? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think in my 

previous answer I think I’ve pointed out some of the actions 

that the government is taking with hot-spotting, with Home 

First/Quick Response, Mr. Speaker, with the fact that Regina 

Qu’Appelle since 2008 has opened up 19 per cent more acute 

care beds, Mr. Speaker, in this city. With the fact that in the last 

year bed blockers, those who are waiting for either placement in 

long-term care or some other services within the community, 

Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle has reduced that number by 

24 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve introduced the Allscripts system within 

Regina and Saskatoon to help with the patient flow, Mr. 

Speaker, from emergency to acute, and then out from their 

discharge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why we have taken what I think is an unprecedented 

action, Mr. Speaker, signified by a meeting last week, two days, 

which the emergency doctors, not only from Regina but also 

those that represent their national board, took place . . . a 

meeting took place in Saskatoon where we are starting to plan 

out how do we deliver no waits in the emergency rooms by 

2017, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re not afraid to set bold 

goals, which you will find here in Saskatchewan and not 

anywhere else in this country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Tuition Levels and Support for Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Students and families 

are concerned about the cost of post-secondary education. And 

that’s not surprising because Statistics Canada tells us 

Saskatchewan students pay the second-highest level of tuition 

in the country. Of course we know the Premier has actually 

argued this point with reporters. In August the Premier said: 



4072 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

Just a correction. I’ve heard this in some of the media 

since the StatsCan numbers came out. Tuition in 

Saskatchewan is not the second highest in Canada. The 

tuition increase that some of the universities had for 

year-over-year is probably in that range, but tuition levels. 

 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education: leaving aside that 

the Premier chose to disregard the facts from Stats Canada, can 

the government confirm that Saskatchewan students pay the 

second-highest level of tuition in Canada? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to speak about the significance of post-secondary 

education and especially about affordability for Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to my hon. friend across, I of course would have 

some, some challenges for him on the premise. In fact when we 

think about the investments that we’ve put forward, more than 

$4.6 billion in post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker, we can 

think of some of the most significant student supports across the 

country. In fact just this year there’s $117 million, making sure 

that students have more affordable, more accessible, and 

excellent post-secondary education. 

 

As far as answering directly to the question, Mr. Speaker. I 

would just simply say that students at Dalhousie in the 

University of New Brunswick, University of Waterloo, Queen’s 

University, University of Toronto, York University, University 

of Guelph, University of Ottawa, Carlton University, university 

of western Ontario, McMaster University, University of 

Windsor, and University of Calgary would all generally have 

much higher tuition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Interesting, Mr. Speaker. The minister didn’t 

answer the question, but we’ll carry on in hope, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 2007, using the same annual report from Statistics Canada, 

the then Sask Party Finance critic said the tuition should be 

reduced. He said — the member from Silver Springs and the 

minister’s got him right in front; there’s somebody will be able 

to clear this up with him — he said, “National average at the 

very least, that should be our goal.” But we’ve seen tuition 

increases, and we now have the second-highest level of tuition 

in Canada. And despite being more, students are getting less. 

 

This government has mismanaged the post-secondary sector: 

the Carlton Trail — St. Peter’s merger scandal, the probation 

once again at the College of Medicine; $100 million of debt 

pushed from the province’s books onto the U of S [University 

of Saskatchewan] books; the funding crunch at universities 

which continue to force layoffs of staff, the sale of assets, which 

at the University of Saskatchewan included the sale of sheep. 

 

To the minister: why should students be paying more and 

getting less? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what we know at both the University of Saskatchewan 

and in the University of Regina is that under the NDP, things 

were considerably more challenging than anything that students 

could envision. In fact, Mr. Speaker, between 1991 and 2007, 

under the NDP at the University of Saskatchewan, tuition 

increased by 175 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 175 per cent. At the 

same time, Mr. Speaker, again between 1991 and 2007, 

undergraduate tuition increased at the University of Regina by 

144 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done is put in place a number of 

innovative, in fact very, very important initiatives to make sure 

that students have greater access, Mr. Speaker, and that they’re 

maintaining their focus on excellent programs. For example the 

graduate retention program, Mr. Speaker, the graduate retention 

program where there are now 40,000 graduates participating in 

and benefiting from the graduate retention program, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite might have been 

familiar with 40,000 Saskatchewan graduates in the past, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again we 

see a government not ready for growth but ready for excuses. 

Although in this case, it turns out they were ready for growth — 

growth in tuition, Mr. Speaker, with Saskatchewan now having 

the second-highest level of tuition in all of Canada. That’s not 

what they promised in 2007, and they certainly didn’t talk about 

it in their election in 2011. 

 

Students and parents and university staff and professors that 

I’ve spoken with are confused and frustrated when they see this 

government’s self-congratulatory advertisements. They’re 

recently spending $54,000 on spin and PR [public relations] 

about their record in post-secondary education, and the bill 

continues to rack up as we speak. 

 

Students and parents are confused and frustrated because those 

ads don’t match the reality they’re experiencing on campus — 

the second-highest level of tuition in the entire country, layoffs, 

cutbacks, and program reviews. To the minister: why is this 

government spending $54,000 in self-promotion when our 

universities are under such duress? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to 

make sure that the member opposite is familiar with this own 

record before we address the question directly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we saw under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, were 

real cuts to post-secondary educational budgets. In the early 

1990s, minus 2.5, minus 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And the years 

were bleak, Mr. Speaker, the years were bleak not simply on 

funding because the graduates, Mr. Speaker, would then leave 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4073 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve just said, what we’ve seen under this 

government is a number of initiatives like the Saskatchewan 

Advantage Scholarship where 4,500 graduates out of high 

school are now participating in and able to benefit from this 

increased access to post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we can talk about is, between 1991 and 

2007, the University of Saskatchewan students faced a 175 per 

cent increase, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s so much good 

news to talk about post-secondary education, I’m afraid the 

member opposite is missing the big story: more opportunities 

for Saskatchewan students right here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Crime Prevention Measures 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the community of North 

Battleford has concerns about crime. The issue has generated 

national media attention and over 1,000 concerned citizens have 

joined a local Facebook group to speak out about this. 

 

We know that the North Battleford mayor and city manager 

requested three things when they met with the Minister of 

Policing. The community has asked for more RCMP officers, 

more community service officers, and more resources for the 

Hub initiative. 

 

We appreciate that the government met with the representatives 

of North Battleford, but we haven’t heard specific commitments 

to address this very immediate and serious problem. To the 

Minister of Policing: is there an action plan to follow up on the 

three specific requests from North Battleford? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As part of our 

growth agenda, this government is committed to safety in our 

communities. Speaking specifically about North Battleford, Mr. 

Speaker, we met with the mayor and city manager and the MLA 

for North Battleford, the Minister of Justice and myself. We are 

trying to get together an analysis of really what’s happening in 

this community. 

 

But I’m going to speak briefly about some of the things that this 

government has done in relation to crime prevention. 2007, our 

election promise of 120 additional police officers across the 

province. And I’m just going to speak, you know, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’ll speak later about this, about what the NDP failed to do 

in relation to hiring and making a promise and failing to hire the 

police officers necessary. I’m going to speak about the COR 

and Hub that’s coming out of Prince Albert that is being 

replicated in communities like North Battleford.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we need some time to get this together. The 

community is working with us, and we will continue with this 

progress. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister heard this exact plea 

back in May. And at that time she told the community, “We 

would encourage the committee to put a business case together 

and explain their needs.” 

 

The crime reports for this community fill the local paper. The 

RCMP officers responded to a hundred calls on the last reported 

weekend alone. There are more victims of crime in that city 

every day. I would consider this not a matter for business case 

development. I would think this is a case where the government 

should take quick, decisive action to support the community 

and reduce crime. 

 

To the Minister of Policing: will she consider the high incidents 

of reported crime to be the most compelling business case and 

step in to support North Battleford’s community safety efforts 

right now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, our efforts to reduce crime and 

ensure community safety are working. We have the Hub 

program coming out of North Battleford. It’s only been in place 

for a very short period of time, Mr. Speaker. 2012, the crime 

rate was down by 7 per cent and the severity of crime was down 

by 4 per cent in Saskatchewan compared to 2011, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We acknowledge that the crime rates in the province are too 

high and we are working diligently to try and reduce them, Mr. 

Speaker. Let’s talk about the promise. And here the members 

opposite talk about hiring more police officers. Mr. Speaker, we 

promised 120. We delivered 120. They promised 120, Mr. 

Speaker. They delivered nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again promise made, promise kept. I promised and we’re 

working towards helping the community of North Battleford. 

We will continue with this progress and working with the 

community, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what’s clear is that the community 

and the police are doing their part. The community needs this 

government to allocate resources they’ve asked for as quickly 

as possible. They need to get to some of the grassroots of this 

situation because they need to address crime and prevent crime 

by addressing grassroots. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s what Councillor Bater from North 

Battleford says: 

 

So if the provincial minister is suggesting that we have to 

look at a long term strategy, I would suggest back that all 

those areas are provincial responsibilities, with social 

services, education, health — something we need to keep 

pressing on. 

 

Councillor Bater is right. The provincial government has a lot 

of responsibility on these important issues in order to help 

prevent crime from happening in the first place. To the Minister 

of Policing: will the province’s response to crime in North 

Battleford include changes to social services, education, and 



4074 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

health care, and will they contact the federal government to 

make sure that they are part of this solution as well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to 

mention to the member opposite, if he isn’t aware of the fact, 

that we have a child and family committee that incorporates 

Policing, Justice, Education, Social Services, and Health, Mr. 

Speaker. We are working to try and address some of these 

children and families that are at risk, Mr. Speaker. We 

understand the components. We understand the necessity for 

looking into these particular issues and working together as a 

government. 

 

Now let’s just talk about what the NDP did. From 1996 to 2006, 

Mr. Speaker, our national crime rate dropped by 11 per cent. 

During that same time period, crime in Saskatchewan increased 

by 17 per cent. We’ll take no lessons from the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. Crime was increasing at the time that 

they were in power and they did virtually nothing. Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Krawetz that Bill No. 112 — The 

Accounting Profession Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and speak about this bill relating to the accounting 

profession. And we know that the government has brought it 

forward again because there is some urgency in getting this bill 

passed to meet some of the timelines of the three accounting 

professions that have come forward with this recommendation 

to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have here is the result of many, many 

years of discussion between the chartered accountants, the 

certified general accountants, and the certified management 

accounts and their professional bodies that regulate their 

industry. And, Mr. Speaker, what we have is the new 

designation that is going to work for these organizations here in 

Saskatchewan and across many jurisdictions across Canada. 

And what we understand is that there have been some very long 

and serious discussions about the kinds of changes that need to 

be made to make sure that the qualifications of the individuals 

doing the work will meet a common standard right across the 

board. 

 

Now what I would say, Mr. Speaker, as a member of this 

legislature who has worked with all three of the professional 

designations — the chartered accountants, the certified 

management accountants, and the certified general accountants 

— that they all have provided very good advice, whether 

they’re working within the civil service, whether they’re 

working in private practice, or whether they’re working in 

corporate structures, as it relates to the accountability issues of 

all of the work that we do at the legislature. 

 

Now we know over the years that chartered accountants have 

been the main category of people who have been selected to be 

the Provincial Auditor. And one of my questions for the 

Premier and for the Minister of Finance is whether they will 

listen more carefully to a provincial auditor if they’re a certified 

management accountant or a certified general accountant than 

they have been listening to just a certified accountant. Because 

we know that there’s a whole number of issues where the 

Provincial Auditor, who basically is one of the . . . in that 

position, they hold one of the top accounting positions in the 

province, where they have not been listened to. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not sure this legislation will deal with that, but it 

will deal with the fact that we want to have the best professional 

people we can to provide advice to us, especially advice to the 

legislature. 

 

So as we move forward with this particular legislation, we need 

to understand what it is that is happening with the profession. 

And I think that the pressures that have come across all of the 

accounting professions that are now coming together in this 

Institute of Chartered Professional Accountants or CPAs 

[chartered professional accountant] . . . And CPA is a term we 

know very well from the United States, although there it means 

certified public accountant. But I think it’s important that they 

have used this CPA designation because it assists them in 

having their Canadian skills recognized right across North 

America. 

 

But anyway what we have is legislation which is professional 

legislation. And if there’s one thing that we in this legislature 

have a lot of experience with, it’s with professional legislation, 

whether it’s renewal or revision or reform. Or in fact quite often 

we get whole new professions where we have their legislation 

coming forward. 

 

And so I’m pleased to see in this legislation that the standards 

that we have as a provincial government, which were developed 

over many years, are being met and to make sure that the 

legislation completes its number one function, and that’s the 

protection of the public. And in that protection of the public, we 

also then have all of the protections for the people who spend 

hard-earned dollars and many years of their lives to get these 

designations so they can provide good, professional advice to 

corporations and individuals and governments across the 

province. 

 

And so what we have, Mr. Speaker, in this Bill 112 is 

professional legislation of the most recent and updated kind that 

deals with all of the different issues that are there. And if you 

look at the legislation, often some of the longest parts of the 

legislation itself are, you know, relate to the discipline 

procedures and the information that is required to make sure 

that the public is protected. 

 

And so one of the ways that we’ve developed over the years to 

make sure that the public is protected is to have public 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4075 

representatives on the board. And this particular legislation, in 

section 8 I think, ends up . . . no, in section 9 says that there 

shall be public appointees, and these are appointees by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. And the system that’s set out 

in this legislation is to include two people who are not chartered 

professional accountants to be on the board, and their job is to 

represent all the people of the province and to represent us as 

legislators in making sure that the public is protected by the 

institute, by the organization that is set up to regulate the whole 

accountancy industry. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Now one of the facts of life for chartered professional 

accountants in Saskatchewan is that most of them are members 

of professional corporations that extend beyond the borders of 

Saskatchewan and indeed beyond the borders of Canada and 

North America. And one of the real challenges for a 

professional organization located in the province of 

Saskatchewan is to make sure whatever happens here is 

connected with what happens across Canada and in fact across 

the world. 

 

One of the reasons for that is that chartered professional 

accountants often are involved in assessment of the records and 

books of corporations where people rely on their information 

for investment. If that information is not accurate or it’s 

recklessly prepared, chartered professional accountants can be 

subject to a lawsuit much the same as any other person who 

doesn’t do their job properly. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

major issues in trying to set up this legislation and have it relate 

to other professional legislation across the country is, how do 

you regulate locally an international profession? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would have to congratulate the people in 

Justice who have worked on drafting this bill, working together 

with the accountants of the various organizations, and obviously 

with both the provincial organizations and the national 

organizations, because I think they have been able to get the 

right balance so that our public, our people here in 

Saskatchewan are protected, the professionals that work in 

Saskatchewan are protected, and also that people in other places 

that will rely on the work done by our professionals here in 

Saskatchewan will also be protected. 

 

Now one of the ways that some of these accommodations can 

be made is through expanded use of bylaws in the actual bill 

itself and I think also expanded use of the regulatory powers of 

the provincial government. This always makes it a bit difficult 

for lawyers — that’s the profession I belong to — because it’s 

not always the whole . . . The whole of the story isn’t in Bill 

112. But, Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s been the appropriate 

balance here to make sure that the rules are quite clear, how 

everything is set up is quite clear, and the ability to access all 

the information that one would need to fully discover the 

responsibility lines that might happen if any particular difficulty 

arose. 

 

So we end up then, Mr. Speaker, with Bill 112 as a legislation 

that is basically completing this amalgamation of the various 

institutes. I guess the formal names are the Canadian Institute of 

Chartered Accountants, the Certified General Accountants 

Association of Canada, and the Certified Management 

Accountants of Canada. And that’s what’s going to be 

happening here in Saskatchewan. I think that as far as we know, 

what’s being done in Saskatchewan is among the first provinces 

to move forward with the implementation of this. I think that 

that says a lot about our civil servants here and their ability to 

work together with the profession to get the rules in place. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, always though when you’re looking at 

legislation like this, there is a chance that some of the finer or 

more detailed issues are not totally done in a proper way, so we 

will be listening carefully over the next few weeks or months if 

that’s necessary to see if there are any concerns from the three 

professional organizations or from individual accountants, CAs 

[chartered accountant] or CMAs [certified management 

accountant] or CGAs [certified general accountant], or for that 

matter lawyers who see something that’s going to affect some 

cases they might have, or just other people generally in the 

public. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is good legislation. I’ve watched it 

develop over a couple of decades I guess we can almost say, 

and I’m very pleased that it’s here now. But we will continue to 

look at it diligently to make sure that it’s the best that it can be. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate on Bill. No. 

112. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 99 — The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 

always it’s a pleasure to rise in this august Assembly to have an 

opportunity to participate in debates on the government’s 

proposed legislative agenda. Today I’m rising to speak about 

Bill No. 99 which is An Act to amend The Public Employees 

Pension Plan Act. 

 

As the minister indicated in his comments . . . We didn’t get a 

lot from the minister on the actual substantive portions of the 

amendments. He spoke a lot about the role. But there’s a wee 

short paragraph about the actual changes that are being brought 

forward with very little explanation about the reasons behind 

them, although they are self-explanatory to some extent, Mr. 

Speaker. So we have here a number of small changes that are 

being proposed to the pension plan Act. 

 

And as the minister indicated, the Deputy Premier, this is the 

plan that is provided for public employees. So there are 

thousands of people in Saskatchewan that are reliant upon this 



4076 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

plan for their retirement years, and it appears the government is 

making some changes to hopefully make that work better. 

 

I think one of the first changes he indicated was that right now 

there is I believe a requirement for the board to be unanimous 

for making decisions. And that is a very difficult and high 

standard for any organization, Mr. Speaker. So it seems 

appropriate, in the sense of this change, that the decision 

making of the board of the public employees pension plan 

would now be made by a majority requirement rather than a 

unanimous requirement. And to me, Mr. Speaker, that seems to 

make sense because otherwise you can be hamstrung. And very 

few boards that I know of actually operate . . . In fact I can’t 

think of any that would operate on an unanimous requirement 

for decision making. So this seems to be an appropriate change. 

 

The Deputy Premier didn’t indicate why this was being brought 

forward at this time, but it’s clear that this is the intent of that 

particular clause which would be . . . The amendment would be 

found . . . Oh I’ll have to get back to you on that one, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s not jumping out at the moment. Sorry. It 

would be existing provision . . . It’s a new provision that’s 

being added — oh there it is — after section 4. 

 

So it’s section 4.1(1), and it basically is a clarification of how 

this majority decision making is going to be taking place. And 

what we see there, the proposed clause 4.1(1), is that a decision 

taken by the meeting of the board, any other action constitutes 

an action if it was approved by a majority of the members of the 

board. And then it goes into a liability clause in the second part 

of the proposed clause where it says that if . . . There’s no 

liability to a member of the board if the board . . . the member 

did not vote or approve for the decision. And they must request 

that their dissent be entered into the minutes of the meeting. 

 

So if a board member dissents with a decision and requests that 

it be entered in the meeting, then that board member would not 

be liable with respect to that decision, or if they weren’t present 

at the meeting where the decision was taken. So it provides 

some protection for board members who are concerned about 

actions of the majority, and it gives them an outlet for 

protecting themselves if they feel that is absolutely necessary. 

So it seems to be reflecting some democratic principles here, 

Mr. Speaker, and that particular amendment doesn’t appear to 

be of any concern. 

 

The next one that’s being proposed is an opportunity for the 

board to undertake short-term borrowing. And the minister 

didn’t give us any sort of reasoning for that change in his 

comments, so we can only speculate at this point. So what 

we’re going to do is look into this further and determine what 

kind of consultation was undertaken to make this type of 

change. We don’t know if this request came from the board 

itself or if this is something that the ministry decided was 

appropriate and is imposing on the board. So we simply don’t 

know, Mr. Speaker. So that’s something we’ll want to look at 

and I’m sure, as we have some opportunity to take a look at 

these changes, we’ll be able to comment more on that. 

 

The next change that the minister indicated was coming forward 

was to designate a default fund into which all member 

contributions shall be deposited unless otherwise directed by 

the member. And I think this is to deal with a situation . . . This 

is a situation where . . . And I know as a member of this fund, 

we were given an opportunity some time ago to choose the type 

of investments that we would like our retirement funds invested 

in. And this apparently is to make an adjustment now because 

the board needs to be able to allocate members who don’t elect 

to choose a particular fund. So there has to be a default clause 

that needs to be inserted in the legislation, apparently. So I think 

that’s what’s happening now with the proposal for changes to 

section 9(1). 

 

And what’s indicated in the explanatory notes is that there will 

be opportunity by the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 

designate the default fund. And this is being done by . . . I’m 

going to pull out the actual clause, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

found in section 5(1) of the proposed bill, and what it’s saying 

here is they’re going to take out the words “elect to” in both 

parts of the clause, 9(1) and 9(2), and they’re going to create a 

new clause which allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 

or sorry, the board with approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, to designate one of the specialty funds. 

 

I think there’s now six specialty funds. There’s a number of 

them. And this will allow the board to designate one of those 

funds as the election by the member. So there’s no requirement, 

absolute requirement anymore for members to actually elect to 

participate. So it gives the board a little more flexibility for 

those members of the plan who are not maybe as well versed in 

pension funds or are busy with their lives and don’t have time 

to seriously consider their options. 

 

It’s a complicated world, the pension world, and there are a 

number of different sort of shopping choices to be made by 

pensioners or those who will be pensioners. And often it comes 

at a time . . . I know for myself, in terms of financial planning, 

it’s a complicated world we live in and sometimes you just want 

to trust the board that is looking after your fund. So this gives 

an opportunity for members to trust in the board, and then the 

board is being supervised by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. So we know there is some supervision being provided 

and that the board will have the responsibility to designate the 

members’ funds accordingly. 

 

And the same change in number 2, 9(2), sorry, section 9(2) 

where the words “elect to” are being struck. So now it just 

basically allows the board to calculate the amounts in those 

specialty funds to the credit of members who are participating 

in the specialty funds, so just simply removing the words “who 

elect to.” So that makes a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a new clause now. Moving on, clause 6 of the 

amendment bill is asking for a new subclause in section 10 of 

the existing Act. And here it is giving the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council authority to pass regulations to do a number of 

things, but basically to receive members and funds coming from 

a pension plan that wants to become part of the public 

employees pension plan. So this allows new members to come 

in, and once they’ve met certain provisions under The Pension 

Benefits Act, this allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 

pass regulations to terminate memberships for some and 

transfer amounts from those contributions into the fund and a 

couple of other smaller clauses there, Mr. Speaker, that relate to 

the transfer into the new . . . into PEPP [public employees 

pension plan]. 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4077 

[14:45] 

 

And then the final change that’s being proposed in this bill is 

found in clause 7, and again it’s adding a new clause that allows 

regulations. So again we see authority being deferred in this 

case to the Lieutenant Governor in Council. And as I’ve 

commented in the past and I’m sure I will in the future, these 

types of unscrutinized types of activities on behalf of executive 

government are something that are of concern. We know that 

executive government has considerable power already in our 

Assembly, and these types of regulation clauses, where 

activities and actions being done by the government are taken 

out of legislation and transferred into the executive power 

through Lieutenant Governor in Council actions, is something I 

think that we need to be vigilant about, Mr. Speaker, and that as 

a public we need to ensure that there’s proper scrutiny. 

 

And as I’ve mentioned in the past, when we receive these 

orders in councils that are already passed and approved by 

Executive Council, we do not get an opportunity to comment or 

provide public review of those types of regulations. So this is 

another example of this government using regulations rather 

than embedding these types of decision-making items into the 

actual legislation itself, which would then receive the review of 

this Assembly and greater public scrutiny. 

 

In this particular case, there’s a number of regulations that the 

government is indicating are necessary for the fund. And in the 

explanatory notes that we’ve been provided, we’re told that 

these: 

 

Regulations are . . . [needed] to: terminate membership of 

current employees coming into PEPP in their pension 

plan; terminate the membership of former employees of 

the employer coming into PEPP, who continue to be 

members of the pension plan; [and to] transfer the funds of 

the members to PEPP as prescribed by regulation; and to 

prescribe how the funds will be transferred. (. . . [so 

particularly] into which funds will they be allocated). 

 

Again we see, you know, this may facilitate the functioning for 

the board and hopefully be for the benefit of the members of the 

plan — a little bit of self-interest because it’s my plan too, Mr. 

Speaker. But you know, again we’ll need to find out who the 

minister consulted with, who asked for these changes, whether 

or not that they are ones that are seen as appropriate by 

members of the pension plan and by the board itself. And we 

don’t have any indication from the Deputy Premier in his 

comments introducing the bill as to what kind of consultation 

did take place. 

 

And we know obviously that if these changes make sense, they 

appear to make sense, they appear to be appropriate, and so as 

our leader has said, we will work with this government when 

things make sense. But we don’t know in this case whether the 

proper consultation has taken place, so that’s unfortunate for 

people of this province. But we certainly hope that people who 

are affected by these changes will come forward and make the 

comments that we need to shine a light on the activities of this 

government, to shine a light, as is our role as official 

opposition, on decisions that are being made, particularly in this 

case, by executive government which, Mr. Speaker, as you 

know, is something that is of concern in a democratic 

institution. 

 

So we want to make sure that whenever the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council is giving itself additional powers, that 

means we see executive government giving itself additional 

powers and removing decision making from the purview of this 

Assembly and from the purview of the public. And that is of 

concern and we will continue to highlight that as something of 

concern. 

 

Obviously pensions are very important, Mr. Speaker, to a large 

number of Saskatchewan citizens, and Canadian citizens of 

course. We’ve seen recent discussions on a federal level on the 

Canada Pension Plan. And of course one of the things that 

always gets overlooked in these types of discussions is people 

who have no access to pension plans. And I know my colleague 

from Athabasca indicated yesterday there’s so many seniors in 

Saskatchewan today who are struggling greatly because they 

don’t have access to any pension plan, and certainly not 

something that we are as fortunate to have here with the public 

employees pension plan. 

 

So I’m always mindful, Mr. Speaker, of the benefits that we 

enjoy as employees of the public service vis-à-vis those people 

in Saskatchewan who are not able to enjoy these types of 

benefits. It’s something that, you know, gives me comfort when 

I sleep at night, that I know that I’m working towards a 

retirement fund that will help sustain me in my senior years if I 

make it that far. And you know, I hope I have a long time to go, 

Mr. Speaker, and I certainly hope that for everyone. 

 

But we know that a number of seniors are struggling now and 

particularly in Saskatoon Nutana, when I have to say that’s the 

single most concern that I hear from people in my riding is 

seniors struggling on fixed incomes or lack of pension plans, 

and just trying to stay in their own homes. So that’s perhaps a 

discussion that we would look to this government for, for more 

support and legislation on ensuring that people have access to 

pension plans in their retirement years. 

 

But at this point, in terms of this particular bill, An Act to amend 

The Public Employees Pension Plan Act, I think there are some 

positive changes being proposed. But we’ll certainly want to 

look at those in the context of who the minister spoke with and 

what kind of consultations have actually taken place. So at this 

point, I know my other colleagues in the official opposition will 

want to comment on this as well, and I would move to adjourn 

the debate on Bill 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The Child 

Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants be now 



4078 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into discussion here this afternoon as it relates 

to Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013, and to look at some of 

the changes that have been announced in the speech by the 

minister introducing this piece of legislation, and also looking 

at some of the context that relates to child care across 

Saskatchewan that certainly has a direct impact on 

Saskatchewan families and on our provincial economy. 

 

The questions of course, when we’re looking at any piece of 

legislation, that are important for us to fully understand on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people is to ensure that government’s 

engaged in proper consultation, the due diligence that they need 

to to derive legislation. We’ve seen far too often by this current 

government, a government that rams forward, pushes forward 

with its own agenda, its own quick ideas, but without 

understanding the consequences on the ground where the 

impact is felt. We’ve seen this of course in education in a big 

way, Mr. Speaker, where this government continues to make 

changes and dismiss and disrespect the voice of educational 

partners — teachers, school boards, administrators, parents, 

students — right across the province. 

 

As it relates to this piece of legislation, certainly we’re going to 

be seeking some clarity from the government as to those that 

were consulted and as to what that consultation looked like, and 

as far as any of the changes that have been brought forward, 

what concerns may have been in place with those stakeholders. 

And of course that would include parents that are engaged in 

the child care system. That should also include child care 

workers. Of course that should include child care providers and 

those that are involved in our training institutes for preparing 

those to deliver support through child care facilities and early 

development programs. 

 

I am pleased to see that it looks like there’s been some direct 

contact with the CÉF [Conseil des écoles fransaskoises] and the 
APF [Association des parents fransaskois]. That’s important. 

And certainly the changes as it relates as to translation and 

making sure that this Act is printed and available in French, 

that’s very important. 

 

And we recognize the service that is provided to many 

communities across this province through child care, and 

certainly we’re thankful to those francophone child care 

providers. And we know that they not only provide a very 

important and vital service to families, but they also are serving, 

providing a service that’s important in some of the demographic 

changes that we’re experiencing as a province where many 

newcomers, or some of the newcomers, that are coming to this 

province are francophone or speak French. 

 

So certainly it’s important that these changes that I believe are 

made within this Act, those are important changes to ensure that 

those francophone child care providers, those that speak the 

French language, have a full ability to understand the Act to 

make sure that they comply with the Act and making sure that 

they are able to be fully engaged in the child care community. 

 

I understand there’s not many other significant changes, is what 

the minister has put forward here. I’m wondering what scope 

and considerations . . . or what considerations were on the table 

as they opened up this Act. Because opening up the Act of 

course provides an opportunity to make sure that the needs of 

communities and stakeholders are met. So we’ll be looking for 

some of the considerations of government. We hope that there 

was broad considerations within the Act to address the needs of 

parents, of child care providers, of child care staff. We’re not 

sure of that because the minister certainly didn’t clarify those 

pieces. 

 

Certainly we know in this province that we need to be more 

supportive or that that government needs to be more supportive 

of investing in child care. We know that for far too many 

families . . . And I can think of so many that I know personally, 

friendships, and of course constituents that struggle with finding 

affordable and also quality child care facilities that they can 

trust in. And when you think of the, even just the . . . We know 

of course the growing population in this province, something 

that should be providing us an opportunity to invest in child 

care facilities and making sure we’re meeting this need. 

 

We also know that there has been significant births in this 

province, which is an exciting thing for the province. But if you 

look at the last five years, you have over 60,000 new births in 

the province, but yet this government is going at it in a very 

incremental way with 500 new child care spaces for each of 

those years. And that’s simply not enough when you think of 

60,000 births, when you think of a growing population. 

 

So it seems that government simply doesn’t get the reality on 

the ground as it relates to child care in this province. It seems 

that they’re not willing to listen to communities and to parents 

to hear the need. And that need is significant. In many ways it’s 

causing great strain and stress on relationships and on families, 

and one that we should be listening to, one that that government 

should be listening to and not dismissing. But it also has an 

impact on our provincial economy. 

 

We know that . . . I believe it’s that more than 70 per cent of 

women with children under age five are in the workplace. And 

you can think of the huge strain to be in the workplace and not 

having certainty over the child care supports for your family. So 

you have many, many families that are under strain, that are 

piecemealing child care supports together, and many others that 

are impeded from entering into the workplace or entering into 

furthering studies or taking on training and allowing themselves 

to reach their full potential and to reach their goals as well. So 

we need to look at child care, certainly from a family focus first, 

about what this matters to people right across this province, to 

moms and dads and to the kids themselves that are receiving 

this very important support. 

 

But we also need to think about it from an economic lens, 

understanding what it means to make the investment in child 

care from an economic perspective. And quite simply this 

government’s failure to make those investments right now isn’t 

a smart growth approach. When we’re growing as a population, 

when we see immigration occurring the way it is, when we see 

the births, this provides us a tremendous opportunity as a 

province. But we don’t see government doing their part, and we 

see them dismissing the reality on the ground and failing to 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4079 

make the meaningful investments in child care across our 

province. 

 

I understand there’s also some changes in this Act to the 

investigative process and powers of government as it relates to 

licensed child care facilities. We certainly have more questions 

on that front because this is a really important area. The quality 

of care is crucial and government has a direct responsibility in 

ensuring that. And we hear too many stories of concerns and 

very, very tragic circumstances in child care facilities, and 

government does play a role and a very important role in 

providing an assurance and a check and balance to 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

So we’ll be looking to see what those investigative powers 

mean, what the scope and what the mandate of those powers 

are. Certainly I’ve heard — and I’ve connected directly with 

ministers’ offices on this front — concerns from parents that 

have concerns over treatment within child care facilities. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I think of one circumstance where a mother was raising 

this concern, where she went through the process and at one 

point the ministry engaged in the investigation, I understand. 

They then went back — and it was a delayed process, Mr. 

Speaker — and then when they finally had their 

recommendations, I understand those were only made available 

to the board itself of the child care facility. And it left that 

parent and it left the other parents in the child care facility with 

many questions because there were allegations and concerns by 

many parents. 

 

And so I’m wondering how this Act will address those sort of 

challenges where it only seems right that they should be 

provided more answers about the treatment of their children, the 

actions of a child care facility, and the breaches and 

non-compliance circumstances that may or may not have been 

found within a child care facility. So I think we need to push for 

better communication of the investigations and the reports and 

the recommendations that are brought forward, and making sure 

that parents are provided the certainty they deserve about the 

place that many of their children spend an awful lot of time, and 

places that have critical impacts on their development. 

 

As I say, people in this province are doing their part. We have 

families that are working harder than ever, and child care is a 

big stress and strain for many. The affordability itself is a 

major, major burden, an obstacle that many families can’t 

overcome. And government needs to make sure they understand 

the importance of making sure that child care is affordable. 

 

And of course we need to make sure there is more spaces. As 

we grow as a province, as businesses are investing in this 

province, as our population is expanding, we need to move 

forward the number of child care spaces in a meaningful way. 

And the 500 a year that we see from this government is a drop 

in the bucket and certainly doesn’t meet the demand, certainly 

doesn’t provide the kind of investment that would improve the 

economy for our province but also bring forward some peace of 

mind for many families across our province. 

 

I know that other jurisdictions have moved forward with online 

registries and abilities to track the demand in child care. This 

government continues to be reluctant to do that. It’s a concern 

because when you chat with child care facilities and providers I 

know within my own constituency, but also across the province, 

you have many that have wait-lists that are significant. And you 

hear stories of wait-lists in the numbers well over 100, and that 

should be something that government should be caring about. 

And it seems as though this government’s unwilling to collect 

that information because they’re unwilling to come to terms 

with the realities that communities are facing. 

 

So certainly we continue to urge this government and push this 

government to better track the demand in child care, to better 

understand the wait-lists that exist to make sure that policy can 

be built out in a way that meets the needs of families and 

communities and our economy. Right now this government’s 

sort of ramming forward with its inadequate plan and its 500 

spaces a year, which certainly don’t meet the demand. What we 

call for is a plan that meets the needs of families and to do that, 

this government should be tracking that demand. 

 

One of the other big challenges I know when I chat with child 

care facilities, providers, and also staff is the ability to attract 

and retain workers. And of course those workers play such an 

important life in the development of a child from an infant up 

through their younger years. It’s a really critical stage of one’s 

life, and we see too much transiency. We see too many 

shortages in this field, and government needs to be putting a 

spotlight on this problem and making sure that it’s (a) in touch 

with the reality that’s going on in communities and then 

bringing forward a plan to address recruitment and retention in 

the child care sector. And certainly, certainly this is a major 

challenge. 

 

And I know members on, I would hope, both sides of the 

Assembly have heard these concerns, and I hope they’re 

sharing, you know, on the other side of the Assembly, the 

government caucus, I hope that they’re sharing this with cabinet 

because it seems to not be understood by the current 

government. And I know these pressures are real in every 

corner of this province from the Southeast to the Southwest, up 

through the North, certainly in through Regina and Saskatoon. 

But we need a government that’s willing to bring forward plans 

that are going to address these sorts of challenges. 

 

We’re willing to work with government when it makes sense. 

Certainly some of the changes that we see here, the translation 

into French is very, is certainly something we support and 

something that’s important. We want to make sure that the 

changes that are brought for the investigative powers of 

government are as strong as they need to be to protect children 

across this province. But we also want to make sure then that 

the communication and the reporting back to families is 

improved and that we’re bringing about a system that provides 

some assurances and some peace of mind to Saskatchewan 

families, and certainly they deserve nothing less. 

 

At this point in time I don’t have much else to say about Bill 98, 

The Child Care Act. It has been my pleasure to enter into 

discussion on a matter that’s critically important to many 

families across Saskatchewan, certainly within my 

constituency, and an area that’s a big focus for the official 

opposition NDP — making sure that there’s more choices, more 



4080 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

options for young families as it relates to child care, making 

sure that families aren’t so heavily burdened by the cost, and 

making sure that we can unlock the true potential of so many 

young families and young mothers and young dads by making 

sure they can access the training and post-secondary or the 

employment opportunities that they deserve. And certainly 

those investments in child care are an important part of 

allowing them to do so. 

 

But at this point in time, I’ll adjourn debate as it relates to Bill 

No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 100 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 

pleasure to rise today and join debate on The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013, Bill 100. I can give 

you the . . . We’ll see if we can manage to give you an 

assessment of the bill here, Mr. Speaker. But you know, if you 

can’t have funds, then really, what can you have? 

 

But this is an interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

because this is one of these pieces of bills where, in terms of 

how we keep the lights on in this province and the roads paved 

and all of that, this is one of these pieces of legislation that 

really goes to the heart of what makes this province work. 

 

And it may not be glamorous or terribly earth shattering, Mr. 

Speaker, but in terms of having an appropriate Assessment 

Management Agency with updated legislation and respecting 

that partnership that is there between municipalities, both urban 

and rural, municipalities in the North, and as well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the partnership that this agreement represents with the 

education sector, it’s pretty important legislation. 

 

So in terms of, again referring to the November 12th minister’s 

speech introducing this piece of legislation wherein 

Saskatchewan’s property tax . . . He goes over the taxable 

assessments, the fact that $1.52 billion were generated in 2012: 

the 929 million from municipalities, the 595 million for the 

education system. The minister references the consultations that 

occurred with SAMA or the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency; again, Mr. Speaker, both a governance 

body and a representative body in terms of the partnerships that 

are out there and again right on the front lines of this legislation. 

So it’s good to see that they have been consulted, and we’ll 

certainly undertake as the opposition to verify that work. 

 

The continued work that has been done with SUMA, the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, or SARM, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, in terms of 

consulting with them, again very important. And we’ll be 

looking to confirm, not just the fact of those consultations, but 

their tenor as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

First set of changes in terms of repealing provisions related to 

the 65/35 per cent split sharing of SAMA funding responsibility 

between the province and municipalities, which prevents the 

agency from seeking greater funding from the municipal sector, 

again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be interested to see how that 

provision works out and whether or not that historic 

arrangement, whether or not the reasons being put forward for 

going that arrangement are in fact the rationale or whether or 

not . . . how that’s actually lived up to, how that shakes out on 

the ground. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been around this House long enough 

to have seen the good work that one Harry Van Mulligen did in 

partnership with the Urban Municipalities Association and 

SARM, and the round tables that were undertaken and the 

process that got us to a new revenue-sharing system with our 

municipalities in this province. I was very glad to see that work 

carried forward by the government post-2007. 

 

But again it’s not just me saying this, Mr. Speaker. I think of a 

good article that Laurent Mougeot, the current executive 

director of SUMA, wrote on arriving at a new revenue-sharing 

system for the province of Saskatchewan and the way that that 

had worked out, and not just the role of the then minister of 

Municipal Affairs, Harry Van Mulligen, but also the important 

role played by then Deputy Premier Clay Serby in arriving at a 

new arrangement, getting that work progressed in terms of 

revenue sharing, and making sure that municipalities had the 

tools to get their very important work done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again that’s work that is ongoing, and it’s reflected by the 

fact of debating this legislation here today, and the fact that 

these amendments need to come forward in a timely way to 

reflect the new reality to address unforeseen circumstances or 

circumstances that evolve. But we’re glad, again, that we can 

have a debate like this on the important sort of fundamentals of 

the relationship between the province and municipal sector. 

And again how that is brought to bear around the removal of the 

65/35 percentage arrangement, we’ll see how that plays out in 

reality. 

 

The second measure identified by the minister in the second 

reading speech: 

 

. . . to make related financial amendments that provide 

SAMA greater flexibility respecting increases to 

municipal requisitions, provide timelines that are 

achievable and ensure a properly funded agency, and make 

it more administratively efficient for government to make 

its financial payment to SAMA earlier. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to seeing how that looks 

out in practice, whether or not that flows the cash on a more 

expedited basis, gets it into the hands of municipalities so that 

they can, again, do the very important fundamental work of 

helping municipalities go and grow. We’ll be looking to see 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4081 

how that works out. 

 

The third measure identified by the minister in his second 

reading speech concerns making: 

 

. . . miscellaneous amendments of a non-financial nature 

. . . [to] better reflect the agency’s present roles, 

responsibilities, and practices, and responding to the 

changing responsibilities of the ministries of Government 

Relations and Education respecting the education funding 

system. 

 

Further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wherein: 

 

. . . government has a direct interest in the delivery of 

property assessment services in a timely, accurate, 

professional, and consistent way, and in ensuring public 

confidence in the property assessment and taxation 

system. The ability to do property reinspections, to update 

assessments, and to conduct annual maintenance 

inspections to add new properties to the assessment roll 

are affected by the level of funding to SAMA. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, very, very critical work and very important 

work if indeed our assessment system is to have integrity and to 

make sure that those critical tax dollars are both property 

assessed and then properly raised and afforded to the 

appropriate agencies. But it also in these miscellaneous 

amendments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it reflects the new 

arrangement that we have in this province, wherein what had 

previously been more of a partnership of equals between the 

province and the boards of education, the fact of how this 

government has removed the ability of the education sector 

through the boards of education to have recourse or access to 

financial levers in terms of levying property tax increases, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And again there is a certain rationale put forward for that 

legislative change, Mr. Speaker, but it definitely changes the 

footing of the partnership. And again, Mr. Speaker, if one side 

of the partnership controls the financial levers in that 

relationship, is that a partnership or is it one side calling the 

shots, making the financial decisions, and then the other side of 

the sector having to make the decisions to fit into the box that 

has been put before it by the side of the partnership that is 

making the financial decisions in the relationship? 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting wherein we’ve seen 

different evolutions over the years with certainly the school 

board sector and larger school units back in the late ’40s, and 

the different sort of questions around what is the appropriate 

administrative body for the education sector. 

 

I think about my father having grown up on a farm out 

Montmartre way and having attended the old Greenville school, 

which of course was built by local families donating the land, 

donating a portion of their income to provide the salary for the 

teacher, and then the fact of the local school board attaching 

itself to Greenville. I think there was the one room and the 

cloakroom, so I’m not sure if you could call it a one-room 

schoolhouse, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps one room and a 

cloakroom in terms of the school that my father grew up 

attending out in Greenville in the Montmartre district. 

 

And again there’s been this evolution, and one of the sort of 

interesting moments in the educational sector’s history in this 

province was the reorganization into larger school units under 

then Education minister and I believe treasurer for some of this 

time as well. But Education minister Woodrow Lloyd who’d 

come from Biggar, Biggar country, and too was a teacher and 

came out of the teachers’ federation as well. 

 

But that was work undertaken in partnership between the 

province and between the local school boards. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve got a very long and in some cases very proud, 

in some cases less proud, history of that partnership between the 

teachers, the school boards, and the provincial government in 

provision of the education in this province. 

 

But in very recent terms, Mr. Speaker, the way that the footing 

of that relationship has changed wherein the province now calls 

many of the financial shots, and it’s up to the local sort of, the 

local school boards to fit their priorities into the envelopes of 

money provided to them by the provincial government. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I think people are sort of figuring this 

out in terms of who’s responsible for what and what is the state 

of the relationship. Is it a partnership, or is it more of a dictating 

of terms on the part of the province to the school boards? I think 

there are a lot of people that are still figuring that out. And it 

certainly wasn’t like that previously but again, if the province is 

calling all of the financial shots and the school boards are not 

treated as fair partners but more as in an advisory capacity, that 

has a definite impact on the relationship. 

 

So it’s got some utility in that we know where the buck stops 

now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And certainly again there are 

vestiges of that partnership in relationships such as that 

represented here by SAMA, and the way that that agency 

approaches the questions of property tax and the levying and 

raising of property taxes in this province and the funds related 

thereto. 

 

But it’s an interesting and a relatively new period in the 

evolution of the relationship between school boards and the 

provincial government and how one side . . . It’s interesting to 

see how this legislation reflects various of the changes that have 

been made to that relationship. And again, Mr. Speaker, as we 

better understand how the relationship works — and not using 

the old arrangements to understand the present reality, but 

gaining that better understanding of the present reality — and 

just how much power that the provincial government has 

grabbed for itself in this relationship is pretty interesting. And 

again with that power, Mr. Speaker, comes great 

responsibilities. And I know in consulting with local school 

boards and school boards around this province, that that 

relationship and the imperatives they’re in, people are having a 

pretty interesting time getting that sorted out. 

 

And anyway, returning to the minister’s second reading speech, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

School divisions and municipalities both end up forgoing 

increased property taxes from assessments which are not 



4082 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

up to date. This could also end up directly costing the 

provincial government more for grants to school divisions. 

The potential financial benefits for SAMA’s client 

municipalities and the education sector of up-to-date 

property assessments, achieved through annual 

maintenance inspections and reinspections of 

municipalities, could be significant. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, not just the actual instrument of the 

assessment and revenue and raising of tax dollars, but also 

ensuring that those assessments are made in as timely a manner 

as possible so that there isn’t a lag, that there isn’t shortfalls to 

be made up by one side of the partnership or other, and again, 

forgoing the flowing of important resources to this critical work 

of making sure that the education sector is there looking to the 

needs of students, developing that potential in the main for 

young people in this province, and all of the tremendous benefit 

that that has around our society and our economy, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So again, making these instruments more responsive and 

capable of acting in a more timely fashion, we’re good to see 

that and we’ll look with great interest to see how that actually 

works out. Returning to the minister’s second reading speech, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

In 2012 property tax revenues were split, with 61 per cent 

going to municipalities and 39 per cent to education. Mr. 

Speaker, the amendments relating to funding will provide 

for a fairer balance of financial responsibility for 

assessment services to municipalities and the province. 

These financial amendments will be made retroactive to 

January 1st, 2014 to correspond to SAMA’s fiscal year. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting that municipal SAMA 

requisitions have been stable for over 10 years. 

Municipalities are the main beneficiary of the property tax 

system, and revenue-sharing funding has seen significant 

increases in funding for municipalities. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the split on the revenues 

generated and how that is properly reflected in the authorizing 

legislation being considered here, bringing the financial year in 

terms of making the amendments retroactive to January 1st, 

2014 corresponding with SAMA’s fiscal year. Again fair 

enough, Mr. Speaker, and not exactly something to stop the 

world from spinning about, but again very important for the 

critical work that is done by SAMA and done by the partners 

represented in this piece of legislation. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again quoting from the deputy 

minister’s remarks: 

 

Mr. Speaker, provincial interests in SAMA and property 

assessment are outlined in the Act. The province will 

continue to provide funding for the assessment system. 

Government increased SAMA’s operational funding for 

the 2013-14 fiscal year by $522,000. The actual amount of 

provincial funding to SAMA will continue to be 

determined in the provincial budget process. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, making sure that SAMA is appropriately 

funded to do the very important work that it has before it is a 

reasonable objective for any government to pursue. And we’ll 

be very interested to see how that is borne out in the legislation 

and to consult on that point with related stakeholders. 

 

With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that other of my 

colleagues are very interested in joining the debate, and not just 

on this legislation but other items as well. So with that I would 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 100, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

100, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 

2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 101 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, 

we kind of get a chance to bring some I guess concerns that 

may be raised later on as we debate the bill, and to join in on 

the debate, you know, Bill 101, The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

I’ll start out with some opening comments and referring to the 

process that government has. And this government currently, 

we have seen the way they consult, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or lack 

of consult, or they spin it that individuals . . . They went out 

and, you know, and had a large group, and they tell you that 

they’ve done the due diligence. And sometimes you find out 

later that groups were missed, groups didn’t get a chance, and 

groups that even sent letters telling them they are concerned 

about some of the stuff that this government is pushing, 

legislation, whether it comes to parks . . . And I can give 

examples of that. We’ve seen that on some of the, you know, 

the one new provincial park for sure. 

 

Clearly you have organizations and, you know, First Nations 

communities, whether they’re Métis, whoever, if they have 

concerns and they’ve raised them to the government, the 

government should listen to that advice and should not act and 

push legislation that counters when they say they want to 

consult the communities and they want to make sure that 

organizations and communities, individuals, that are going to be 

impacted by legislation this government’s bringing forward, 

whether it’s amendments, whether they’re changing, it’s going 

to impact Saskatchewan residents. They have a right to be heard 

and to make sure that the government takes the advice that’s 

brought forward. There’s the due diligence on their part. 

 

And I just want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly you know, 

whether there’s individuals out there . . . And I’ll make 

comments about certain amendments that are being proposed by 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4083 

Bill 101, and I’ll talk a little bit as we go through that. But I also 

want to say to the universities, and whether it’s the student 

unions, students that are in our university, whether there’s 

residents, when we look at the cost of getting an education in 

this province, and we’ve heard some of the shameful amounts, 

and then you look at, you know, comments made today about 

clearly our universities are second highest tuition rates in 

Canada, that’s sad. 

 

And if that’s the case, we can spin it the way we want. Sad 

reality is, it’s tough for students. They’re proud. And I give 

credit to the students. They’re doing their best. Families have 

done their part to represent and give a chance, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for their families to move forward and get a good 

quality education. And that’s what our students want and we’re 

proud of our universities and our institutes. They do a great job. 

They try their best with the resources they’re given by this 

government. And sometimes it’s sad seeing what’s going on 

and seeing the struggles that the universities are going through. 

 

And you can talk about all the growth plan and you can talk 

about, you know, how the economy’s doing well. And we’re 

happy for that. Don’t get me wrong. It’s good. Saskatchewan 

people benefit. Not everyone. We’ve heard some of the 

challenges, people living in poverty and the challenge. So 

they’re there. 

 

But I want to go back to talking about, you know, and I know if 

the students and the university have issues, I guess the 

Advanced Education critic, there’s an opportunity for them to 

get hold of the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre to 

raise their concerns and ask him, you know, to bring forward 

their concerns if they’re not getting that by talking to the 

minister. And sometimes we know, and working with the 

ministry officials, for whatever reason, their concerns go 

nowhere. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And we’ve seen that time and time again. This government 

doesn’t seem to want to take advice and doesn’t always listen to 

the people when they’re bringing their information forward, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And that’s a sad day when we see that, the 

frustration. But having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

encouraging those individuals, if they have concerns, to bring it 

to, you know, members of the opposition, to raise the concerns 

and to bring that forward, you know. 

 

At the end of the day, you know, whether it’s the challenges, 

you know, that are out there, the ministry . . . So clearly I say 

that there are challenges, and when those issues are raised 

forward to, you know, the minister and government and, you 

know, we want to be clear that they hear those concerns. And 

however those messages come through, sometimes, you know, 

we have individuals who work for the ministries who bring that 

forward to the minister. There’s different ways that that stuff 

comes forward, and sometimes those are the individuals that are 

in contact. So I just want to, you know, it’s always the great 

work that universities do, and I know some of the great work 

that front-line workers do that work for our ministries. I don’t 

want to take away from that. 

 

But sometimes the government doesn’t hear the concerns that 

are being raised. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in itself is a 

challenge when you have a government who’s I guess secretive, 

dismissive, doesn’t want to take advice from the people that are 

going to be impacted by amendments that they’re proposing. 

Let’s be clear. And I mean I looked at the bill itself, and they’re 

talking about a number of different amendments that they’re 

going to do, whether it’s the senate . . . And they talk about that 

and then they talk about reaching out, and the university is 

reaching out to make sure that this is what the students want, 

this is what’s best for . . . Like I have no . . . at this point anyone 

telling me, yes, they’re supporting or no, they’re not. And 

hopefully if they are or aren’t, you know, the critic will get the 

information forward so we can deal with those concerns and we 

can raise them in the House as we’re debating this bill and 

seeing how these, you know, amendments are going to impact. 

 

And you know, there’s more challenges, and some are talking 

about three terms, and they refer to in here about, you know, 

Chair and the Vice-Chair, and they’re changing and they’re 

making some amendments to try to I guess . . . I guess the 

argument side of it would be from the government side is they 

want someone who has experience to be the Chair, Vice-Chair. 

Maybe they get to another term of serving two terms. 

 

I’m not sure exactly right now what’s there, if it’s two terms 

and they can’t seek re-election or be considered to be 

reappointed, elected, reappointed — the process. But I guess if 

they’re giving them a third term and they’re saying, well this is 

going to strengthen the organization of the senate and if that’s 

what the senate’s saying, I have no reason to believe other than 

hearing from individuals on the senate that, you know, serve the 

universities and give the good advice that they . . . and direction 

that they give. And I don’t want to take away from the good 

work that’s been done by many who do their job and sit on the 

senate, whether they’re from the faculty or how they come 

about to be appointed, whether it’s two terms. 

 

But they’re raising a number of amendments that this 

government . . . But I want to go back to the amendments that 

they’re proposing. There’s about five of them. They talk about 

some housecleaning items in here as well. And that’s going to 

be interesting. Any time you talk about housecleaning — and 

it’s a simple word to say, housecleaning — but you always 

wonder, you know, the details. You know, you want to make 

sure of the details and what’s exactly and who’s going to be 

impacted later on. 

 

And the changes come in and you’re wondering, okay, the 

details. And let’s make sure that the process is done and we go 

through the details. And sometimes we’re not sure who’s going 

to be impacted, and will they be impacted in a good way with 

these amendments. And how will they impact the students? 

How will they impact the universities? And you know, does that 

open it up, you know, even further with the institutes when 

you’re making amendments? Every time you make changes, 

you hope. And I want to be clear. I think our leader has said this 

very clearly from opposition: when it makes good sense and it’s 

best for Saskatchewan people, we’ll support the government. 

 

And I think we’ve shown that and we can work together. But 

I’ll tell you, there’s a lot of times where we can bring in 

amendments and we make suggestions that we hear from the 

people of our province who, you know, whether you’re at 



4084 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

coffee row, whether they call a meeting, they come into your 

office, your constituency office, and they share their concerns. 

And we share that with the government, and the government 

again is, you know, really doesn’t want to listen to it. They have 

their own agenda and they want to push ahead with it. And 

that’s the sad reality. 

 

Because what they’re saying is to the people that are raising the 

concern to the opposition . . . And I don’t know that they 

haven’t tried to get a hold of the minister or the ministry to talk 

about the changes or, you know, saying how these will impact 

us. I have no way of knowing that other than, you know, being 

told that. So when I say that there’s individuals who raised their 

concerns with the opposition, we’ve raised them with 

government and the government does not listen to them, they 

think it’s like it’s our idea. And sometimes they have to 

remember, we all have a role to do in this House. And 

Saskatchewan people have asked the opposition to make sure 

we hold the government to account, to make sure we ask them 

tough questions. That’s the only way to work. And let’s be 

clear. The government has clearly a large majority. It will push 

what it wants and doesn’t. 

 

But I want to commend the nine members and my eight 

colleagues as opposition, holding this government to account on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people that’s been asked to do. And 

whether it’s amendments to the Acts or the university or 

whatever changes are coming, legislation that’s coming, and 

changes, whether it’s amendment, it is impacting Saskatchewan 

people. And they have asked us to do our due diligence and we 

will do all we can representing them, and raise their concerns 

when we’re asked to do that. And whether that’s . . . And that 

could be long-term care, that can be our roads, it can be 

education. There are many ways . . . And we see how our 

teachers were treated. We see how our families are being 

treated. And in northern Saskatchewan, we see about housing. 

And it goes to show a government that listens or doesn’t listen, 

a government that takes away. 

 

So when we make legislation changes, amendments, we’re 

impacting Saskatchewan residents. And there’s so many 

different ways that we impact Saskatchewan residents. And like 

I say, when you have a government that doesn’t listen to the 

families that are out there, whether they’re living in poverty, 

whether they’re having addictions, and they’re struggling with 

the economy . . . Yes, and we’ve said that this government 

doesn’t seem to listen. 

 

It’s got a large majority. It’s fine. They like to pat themselves 

on the back, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But changes that they’re 

bringing forward here like in Bill 101, we’re not sure how that 

will impact Saskatchewan families. We’re not sure how that 

will impact the universities. We’re not sure of that. So there’s 

questions. And that’s the reason why we’re asking some of the 

tough questions and want to raise some of the concerns that we 

may hear, and want to offer to Saskatchewan residents to get a 

hold of the opposition, like I said earlier, to deal with some of 

the challenges. And we’re not just sure of what these changes 

and how . . . Will they be better for the universities? I don’t 

know that at this point. That’s why we’re debating it and that’s 

why we’re going to find out. And I think I encourage the 

universities . . . And if these are good changes and it benefits 

the university, then good. Good for us as a province and as a 

university. We’re listening to the people. 

 

But we’ve seen the track record of this government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is a shameful track record that they have when it 

comes to consulting First Nations, Métis, Saskatchewan people, 

families, teachers, students, parents. You know, dictate how 

things will be, tell them how their boards of education . . . They 

tell them how it will be. Do they consult with them? Do they 

talk . . . Oh they say they do. They say they do, but they have 

such a large majority, they just push, push, push, do it their 

way, and you’d better like it. And if you don’t like our ideas, 

we’ll come after you. That is not the right way to do it. To split 

our province and split individuals and to push, that is sad. That 

is sad. 

 

So you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s just hope these 

changes that are coming will benefit the university. And if they 

are, again I go back to saying that’s good for the students, good 

for the university, good for the province. These are good 

changes, as long as they’ve made sure they’ve listened to the 

universities, they listened to the students, to the families that 

will be impacted when they’re going on these changes, whether 

it’s the senate, you know. And you look at the way they bring 

their strength and the good work they’ve done. 

 

So I don’t want to take away from the good work that 

organizations, the universities have done. Students and parents 

are very proud of sending . . . The cost, and I know some of my 

colleagues in their previous comments talked about the costs. 

And we’ve heard that. So there are challenges. So let’s hope the 

due diligence has been done in these amendment changes, that 

the university, the students that will be impacted, that the 

government will hear the concerns they have. And if it’s 

positive, great. I just bring some of the concerns. 

 

And I’m just wondering myself, you know, how it will be. And 

we’ll see, at the end of the day, how this legislation is presented 

and how it’s used. And I hope it’s used in a positive way to help 

Saskatchewan families, students, the universities, so we move 

our province, as we say in the area. We don’t forget about 

people. 

 

But again I go back. And the last comments I want to say, this 

government’s track record of listening to Saskatchewan 

families, Saskatchewan people, organizations — whether it’s 

First Nations, Métis, education, teachers, working men and 

women, working families — this government’s track record is 

not very good when it comes to consulting before they make 

changes. They change, change, change and then they say, oh 

well. Oh sorry about that. You know, oh, oh, we’re going to do 

better next time. And that’s not the way you do it. You don’t 

make the changes and then go say, oh sorry. Sorry, we’re going 

to do better next time. Let’s talk. And we’re not going to 

change what we’ve done. We’re going to go ahead with that, 

but . . . 

 

So that’s why I say some of these changes we see sometimes, 

we’re not sure the impact. So we’ve got to watch them. And I 

say to the universities and to the students, keep an eye on them. 

If it’s what you want and it helps you, great. We want you to do 

good. We want our students to do great. We want our 

universities to do great. And we see some of the struggles and 

the challenges they’ve had. And we hope that these will help 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4085 

them move forward and continue in a good way because we’re 

proud of our universities. We’re proud of our families and 

students that go there. So let’s hope these changes will do 

exactly that, improve a quality of life for Saskatchewan people 

and the university in itself. 

 

So I’m hoping at the end of the day the government has done 

and it says what it’s done with consulting, and making sure it’s 

done right and it’s listening to what it heard. And it’s not 

pushing its own agenda and not listening, saying, oh we 

listened, but they push their own agenda — that, I hope, is not 

what’s happened. 

 

At this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn 

debate on Bill 101. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill 101, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 107 — The 

Wildfire Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter the discussion today on Bill No. 107, An Act 

respecting the Prevention, Management, Control and 

Extinguishing of Fires or The Wildfire Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill replaces The Prairie and Forest 

Fires Act, 1982, which was a bill that at first came about in the 

’50s and then was amended in 1982. And as the minister has 

pointed out, it is likely time that this new legislation keep up 

with different changes that have taken place over the years, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

One of the things that this bill . . . Well I need to talk a little bit 

about some definitions in the bill actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’d like to give you the definition of wildfire. So: 

 

“wildfire” means an unplanned fire that burns organic 

soil, grasses, forbes, shrubs, trees and associated 

vegetative fuels in their natural or modified state, and does 

not include structural, vehicle or landfill fires. 

 

So that is what a wildfire is defined as in the Act, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I think it’s important to note, and the minister had said 

this in his comments, that the primary focus of the legislation is 

the prevention of wildfires, over which 50 per cent are caused 

by humans. And the reality is with climate change we can 

anticipate that we’ll be seeing more and more storm events and 

as such likely more wildfires, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to 

look to places like California who’ve had huge, devastating 

losses very recently. 

 

We can look in Saskatchewan here, and in 1999 in La Ronge 

seven homes were lost in a wildfire. In 2002 Turtle Lake, 54 

cabins and homes were destroyed. I remember that one 

particularly well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I used to have a cabin at 

Turtle Lake. And it was not on my side of the lake, but I had 

friends on the other side who actually were very close to being 

at risk of losing their property. I remember that fire particularly 

well and the feeling of panic and concern many cabin and 

homeowners had. 

 

[15:45] 

 

In 2003 over 334 homes and businesses were lost in British 

Columbia, actually around Kelowna. I remember that one very 

well as well. I had a friend who was doing Ironman right around 

that time in Kelowna, and there were some challenges with 

running the race because the wildfires had been burning and the 

smoke was a huge challenge around running this particular race. 

And then we only need to look to a couple of years ago in Slave 

Lake, Alberta where 374 homes were destroyed. So these are 

wildfires. Fires in general are a huge issue, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I think, going on with some of the definitions, so I’ve 

mentioned what wildfire is defined here in the Act. We need to 

talk about the wildfire management area. I do have some 

remarks about that in a moment, but: 

 

 “wildfire management” means wildfire prevention, 

detection, control, preparedness, suppression, 

investigation, research, training, education or reclamation 

and includes any activities related to the foregoing; 

 

“wildfire management area” means: 

 

a provincial forest, including a provincial forest within 

the boundaries of a rural municipality or the Northern 

Saskatchewan Administration District; 

 

park land [which is defined in The Parks Act so we 

would have to look at The Parks Act for the park land 

definition]; 

 

vacant Crown land; and [this is the one that I think that’s 

important here, Mr. Deputy Speaker] 

 

(iv) every quarter section of land lying wholly or partly 

within 4.5 kilometres of the boundaries of a provincial 

forest; 

 

That actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the piece that brought 

on a bit of a firestorm, shall we say, this past spring, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The government had an Act prepared but had a 

huge outcry from the rural municipalities. What would have 

happened, right now the Act that this one is replacing had that 

4.5 kilometre burning permit area to act as a buffer zone, but 

what the government was proposing is putting the cost, the onus 

on the rural municipalities to pay for . . . to either provide the 

fire suppression in that area, or if they couldn’t do that, the 

provincial government would do that, but then bill the rural 

municipalities. And there was a huge outcry this spring with 



4086 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

respect to that proposed change. 

 

So in fact I’m just looking at a news article from the spring, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I’m just trying to find the date here. But in the 

RM [rural municipality] of Buckland, they were very concerned 

about this. It’s The Wildfire Act, from the news story I’d like to 

read: 

 

If the Wildfire Act comes to fruition, the Buckland Fire 

Department (BFD) would be responsible for stopping a 

wildfire in these woods. But Fyrk [who is part of the RM] 

believes this isn’t feasible. 

 

“Let’s say it’s three kilometres back in the bush. They 

can’t do anything. What they can do is stand on the edge 

and if the fire burns out of the bush protect the homes,” he 

said. 

 

Because there are no roads or access points, it would be 

next to impossible for the BFD to get into the forest and 

stop a rapidly advancing fire. 

 

So again the point is, if the RM couldn’t stop the fire, then the 

province would, but the onus would be on the rural 

municipality. And they have argued that they couldn’t . . . that 

was just cost prohibitive and would break rural municipalities. 

In fact there was a quote in another news story. The bottom 

line, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is rural municipalities were very 

concerned about the cost of having to take on fighting fires in 

these buffer zones, which had never happened before. And so 

this was about downloading costs to already stretched rural 

municipalities when obviously this is a role for the provincial 

government to play. 

 

So the reality is fires can be incredibly expensive, and it’s a 

huge, huge problem. So the government, to their credit, heard 

the rural municipalities. And it was hard not to hear the rural 

municipalities. The rural municipalities, the RMs, were loud 

and clear that this was an untenable situation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It was absolutely not acceptable, and some changes 

were made. And as the bill is before us, the status quo is being 

maintained and the province will continue to maintain 

responsibility for that buffer zone around parkland, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So that is a good thing. 

 

As I mentioned, wildfires have caused a huge amount of 

damage, both in Saskatchewan and across Canada and in the 

United States. And it’s positive to see an Act coming forward 

that the goal is to prevent and attend to these wildfires. 

 

So I know one of the things that happens in this fall session is 

legislation is first introduced, and it’s an opportunity for the 

opposition to go out and speak to the public, to speak to 

stakeholders to find out if there are challenges with the bill that 

have been included or things that have been missed in the bill. 

So between now and the spring session, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

know we will be going to various stakeholders and asking them 

if they are satisfied with what they see in the bill and what the 

shortcomings or what the strengths of the bill might be. And 

that is part of our job as opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to find 

out those things. 

 

So we will be reaching out and asking those questions. But I do 

know I have colleagues who will be, down the road, interested 

in speaking to Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. So with that, I 

would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Riversdale has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 111 — The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to rise and speak on Bill No. 111, An Act to amend 

The Personal Care Homes Act. And it’s a short Act but it’s an 

important one, and I’m happy to speak to it today. 

 

And there’s so many different reasons for it. And one of course 

and the most important one is, how do we look after our seniors 

in their senior, their golden age. And I think that seniors who 

have contributed so much to our province, done so much, the 

last thing on their mind should be is how will they . . . What 

kind of shelter will they have as they retire? And we’re seeing 

this as a major concern — a major concern — in Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact it’s ironic, today is National Housing Day, Mr. Speaker. 

And in Saskatoon right now there is a housing conference based 

on needs of seniors. And it’s really an important conference and 

I wish I could be there, but my assistant is there today because 

we feel it’s an important issue. 

 

So this issue of personal care homes, and I know that the 

minister has talked about we shouldn’t confuse the different 

kind of homes for seniors, personal care homes. He wanted to 

make sure we understood that this was personal care homes, not 

long-term care homes. And fair enough, there is a division, but I 

think right across the spectrum, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a 

concern in this province that senior housing is not being looked 

after by this government. It’s being left to neglect. And whether 

it’s seniors who would just like a little support in making sure 

their homes are up to snuff, up to code, or those who are in 

long-term care, right from one end of a continuum to another 

it’s a major, major issue. 

 

And so I appreciate the minister’s concern that we don’t 

confuse this, and because we know that the personal care homes 

are privately operated homes and they are not run by the 

regional health authorities, but they are in fact licensed by the 

provincial government. So there are some differences. 

 

And I will get into the specifics of that right now but I want to 

set the context of what too many seniors face today in 

Saskatchewan. And of course this government . . . Because we 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4087 

know they often reach for excuses when it comes to being 

challenged why they are not stepping up to the plate. And we 

saw that today in question period. They could not own up to 

their deficiencies, their failures, and say, listen you know — 

and we have heard this so often, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 

getting a bit tiresome — there’s more work to do. For the last 

six years, we’ve heard there’s more work to do. And well 

certainly there is and certainly there is. But clearly they have to 

set some standards. And you know, today we heard them talk 

about goals, but they seem to refuse to set standards when it 

comes to senior care, particularly when it comes to staffing, that 

type of thing. 

 

And then they will go on about whatever the excuse may be, but 

certainly it is not their fault. That is their line. And the closest to 

any kind of responsibility is some acknowledgement that there 

is more work to be done, more work to be done. Well of course 

there’s more work to be done. That goes without saying, isn’t 

it? I mean it’s like saying there’s more learning to be done by 

students. I mean where does this get to be a little bit silly is the 

fact that it’s used as a cop-out for accepting responsibility for 

work that needs to be done. 

 

And in fact when I get into the meat of the matter here, Mr. 

Speaker, this will be interesting because the government talks in 

this Act about how it was urged by the auditor and the 

Ombudsman to do this. And when I actually went back and 

actually got the chapter from the auditor’s report, there are five 

recommendations. And I would like to know, where are the five 

recommendations? This is the fifth of the recommendations and 

probably the lightest of them all, the most simplest ones. And 

we’ve asked and the member from Nutana asked last night a 

very simple question: why wait? Why are we waiting two 

years? In fact, this report from the auditor was from 2012 so 

we’re taking two years to get around to this. 

 

And so you know, it reminds me of a little saying that my 

mother had, a round TUIT jar, right? You’ve got these little 

round TUITS. And this is what this government, instead of 

more work to be done, it’s going to be when we get around to it, 

you know. And because they just can’t seem to grasp the 

seriousness of this situation and the fact that too many seniors 

. . . And whether it’s as simple as renovations in their homes so 

they can stay in their homes, and I know the member from 

Cumberland has often raised the issue of rent to own in the 

North so that they can own their homes by the time they do hit 

their senior years. And then we have long-term care and 

personal care. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, and in fact I had the opportunity . . . And 

actually it was interesting because both the Minister of Health 

and myself were at the seniors’ housing summit in Weyburn 

this past June. And I found it very interesting. And of course 

they brought their initiatives and what they’re going to talk 

about, and that was well received. Except what wasn’t well 

received, the short . . . the fact that not a lot of government 

attention was being paid to the folks organizing the summit, and 

the fact that they only stayed for a brief period of time and then 

left. 

 

But the minister was there, and that was good. And he did share 

some comments. But I think that what’s really important is, and 

I think they’re going to be talking about this today in Saskatoon 

at the seniors’ housing summit, is the fact that seniors’ housing 

is much more unique than the general population in many ways. 

When we go to housing summits . . . And this government 

actually, you know, it’s interesting because in their work to-do 

list, they seem to have a real priority for housing summits. 

We’ve got to have several housing summits. And that’s one of 

the things that I’ve really seen over the past while is how many 

housing summits we’ve had. 

 

And as a result of that, we often see housing continuums, and 

they often seem to equate seniors in the same kind of camp as 

students, as if somebody’s a senior for only four years or six 

years, the years that you may be a student. And actually 

students I know actually can be longer than six or eight, could 

be even 10 years. But seniors live a significant period of time, 

Mr. Speaker. And we all hope that we do, when we’re seniors, 

that our life expectancy after 60, 65 will be 20, 30 years, we 

hope. And it’s not going to be four or six years, the length of 

time for us to get our undergraduate degree or our teacher’s 

degree or engineering degree. 

 

But somehow this government often thinks seniors’ lifespan is 

very short, very short. In fact when we get a housing 

continuum, we see the typical housing continuum often starts 

out on the left side with a rental and perhaps even emergency 

shelter that we’re often seeing, that now in this new 

Saskatchewan, emergent shelters really become an issue, 

particularly in cities where there is extreme vacancy shortages, 

and we know that’s the case in cities like Estevan. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But we also see it with cities that have a very good vacancy 

rate, but the issue is not the shortage of housing but actually the 

fact that the housing stock does not have a very good quality. 

It’s not up to code that should be expected. And we see that in 

cities like Prince Albert where actually there is a fair amount of 

rental property that’s available, but it’s just not adequate. It’s 

not up to code. And then you have to the right, to the end of the 

continuum, a detached bungalow, and it seems that’s what we 

all want to aspire to in our work lives, and fair enough that we 

do want to own our own homes. But many may not. They may 

end up wanting to live in a condo or rental is a good fit for them 

as well. 

 

But for seniors that housing continuum doesn’t work. In fact it 

starts with quite often owning something and then, what will 

your final days be like? And that’s where we get into the whole 

issue of, you know, owning, whether it’s a condo or whether 

it’s a detached bungalow or . . . And then moving along the line 

to where you go into personal care home or long-term care. And 

we hope, and we share this I think right across the floor, that in 

fact our hope is that we can stay in our homes as long, as long 

as we can. And that works best for everyone. We know that’s 

best for seniors. There’s a sense of purpose when you own your 

home, a sense of community because you’re with people you 

know. And I think people are much healthier when they are in 

that circumstance. 

 

The challenge becomes when you don’t have the resources to 

do that and of course this is what the Minister of Health has 

often said. And he has talked about how can we keep people in 

our homes. That’s our first, first thing that we need to think 



4088 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

about for seniors. And we need to think then as well, if they are 

staying in their homes, what can we do to make sure their 

communities are strong. We’ve talked about that, whether it’s 

safety in their communities, whether it’s transportation, whether 

they have adequate income, whether they have supports, 

whether it be health, that type of thing, nearby. 

 

And we know as well that, and I won’t go at length on this, but 

as well the emergence now of the condos, that we have so many 

condos in Saskatchewan. And that can be a good thing, but 

seniors have raised particular concerns about that as well, that 

in fact when they thought they were moving into a community 

of like-minded owners that in fact they found out that half the 

condo, the building, was in fact tenants, and they weren’t going 

to be part of any condo association and there weren’t going to 

be the social activities and that type of thing. 

 

And so the government refusal to really work with that is a 

concern because we know other provinces are looking at that, 

particularly BC [British Columbia] and Vancouver, when they 

recognize that condos are in a sense very much a home and we 

should be able to regulate that type of thing. It’s just not an 

owner by whatever the owner wants to do, that in fact they get 

to do, that in fact an absentee landlord can create issues. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we’re here today to talk about is that 

Bill 111, The Personal Care Homes Act, and the publication of 

the inspections that the government will do and that they will 

publish this in different formats, I expect. It just won’t be on the 

Internet. I mean that would be the best way because clearly . . . 

or the most appropriate way because a lot of people have 

become used to that. And that they’re going to do it in the same 

way that we have come to expect public health inspections of 

restaurants. 

 

We were very happy to see this government move forward with 

the public registry of buildings with asbestos. That was a real 

move forward. And we still have . . . We’re looking to see that 

registry be improved. It’s not quite as user-friendly as we 

thought it might be. Now I haven’t checked in the last couple of 

weeks, so if it has been modified then I’m looking forward to 

seeing that, but I know that the key is not just putting up the 

information. The key is making it searchable and that it is 

user-friendly, and if it is not, then people will be discouraged. 

 

And the interesting thing will be that if you’re considering 

putting a . . . If you’re part of the decision-making process 

where your parent or your uncle or aunt is, you’re part of the 

decision of putting them in a personal care home, you may be in 

that age group of 50 to 60 to 70 that aren’t very friendly to the 

Internet, and you may have some, you know, Internet illiteracy 

issues yourself. So it’s even more, more important that that’s 

the case. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that . . . Before I get into the personal 

care home auditor’s report because that was cited as one of the 

main causes or drivers of this, I do want to say that, you know, 

we are concerned that the government is not taking this as 

seriously as they should. We’ve raised this issue. We raised it 

last spring. And there’s been numerous media stories about this 

and where the government clearly, when it’s been drawn to 

their attention that staffing ratios is a problem in long-term care 

homes, they have consistently resisted that and dismissed that 

and said, that’s not the problem. And in fact, it was interesting 

that the minister said that he was not . . . And I’ll quote. This is 

from Saskatchewan News and this was April 24th, and I quote: 

 

Health Minister Dustin Duncan insists setting staffing 

standards is not something the government is currently 

considering. He says each health region gets a quarterly 

report on staffing from each care home and he doesn’t see 

reason for alarm. 

 

So he doesn’t see reason for alarm, and then . . . But they do set 

out and they do an investigation, and then they get the results. 

And of course, they weren’t really too forthcoming, but because 

of our action in terms of the freedom of information request, the 

government released the information on October 2nd. And all 

of a sudden, he goes from being, and I quote, not . . . that he 

doesn’t see reason for alarm. Then he goes to being, he says, 

and I quote, “Saskatchewan Health Minister Dustin Duncan 

says details in a report on conditions in the province’s 

long-term care facilities are ‘dismaying’ and ‘heartbreaking’ 

and left him ‘angry.’” 

 

So it’s quite a change now. He may be saying . . . But still does 

have nothing, and he still says, has absolutely nothing to do 

with staffing. But it’s just . . . It’s funny how one person in one 

group of people can be in that boat, in that kind of ship, where 

everybody else is saying, you know, they weren’t surprised to 

hear this. They weren’t surprised at all to hear this. 

 

And you know, this is what Candace Skrapek, past president of 

the Saskatoon Council on Aging, says. She wasn’t surprised by 

the findings, wasn’t shocked by the findings. And she says, and 

I quote, “They’re certainly consistent with what we have heard 

(from) caregivers and older adults.” 

 

People knew this. They knew this. And so while this is 

long-term care and we’re talking about personal care, but we 

are talking about seniors. We’re talking about all seniors, 

making sure they get shelter in a dignified and safe and quality 

manner. And so this is just one part of the package. And while I 

don’t know why we were . . . why he may want to split hairs 

and say, be sure we know what we’re talking about here. Now 

there is 8,700 seniors who live in long-term care, and we’re 

actually talking, I think — then I’ll get the numbers — over 

3,000 seniors live in, or people live in a personal care home. 

And some may not be seniors; some may be with disabilities 

that they need to be in a personal care home. 

 

But I do want to just reflect on a moment that I found it ironic 

today that while the government made much of their 

announcement on the 1st of October about what they’re going 

to do for long-term care homes and that they created this $10 

million Urgent Issues Action Fund — and that’s what it’s 

called, Urgent Issues Action Fund — but today when pressed 

about, so what was the total asked for the proposals under this 

Urgent Issues Action Fund, they didn’t know. They didn’t know 

what the answer was, or if they did know, they weren’t going to 

tell us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I find that alarming that, considering the 

severity of the situation in which the minister went from not 

having any concerns to being angry that . . . But he didn’t have 

any answers today. Couldn’t give us any more details about 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4089 

this. That leaves us with a lot of questions, leaves us with a lot 

of questions. And so we see that care homes are in crisis and 

whether they are in long-term care or personal care homes, 

there is a lot, a lot of work to be done. 

 

So now the minister did talk that it was the Ombudsman and the 

auditor that really were the drivers behind this legislation. I 

don’t know if, you know, from reading the auditor’s report — 

and I may be wrong on this, but the minister can correct me — 

whether she had called for legislation. I don’t see any reference 

to the actual legislation, but she did call for the ability to do 

this. 

 

But we know that with the Ombudsman it was really the 

problems with the closure of St. Mary’s Villa in Humboldt that 

drove the issue around making sure the health region did a 

better job. But I’m not sure if that’s what the Health minister 

was speaking about, but we’ll be interested in knowing more 

about that when we get into committee about that. 

 

But I want to talk a bit about the auditor’s report because I think 

it was interesting. Because I know people at home want to 

know about, so what is this difference between personal care 

homes and long-term care homes? And how many people are 

involved in this? And I think that it’s interesting to take a few 

minutes and just to review what the auditor had written. 

 

And this is from her 2012 report, volume 2, chapter 34, 

“Regulating Personal Care Homes for Resident Health and 

Safety.” And so of course, you know, it’s been established that 

the Ministry of Health is responsible for regulating personal 

care homes in this province and this requires licensing and 

inspecting personal care homes. And as the minister has said, 

they’re privately owned facilities that provide accommodation, 

meals, and personal care to senior residents. 

 

And we have about 245 personal care homes, and there is a 

good chart in here about where they are. And we know that 

Regina — and this is from during 2011 and ’12 — and we 

know in the Regina Qu’Appelle region there is 76 personal care 

homes, and their licensed bed capacity is 893. So that’d be an 

averaging — just in my head quickly — over 10 per home; 

whereas Saskatoon is 93 with 945, so slightly fewer, but still 

10, 10 per person. 

 

And they’re spread out throughout the province. Prince Albert 

has 27. Those would be the three big ones. Sunrise has 14. But 

clearly . . . and Five Hills has eight for 325. But they would be 

larger. That’s interesting. Eight personal care homes for 325. 

That’s about 40 persons per care home. That’s pretty, those are 

big care homes in Five Hills. I guess, you know, whereas Sun 

Country has 8 for 225, if my math is right on that. Whereas 

Heartland has six for 56 — the 10. So it’s interesting in Five 

Hills, and that that’s an interesting thing. So maybe there’s 

something happening in Five Hills that we don’t know about. 

But we are interested. We are curious. We are curious. So that’s 

a good thing for committee. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And so at any rate, this is what they found: 

 

For the period of April 1, 2011 to August 31st, 2012, we 

found the Ministry did not have fully effective processes 

to regulate personal care homes. 

 

Now that wasn’t in the ’90s. That was just a couple of years 

ago. So we can’t blame us for that. All right? And so I know 

they’ll get around to figuring out how it could be our fault, but 

that was during their time. All right? Just to make sure we got 

the right time span on this. Okay? All right? Just to make sure 

we’re clear on that, okay? 

 

And it said that: 

 

The Ministry documented inspection results but did not 

have a good system for tracking and following up 

problems identified during inspections. When problems 

are identified through inspections, the Ministry needs to 

follow up with identified personal care homes to ensure 

that the problems have sufficiently been addressed. We 

noted instances . . . identified through inspections 

continued for more than two years. 

 

For two years they went on. Now in my . . . You know again, so 

that would take it back to 2010. So clearly they need to do a 

better job here. 

 

Now it talks about providing, the auditor provided the Ministry 

with five recommendations for the Ministry to, one, and I 

quote: 

 

Use a risk-based approach to inspect high-risk personal 

care homes more frequently 

 

Provide guidance for its staff to assist in determining when 

to conduct unannounced inspections of high-risk personal 

care homes 

 

Provide written guidance to staff for consistent and prompt 

follow-up of personal care homes that do not comply with 

actions required after inspections 

 

Use a system to track personal care home inspection dates, 

non-compliance issues, required actions, and dates that 

personal care homes complete these actions. 

 

So that if they’re not completed, they’re not closed off. 

 

And last, and this is the fifth one, and this is the one we’re 

debating today. But I hope . . . And this is what we’ll be asking 

in committee, what happened to the other four? But the fifth 

one is: 

 

Publicly report inspection results when personal care 

homes do not comply with The Personal Care Homes Act, 

1991. 

 

So there you go. So there you go, Mr. Speaker. We have set the 

stage for this, and the auditor did a fine job. And clearly the 

ministry has acknowledged that they have not completed the 

work here. We are curious about the other four concerns they 

have, but we need to have some answers on those things. 

 

So, as I said, that there are about 245 homes in the province. 

Thirty-two hundred people are in those homes. They have 



4090 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

varied care needs. Some have light care needs: meals, 

encouragement to be physically active, reminders for correct 

and timely medications. Some are disabled adults or seniors 

with moderate to heavy care needs. And some may also need 

help due to complex health conditions such as chronic illnesses 

such as diabetes, dementia, and recovering from strokes. 

 

And we understand that the care received in the home will be 

safe. And the cost generally ranges from 1,000 to $4,000 a 

month and is set by each facility without review by the ministry 

because the current legislation does not require a review of fees. 

And that might be something we think about. Is this a fair value 

for the costs? I know that has always been an issue raised. Are 

people getting fair value? 

 

And of course we’ve seen with seniors raising concerns about 

rents going up, but they also raise concerns about costs of 

private care homes going up. And there is no control. They just 

can go up and that’s just it. As long as they have the licence and 

the licence based on meeting the needs, it can go up. And so 

this is an issue too that we should bring up. And they can have 

some top-up from the Ministry of Social Services, and that can 

be up to $1,800 a month that that’s the case. 

 

So what were the results of the audit objective? And it was an 

interesting read, Mr. Speaker. And I would encourage all 

members; we should really pay attention to what the auditor 

says. And I know this is a hard thing for this government to do 

because they automatically dismiss the auditor and say that 

well, they have a different point of view on many of the 

concerns that she has raised. But she has raised some really 

important concerns when it comes to how our seniors are cared 

for. So this is what she said: 

 

During April 1, 2011 to August 31, 2012, the Ministry of 

Health did not have fully effective processes to regulate 

personal care homes in accordance with The Personal 

Care Homes Act, 1991. As such, it needs to perform more 

timely inspections of high-risk personal care homes. As 

well, when problems are identified through inspections, 

the Ministry needs to follow up sufficiently with the 

identified personal care homes to ensure the problems 

have been satisfactorily addressed. 

 

And so her remarks are that up to 2012, they were inspected 

about every two years and the renewal of the personal care 

home licences was not coordinated with the personal care home 

inspections. All right? And now they have changed that, but I 

think we need to make sure that that continues to be the case. 

And also it talks a bit about the fact that how often are the 

high-risk homes inspected. That in fact what they should do is 

they: 

 

. . . uses routine inspections and investigations to monitor 

whether personal care homes comply with required 

standards. Staff inspect some homes more often based on 

their knowledge of the homes but . . . [they’ve] not 

developed a plan that outlines homes that should be 

inspected more frequently based on risk. 

 

And they have a checklist. And again, that makes some sense 

but that’s something we should do. 

 

One of her concerns was that staff schedule routine inspections, 

but they don’t make, they don’t usually make unannounced 

inspections. During the inspection, the staff will discuss the 

home practices with the owner, and then they will explain the 

findings at the end of the inspection, but they don’t make 

uninspected inspections. So we, the auditor recommends that 

they do two things: (1) the high-risk homes, go there more 

often, visit them more often, and (2) do some unannounced 

inspections to make sure that you’re actually seeing what you 

should be seeing. 

 

The follow-up is very, very important. And the other one and 

this is the fourth one, that they “. . . use a system to track 

personal care home inspection dates, non-compliance issues, 

required actions, and dates that personal care homes [actually] 

complete these . . . [things]. 

 

She goes on to note that BC, Ontario, Alberta report the 

inspection results on the senior care facilities on public 

websites. So it would make some sense. And it is something 

that the ministry has been considering for a while. It must be on 

their more-work-to-do file. Let’s make sure it gets done. 

 

But when we go to committee I know that we’ll have some 

questions regarding the auditor’s report. What has been done? 

What’s been the quality of care for seniors in personal care 

homes? And that we will be making sure that seniors, when 

they are faced with those difficult choices, will know that they 

will be looked after, that the government in its responsibility 

will do the best thing. At this point we don’t have that 

confidence. 

 

I know when we read the media and we see that seniors in 

seniors’ groups right across the board are not surprised at the 

kind of alarming circumstances that many seniors and adults 

find themselves in personal care homes or long-term care 

homes have . . . have us consider a lot of questions for 

committee. And so I know that my colleagues will have a lot of 

questions and will want to make sure they get up on the floor on 

this. 

 

But as I said, today of all days, it is a good day to be debating 

this and making sure that we do as well as we can. As I said, it’s 

National Housing Day and it’s one where we don’t just think of 

the semi-detached bungalows, that we actually think of 

everyone in our communities and how can we best meet their 

housing needs. And that is to make sure they have safe, 

affordable, quality homes. And personal care homes fall into 

that category. We can’t let that slide by. 

 

So in many ways we think publishing the results of the 

inspections are appropriate. We think that’s good. We’re not 

sure why it’s come to this, that we’re going to be debating this 

over the next several months. But this is the government’s way 

of getting around to it. But I know that many of my colleagues 

will want to be speaking to this, and it’s one that is important. 

But as I said, there were four other recommendations that the 

auditor made and we will want answers in committee about 

those recommendations and where they are. And I’m curious 

about the Five Hills personal care homes, how it works that . . .  

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that I will take my seat and I 

am moving that we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 111, The Act 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4091 

to amend Personal Care Homes Act. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 108 — The 

Athletics Commission Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to 

take my place today to rise and join the debate on Bill No. 108, 

The Athletics Commission Act. This is a really interesting piece 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and it’s timely. It’s topical. It’s 

dealing with something that is fairly contentious in our society, 

but on the face of this, Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty interested in the 

approach that the government has taken and I’m pretty 

interested to see how this . . . certain assumptions we make 

about provisions in the legislation actually working out on the 

ground or not. 

 

First off I’d say, to sort of own up to some of my own sort of 

biases in this, Mr. Speaker. The commission that has been 

brought forward, the individuals that have taken place or will 

take place on the commission, I think that the government, 

again as our leader says, when the government is doing 

something well, we’ll certainly be there to say so. Where 

there’s something going wrong, we’ll certainly be there to call 

that out as well. But I am quite impressed with some of the 

individuals they’ve put on the commission, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And first and foremost, I’m talking about AJ Scales. And AJ is 

— as I was relating to one of the Pages, Mr. Speaker — is one 

tough dude and certainly a bit of a pioneer when it comes to 

mixed martial arts in Saskatchewan. His home training studio is 

in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’ve known AJ as a person. We have friends in common. 

Certain of my friends trained with AJ Scales over the years. 

And anyway in AJ I find someone who’s quite impressive, not 

just as an athlete but as an entrepreneur and as a 

community-minded person trying to build his support, his 

passion, out into the community. And so again I’ll say it clear 

for the record: I was generally impressed with the calibre of 

individuals brought forward for the commission, Mr. Speaker, 

but particularly impressed with the nomination of AJ Scales to 

that body. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Again we’ve got the former mayor of Regina, Pat Fiacco, who’s 

been named to the commission. And I should also explain here, 

Mr. Speaker, that of the boxing fans in my life, my father for 

many, many years has been a pretty enthusiastic boxing fan. 

And certainly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member from 

Walsh Acres is looking to get into the debate and maybe he 

will, but if he’s going to heckle, I guess if he could state it a 

little more clearly, Mr. Speaker, and then maybe I could make it 

out. If he could, you know, state it clear and then not just recede 

into the giggling right away, that would be helpful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of growing up in the McCall family, there 

is nothing my father delighted in more than getting the gloves 

on my brother and I and having us go at it. And I think it’s an 

ongoing disappointment in his life that none of the kids went 

into boxing in a fairly serious way, but we’ve tried to make up 

for it in other ways, Mr. Speaker. But certainly in the McCall 

household we weren’t strangers to the notion of going out to the 

fights or going to see a card, and that is certainly where I first 

gained knowledge of an individual named Pat Fiacco. 

 

And certainly having worked with Pat Fiacco as one elected 

official to another and knowing something of his passion for the 

sport of boxing, and not just his passion and his own individual 

accomplishment in that regard, but his globally recognized 

credentials when it comes to refereeing and serving as a boxing 

official, and obviously his considerable talents as somebody 

that’s done a lot for the sport of boxing . . . And not just the 

training side of things, you know, the Ken Goff classic and the 

various sort of cards that he’s been party to either as a fighter or 

as an organizer over the years. This is an individual that again is 

well placed on this commission, and we’re glad to see him 

there. 

 

And you know, again the general calibre of the individuals for 

the commission was impressive across the piece, but in 

particular from . . . given the role that municipalities have 

played in the question of how to properly regulate and introduce 

regulations around mixed martial arts, carrying on from the 

previous sort of regime as regarded regulations in boxing, both 

amateur and professional, in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And given the role that the municipalities have played in this 

question, I think that the city mayors’ caucus and SUMA and 

the way that they have come forward and said, you know, this is 

something that we hear a lot about from our constituents; this is 

something that we want to work in partnership with the 

province on, and again to see the mayor of Humboldt, Mayor 

Eaton, is to see His Worship on this commission, again Mayor 

Eaton being an individual who’s brought . . . does a tremendous 

job in the kind of work that he has endeavoured on behalf of his 

constituents and the kind of statement that makes about what I 

think Mayor Eaton will bring to the panel, bring to the 

commission again is encouraging. 

 

And to get back around to where I’d started, Mr. Speaker, again 

when we see encouraging things happen, it’s not for us to . . . 

We’re not johnny-one-note or one-trick pony on this side of the 

House. If we see something good, we’re going to call it up. 

 

But again the other individuals on the commission, that they’re 

coming forward. But I just wanted to mention those three 

individuals, Mr. Speaker, as people that I know something 

about, know something about both as individuals and what 

they’ve done in their professional lives, and looking forward to 

see how the commission rolls out with them putting their 

shoulders to the wheel. And again I guess closing off this sort of 



4092 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

segment of my comments, Mr. Speaker, to say thank you to 

them for offering up their passion and their expertise to make 

sure that as good a job can be done on this commission as is 

possible. So we’re glad to see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again the question of mixed martial arts generally and the 

proper regulation thereof is a fairly contentious question, Mr. 

Speaker, and there are necessary and absolutely urgent 

questions to be answered around the way that the whole 

question of head trauma is taken care of in all kinds of different 

professional sports. 

 

In the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the 

question of head trauma coming to the fore in professional 

hockey, in professional football, and certainly in boxing, Mr. 

Speaker. Head trauma has long, long been part of the question 

about whether or not this is something that people should be 

doing and how to properly regulate it. 

 

We’ll be watching very closely to see how those questions are 

addressed in the legislation, looking for reassurance in the 

committee stage I’m sure, Mr. Speaker. But I guess what I’d 

like to do at this stage is to go through the second reading 

speech of the minister and pull out some of the things there that 

I think bear greater reflection and examination. And then, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to turn to the legislation itself and draw some 

of that into question or into greater examination. 

 

In the minister’s second reading speech he referenced the fact 

that, “Saskatchewan was one of only three provinces that had 

not taken the necessary steps to sanction professional combative 

sports events, including mixed martial arts and boxing.” And 

states further: 

 

Without a mechanism that sanctions and oversees 

professional combative sports events in Saskatchewan, 

promoters may stage unsanctioned events and hold them 

without appropriate standards or safety precautions that 

help protect participants and spectators. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the minister rightfully pointed to the fact 

that this is a question that has been on the plate for regulators in 

Saskatchewan for quite some time, the way that this has already 

been brought forward and the request for action has proceeded 

from municipalities and from the big city mayors’ caucus here 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. One aspect of that in terms of 

the appropriate jurisdictions and how different venues relate 

into this question, Mr. Speaker, something that the minister’s 

second reading speech was silent on I believe, but it begs the 

question, is the question of how this relates to events that might 

take place on-reserve or on First Nations. It’ll be interesting to 

see how that is anticipated or dealt with in the legislation or not, 

whether any consultation has taken place with the FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] or individual 

tribal councils or First Nations. 

 

And again how that question of proper regulation in the 

province of Saskatchewan, if we’re going to be taking a 

border-to-border approach on this, Mr. Speaker, what 

anticipation the Government of Saskatchewan is making as 

regards the holding of mixed martial arts or combative sports 

events on-reserve. We’ll be interested to see what sort of 

anticipation or consideration of that has been made. 

Carrying on in the second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister stated that: 

 

. . . this legislation is not about promoting mixed martial 

arts as a sport, but about regulating it. By regulating this 

sport, we help eliminate illegal fights putting athletes and, 

in some cases, children, Mr. Speaker, at risk. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s one of the fundamental questions 

that government gets to wrestle with from time to time, is the 

question of regulation. And if you’re going to be regulating 

something, if you’re going to be regulating a societal trend, 

something of which there’s a greater incidence taking place, 

you know, which is obviously the case of the rise of mixed 

martial arts, the way that this has grown in popularity and in 

participation, how you properly regulate that and whether or not 

you’re putting in place the proper oversight, proper procedures, 

proper protocols or if you’re going to continue to turn a blind 

eye or turn away from solidly addressing these questions, there 

comes a time when a government has to step forward and make 

those decisions. And again given that we are one of three 

provincial jurisdictions that have not taken the steps to sanction 

these type of events, obviously that question was coming due. 

 

And how the regulation either impacts or makes for a safer 

engagement on this front, Mr. Speaker, and then in terms of, 

you know, the enforcement regime attached to it, we’ll see how 

this plays out in the days ahead. But as I’d referenced earlier, I 

have some encouragement from the fact of the individuals who 

have been appointed to this commission to get this work off the 

ground. 

 

Again referring to the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

. . . amendments were made recently to the Criminal Code 

which had implications for Saskatchewan. Bill S-209 was 

passed in June 2013. This bill amends section 83 of the 

Criminal Code, legalizing the sport of mixed martial arts 

across Canada under the authority of a provincial athletics 

commission or similar established body. 

 

Carrying on in the quote: 

 

. . . the changes to the Criminal Code provided our 

province with clarity and an ideal opportunity to put 

legislation in place to regulate the legitimate side of the 

sport yet shut down the unsanctioned events that put 

participants at risk of serious injury. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that question of regulation and events that 

are ongoing, we would be interested to hear from the minister, 

and I imagine at committee stage, what the incidence of 

unsanctioned events has been like, what the experience to date 

in Saskatchewan has been, and what kind of number or 

frequency of events that would meet the criteria outlined there. 

Again as relates to the federal legislation, Mr. Speaker, what 

kind of interaction the province had, what kind of 

representation the province made to advance that Saskatchewan 

interest as that federal law was coming down the line, and what 

sort of lessons can be learned from other jurisdictions. All those 

questions bear answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I hear my friend across 



November 19, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4093 

the way, the member from Cypress Hills, hitting an oldie but a 

goody. You know, you pause to take a drink of water and the 

heckle goes, I’ve never seen a windmill run on water before. 

But I certainly have heard that heckle before, Mr. Speaker, and I 

never tire of it nor the member for Cypress Hills’ delivery 

thereof. 

 

But returning to my comments, Mr. Speaker. The government, 

quote again from the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

. . . this government has committed to establishing a 

provincial athletics commission. The commission will 

hold the authority to sanction professional boxing and 

mixed martial arts events. This commission will be 

designed to ensure a consistent standard of qualifications, 

rules, regulations, and safety protocols for all participants 

and officials across the province. Furthermore, the 

commission will have the authority to provide protocols 

for licence applications, event permits, as well as the terms 

and conditions of a particular event. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of in the case of AJ Scales or 

in the case of Pat Fiacco, two individuals that have substantial 

experience both from the athletic participant side of the 

equation, but also from the promoter, regulator, officiating 

standpoint, those are two individuals well placed to provide 

expert advice as this commission does its work and gets 

established and gets rolling. And again good to see Mayor 

Eaton in the mix there, bringing that municipal perspective and 

the perspective of somebody that is making government work 

for people. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Again returning to the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

It also ensures that competitors participate in appropriate 

pre-fight medical testing such as blood tests, concussion 

screening, and eye exams. It ensures that qualified medical 

staff and event officials are hired, that promoters and 

competitors have the proper licences, and that promoters 

have suitable liability insurance. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, all of these conditions — if you’re going 

to, if we’re going to as a society proceed with mixed martial 

arts and the interest is there, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to 

appropriately regulate that activity as a society — all of these 

activities as outlined in the minister’s second reading speech in 

the portion I just referenced are critical, again in terms of the 

pre-fight medical testing, in terms of ensuring qualified medical 

staff and event officials being hired, and that promoters and 

competitors have the proper licences and that promoters have 

suitable liability insurance. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this is, this is a dangerous thing. This is a 

dangerous sport and I don’t think it is alarmist or stretches the 

point in any way, shape, or form to say that this is an activity 

from which serious, life-altering damage can arise. And again if 

you’ve got . . . If you don’t have the regulation and you don’t 

have the proper protocol in place, then what is by its very nature 

a risky endeavour, Mr. Speaker, becomes that much more so. 

And the chance for lasting damage, physically the last, you 

know, possible fatality, again it’s not stretching the point that if 

you look through the history of boxing alone, Mr. Speaker, it is 

not . . . The question of death in the ring is not a farfetched one 

or alarmist. It’s a real and present danger within the sport and if 

you’re not taking the appropriate steps, it becomes an evermore 

urgent, evermore risky proposition for the individuals to be 

participating in the activity. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if these are trained athletes, they’re 

individuals that have put a fair amount of work and passion and 

training into getting into the octagon, Mr. Speaker, or into the 

boxing ring, but again it’s a . . . If we’re going to make this as 

safe and as best regulated as is humanly possible, Mr. Speaker, 

these are all rightful questions to be entertained and acted upon 

by the commission. 

 

Carrying on in the second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister states: 

 

The commission will also be responsible for tracking 

competitors’ fighting histories and ensuring safety 

protocols are enforced. The proposed commission will 

consist of five individuals, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Parks, Culture and Sport will appoint an athletics 

commissioner who is to be an employee of the ministry. 

The minister will also establish an advisory committee of 

three subject matter experts. The Lieutenant Governor in 

Council will appoint an adjudicator who will be 

responsible to consider appeals for administrative 

penalties, licences, and event permits. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, how this is operationalized, how this is 

executed are questions of vital importance, and whether or not 

it’s properly resourced to do the job, the fairly significant job 

that is set out before it in Bill No. 108, that will tell the tale of 

the effectiveness of this commission. And again we’ll be 

looking to see how that rolls out. In terms of the commission 

itself, in terms of the commissioner, in terms of the subject 

matter, advisory committee experts, and in terms of the 

adjudicator, we’ll be looking to see that these things are 

properly functioning, and how that carries forward. 

 

Again in the second reading speech, Mr. Speaker: 

 

My ministry has been working with stakeholders to ensure 

the legislation and regulations have proper protocols and 

clauses in place to operate an effective and successful 

commission. Ministry officials have been working closely 

with the Ministry of Justice and stakeholders who are 

closely impacted by this issue. Other provincial 

jurisdictions and commissions have also been consulted 

with and primarily include individuals from British 

Columbia, Ontario, and Manitoba. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’re always glad to see when the example 

and the experience of other jurisdictions is being considered and 

benefited from by the provincial government. It’s not that 

Saskatchewan’s got any shortage of innovation or good public 

policy, Mr. Speaker, but it’s always I think the test of a 

province to be looking without, making sure that we’re not just 

nurturing these approaches within the province, but making sure 

that we’re learning and benefiting from the experiences in other 

jurisdictions as regards to best practices, as regards to the 

experience of the rollout of something like the Athletics 



4094 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2013 

Commission contained herein. So again that is something that I 

look to in this legislation. We’ll look to gain greater detail as to 

the specific sort of impact of the experience in those 

jurisdictions and how it is then translated into the legislation 

that is here before us today. 

 

Carrying on in the speech, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Five of the seven provinces that regulate . . . MMA [mixed 

martial arts] events have provincial commissions. From 

speaking with provinces across Canada, we know 

provincial commissions are proving to be the most 

effective governance model. According to provincial 

jurisdictions, establishing a provincial athletics 

commission provides a number of benefits including 

consistency in rules, regulations, and processes across the 

province; enhanced ability to hold large-scale events; 

potential overall cost efficiencies; and effective use of a 

limited group of individuals properly qualified and 

knowledgeable about the sector. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this would seem to, on the face of it, make 

good sense, you know, making sure you’ve got that right mix 

between mission and mandates, making sure that the task that 

presents itself is being properly addressed. And again in terms 

of having a province-wide commission that addresses these 

questions, I think there’s some good sense to that. 

 

I’d be interested to know more about the other jurisdictions — 

the minority of jurisdictions, I would acknowledge — wherein 

this has been a municipally led, in the main question, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the benefits that are there to be observed. 

You know, what holds the provincial approach over the 

municipal approach? And in a province of 1.1 million people, 

Mr. Speaker, again logically there’d be some benefits that 

accrue between striking that balance between, you know, 

having that province-wide jurisdiction, that province-wide 

scope in mandate, as well as addressing the activities as they 

present across the province. 

 

But it would be good to hear specifically what was considered 

about the other jurisdictions, again in the minority, but the other 

jurisdictions where they have a different approach. What are the 

benefits of that and what ultimately led to deciding against 

adopting that approach and instead going with the provincial 

focus to this legislation? But the questions that are anticipated 

by the commission in terms of the benefit of consistency in 

rules, regulations, and processes across the province, very 

important for . . . You know, we’ve got no end of geography, 

Mr. Speaker. But if you get into sort of jurisdiction chopping 

and one municipality versus the other, it’s the way that that 

could roll out. 

 

We think that that’s a potential gain to be had in province-wide 

jurisdiction being asserted and regulated in this body. But with 

that again comes a number of questions as regards to 

jurisdiction and what anticipation has been made again in a 

province like Saskatchewan. What sort of anticipation and 

consultation has been made with the First Nations people in this 

province and the way that First Nations jurisdiction on-reserve 

ties into this broader question? That needs an answer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But again the question of enhanced ability to hold large-scale 

events in terms of, you know . . . That potential is out there, the 

interest is there, and having a commission equal to that task 

again would seem to, on the face of it, make some sense. The 

potential overall cost efficiencies again seem a reasonable 

proposition. And the effective use of a limited group of 

individuals properly qualified and knowledgeable about the 

sector, again, if prologue is indeed . . . if past is indeed prologue 

that they’ve got individuals like AJ Scales and Pat Fiacco on the 

commission, that should bode well for again effective use of a 

limited group of individuals properly qualified and 

knowledgeable about the sector because Pat Fiacco and AJ 

Scales certainly are that, knowledgeable and properly qualified 

about the sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to provide an overview from the . . . 

Again quoting from the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

I also want to provide an overview of what the legislation 

will outline. The legislation frames areas such as 

responsibilities and powers of the commissioner, licensing 

and event permits, security deposits, inspections and 

investigations, administrative penalties, appeals, and the 

regulations necessary for this Act. Within the legislation, 

the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport will also have the 

authority to apply for a compliance order to prevent 

individuals from proceeding with an event contrary to the 

Act and regulations. We want to ensure illegal activity is 

prevented before occurring. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting to have a broader or 

a more precise understanding of what the experience is in other 

jurisdictions, whether or not the mechanism of a compliance 

order administered by the minister, if that is indeed the 

experience in other jurisdictions. What is the frequency with 

which such compliance orders are issued and what other sort of 

penalties attach to that compliance order, Mr. Speaker? All this 

will be interesting to contemplate in the days and weeks ahead. 

 

And it also begs the question, quite frankly, of resources. And 

last I checked I’m not sure that the Ministry of — I want to call 

it culture and youth — but the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport, what resources the minister has to deploy in terms of the 

enforcement side of this regime remains to be seen, Mr. 

Speaker. And are there individuals currently within the ministry 

that can perform this function? Is there a need for new hirings? 

 

All of these things again, Mr. Speaker, it’s fine to write it down 

in legislation, but legislation begs enforcement. And to enforce 

the provisions of this legislation of course will require resources 

and how the question of resources has been addressed by this 

government. What’s being anticipated by the minister for this 

new task being set out in front of this commission remains to be 

seen. And we await the greater detail on that from the minister. 

 

The close of the minister’s remarks . . . There’s a lot of interest 

on the other side, Mr. Speaker, and they keep calling for more, 

so we’ll come back after supper and oblige them. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, the 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.]



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4065 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4065 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4065 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4066 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4066 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4066 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4066 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4066 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4066 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4067 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 First Nations Youth Summit 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4067 

 Global Petroleum Survey Results 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4067 

 India Canada Association Supper Night 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4067 

 Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4068 

 Saskatoon Partners Win Arts Award 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4068 

 Police Officer Retires After 29 Years of Service 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4068 

 A Plan for Agriculture 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4069 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for Care Facilities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4069 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4069 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4070 

 Access to Emergency Rooms 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4071 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4071 

 Tuition Levels and Support for Post-Secondary Education 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4071 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4072 

 Crime Prevention Measures 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4073 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4073 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4074 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4075 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants  

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4078 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4080 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4082 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4085 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4086 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4091 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


