




















































Hansard: April 16, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 47A  TUESDAY, APRIL 16, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3225 

 April 16, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, I would like to introduce to the House 

a group of very special students from Yokohama, Japan. Also 

with them, Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery is Bob Stevenson 

and a group of Regina students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students come to Saskatchewan from 

Yamate Gakuin High School, which has had an international 

exchange program since 1969. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this 

exchange is to enable students to experience family and school 

life in another country and to develop friendships and to 

promote international understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the students from Yokohama are here for two 

weeks — just in time to enjoy our beautiful spring weather. 

And I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the Regina group will be 

travelling over to Japan this summer. Mr. Speaker, I know that 

they have a busy schedule while they are here, and I hope that 

they enjoy themselves in Regina and Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and I wish them all the best. And I ask all the 

members to join me in welcoming them to Saskatchewan and 

the Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you a group seated in 

the east gallery. They are from the Piapot urban, students with 

the Southeast Regional College adult basic education program. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, if you want to see an impressive 

group of people, if you want to see a group of people that are 

determined and I think are showing that good way forward, you 

know, look no further than the east gallery. You’ve got a group 

of people that have made some decisions about improving their 

education, not just for themselves but I’m betting for their 

families. And certainly it’s really good to see them here at their 

Legislative Assembly. I look forward to meeting with them 

later, to catching up, getting their take on question period. I 

know I’m going to get some good questions after, but it’s really 

good to see these people from Piapot urban First Nation, 

Southeast Regional College adult basic education program here 

at their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I note that 

we have joining us today in your gallery a gentleman who’s no 

stranger to this Legislative Assembly. In fact this individual 

served as this Chamber . . . when I was first elected, was Clerk 

of the Chamber, and then later served in the Senate. He most 

recently served us very ably as the lieutenant governor of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And to my colleagues, I would ask 

each and every one to join me in welcoming to this Chamber a 

former lieutenant governor of the province of Saskatchewan, 

the Hon. Gordon Barnhart. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming Dr. Barnhart to 

the Assembly. It’s a pleasure to see him here today. Of course 

we’re all so familiar and accustomed to seeing him at various 

events throughout the province. And now as he’s entered a new 

chapter in his life, we trust it’s going well and wish him all the 

best. And it’s a true pleasure to see him here today in the 

Assembly. So welcome once again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll follow 

the previous two speakers in offering an introduction to Dr. 

Gordon Barnhart. He is here today accompanied by Mr. Rodney 

Orr. As many people will know, Dr. Barnhart is the Chair of the 

International Minerals Innovation Institute, and Mr. Orr has 

recently been named the CEO [chief executive officer] of that 

institute. And so it’s in that capacity that I would ask all 

members to welcome these two individuals, and certainly 

leaders as far as minerals, mining, and innovation, to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like join 

with the member opposite and welcome Mr. Rodney Orr in the 

International Minerals Innovation Institute and thank you for 

your attendance in your Assembly here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and 

through you to members of the Assembly a constituent of 

Saskatoon Silver Springs, Mr. Mike Couros. Members of the 

Assembly might be familiar with Mr. Couros. He has a segment 

on Monday mornings, I know, on the John Gormley show — 

Mike and Lise in the morning. We get our mornings off right if 

you’re listening to the station. I know they were talking about 

Oprah Winfrey this past Monday, and they had some real 

insights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mike is involved with many charitable 

organizations in Saskatoon. He was a founding member of Care 

& Share and the Progress Club along with former member Ted 

Merriman as well. He’s one small-business person that’s 

working hard to make Saskatchewan a better place. I ask all 

members to help me welcome him here to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 



3226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a number of guests in your gallery, scattered 

throughout, and I’ll just ask them to hold up their hands or 

stand as I go through their names. We welcome them today in 

recognizing the announcement of the funding to the Parkland 

College in Yorkton for the new trades and technology centre, 

and they came down for the event this morning. 

 

With us is executive director, Dr. Fay Myers, president; also 

Del Killick on the floor down here, board of governors 

chairperson. Also with us are board of governors: Doris 

Stelmackowich, Sally Bishop, and Linda Cyr — Lydia Cyr. 

Sorry, Lydia. Staff members Michael Cameron, Larry Pearon, 

Natasha Katchuk, Dale Holstein, William Litchfield, Brendan 

Wagner, Sharron Rurak, and my good friend and coffee buddy, 

Mr. Darrell Landels. I’d ask all members to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition and as the Advanced Education critic, 

I’d like to welcome the folks from Parkland here, Fay Myers 

and the team both from the board and staff. It’s good to see you 

here at your Legislative Assembly. I hope that you didn’t have 

to come here to get the new trade centre and take it all the way 

back. I hope it’s going to take place out there. 

 

But anyway, good to see you here at your Legislative 

Assembly. And this is a good news announcement certainly for 

the province, and we look forward to seeing how this continues 

to develop in the days ahead. Welcome to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the members in 

the Chamber here, I’d like to introduce three people sitting in 

the west gallery. First of all is Jeff Stusek who is the president 

and CEO of ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], as well as Shawn Peters who is the CFO [chief 

financial officer] and Angela Bethune who’s with 

communications. 

 

They’re here no doubt to see the tabling of the ISC report that 

we may even hear a little bit more of in question period. I’m not 

sure. I’d rather not. I’d rather just talk about it out in the 

rotunda. But if there are questions, I’ve been very well briefed 

by those three individuals in the gallery to make sure that I have 

a very good understanding of the excellent year that ISC has 

gone through this year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all 

members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to briefly join with the member opposite in welcoming the 

folks from ISC here today, CEO Jeff Stusek. And certainly the 

annual report being tabled this morning, I’d like to welcome 

these individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

And as to the questions, we’ll see how their briefing worked 

out. We’ll do our best to see how that has worked out. They did 

the best with what they got, for sure. Anyway I’d like to 

welcome those individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I just want to introduce one of the guests who’s 

here with the SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ 

Institute on Parliamentary Democracy] group. And I just want 

to pay a little bit of attention to the individual. And I know they 

were introduced yesterday, but this individual, I just want to 

give him a little recognition. He’s from my constituency. His 

name is Devin Bernatchez. He’s a teacher at Senator Myles 

Venne School, but also he’s truly an advocate for sports, 

culture, recreation in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’ll be reading a member statement a little later here 

explaining his role and his commitment with a group that took 

part in an event in February. So I just want to say, Devin, thank 

you for your commitment to northern children, to First Nations 

children education, and your commitment to our communities. I 

just want to welcome you to your legislature and say, thank you 

for all you do. Tiniki. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very proud to stand today to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage in northwestern Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cellphone service in the Canoe Lake First Nations 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nation along with the 

neighbouring communities of St. George’s Hill; English 

River First Nations, also known as Patuanak, and the 

hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nations 

along with the community of Turnor Lake, including all 

the neighbouring communities in each of these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the petition has been signed from all 

throughout Saskatchewan. And this particular page, Mr. 

Speaker, are people that have signed are primarily from Cole 

Bay, Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to introduce a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And since 

the Act was introduced in December, literally hundreds of 

hours of study and comparison have been carried out in the 

interests of due diligence. And we know there is no labour 

relations crisis to fix and no necessity to rush this omnibus bill 

through that will likely govern workplace relations for decades 

to come. And we know that stable labour relations in all sectors 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3227 

run the risk of being thrown into turmoil of the result of the 

sweeping changes in the bill. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May, and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Imperial, Wolseley, Grenfell, Whitewood, Montmartre, 

Raymore, Moose Jaw, Cupar, and Saskatoon, Muenster, and 

Nipawin. I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Boston Marathon Tragedy 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members and people 

throughout Saskatchewan were shocked and saddened by the 

news from the Boston Marathon yesterday. Many 

Saskatchewan people were especially touched by the tragedy 

including 22 marathon participants from our province, their 

family and their friends, and the many Saskatchewan people 

with loved ones in Boston. My thoughts and prayers are with 

the families of the victims and with all the others affected by 

this tragedy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Boston Marathon is a symbol of courage and 

determination. Racers from all over the world pour their heart 

into qualifying for this event and in return have the opportunity 

to run an exhausting and inspiring 26.2 miles past thousands of 

supporters cheering them on. Yesterday’s incident is one that 

we will all remember, as we should. But we must never let 

anger defeat us. Instead we must take a lesson from those that 

run and continue moving forward one step at a time towards a 

better and more peaceful tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Emergency Telecommunications Week 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

acknowledge that our province has proclaimed April 14th to the 

20th as Emergency Telecommunications Week in 

Saskatchewan. During this time, Saskatchewan joins with the 

rest of Canada and we turn our attention to emergency 

telecommunicators and the work that they do. It provides the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for us to acknowledge the dedication 

of individuals who are our first line of contact, that initial 

reassuring and helpful voice on the other end of the line when 

we are at our most vulnerable. 

 

The people of our province depend on the skill, dedication, and 

expertise of these professionals, not only to dispatch emergency 

resources but to provide support and assistance when our 

citizens need it most. Mr. Speaker, I am truly impressed with 

the level of service that we receive from our dispatchers, 

including those from police, fire, and emergency medical 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s plan for growth is about 

balancing priorities and improving the quality of life for all 

Saskatchewan people. It’s important that we not only provide 

opportunities for the people of this province, that we are 

protecting those that need our help as well. Emergency 

telecommunicators have earned the public’s trust and 

confidence. For this I am both grateful and I congratulate them. 

We want to remember, Mr. Speaker, that these are everyday 

heroes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and all the people that our 

telecommunicators have supported over the years, I say thank 

you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Festival for Northern Youth 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, close to 200 youth representing 

the five northern recreation regions gathered in La Ronge in 

mid-February to participate in the Northern Sport, Culture, and 

Recreation District Festival. The purpose of the festival was to 

bring youth and communities from northern Saskatchewan 

together to participate, learn, develop, and celebrate through 

sports, culture, and recreation. 

 

Sport activities during the five-day event included basketball 

and broomball tournaments. Cultural activities included 

preparation and tanning of moose hide and the identification 

and use of traditional plants. Art activities included filmmaking, 

hip hop dancing. 

 

Michael Linklater, a professional basketball player with the 

USA All-Stars, International Basketball League, was the 

keynote speaker at the banquet. Michael is originally from 

Thunderchild First Nation near North Battleford. He 

encouraged the youth in attendance to follow their dreams and 

to believe in themselves and to be willing to work hard to 

achieve their goals. 

 

This event couldn’t have happened without the dedication and 

commitment of coaches, chaperones, and volunteers, and of 

course the athletes. The pride of the northern culture was so 

proudly displayed by participants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

northern sport, culture, and recreation district committee for 

facilitating and coordinating this major event. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Family Treatment Centre Opens in Prince Albert 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday was a 

great day for Saskatchewan. I had the pleasure, along with the 



3228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

member from Prince Albert Carlton, to bring greetings on 

behalf of the Minister of Health to the grand opening of the 

Prince Albert Family Treatment Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of us know well the challenges that come 

with parenting. It is a very demanding job even when things are 

going well. For the mothers with addictions, things are not 

always good. This centre addresses that reality through its 

innovative approach to treatment. The residential facilities and 

on-site child care and school services will help to remove 

barriers to care. The family treatment centre will offer much 

needed services to mothers in need and will help families to 

access care together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, up to eight mothers and their children will be able 

to access treatment at a time. This facility will also include a 

separate 10-bed child and youth mental health in-patient unit 

which replaces the former 10-bed unit. 

 

The family treatment centre will be engaged with other service 

providers, agencies, and government ministries to coordinate 

care and the transition back to a patient’s home community to 

ensure a successful and well-rounded approach to healing. That 

is why this government contributed almost $10 million to this 

innovative facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the Prince Albert Parkland Regional Health Authority on the 

grand opening of the family treatment centre. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Grade 10 Student Provincial Science Fair Winner 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 

this Assembly today to share the recent accomplishments of a 

young constituent of mine. When Tawnee Dupuis, a grade 10 

student at École St-Isidore, won first place in the local science 

fair in Bellevue last November, she thought it would be a good 

experience to participate in the provincial event, never 

imagining it would go any further. Last month she found herself 

among the top three at the provincial fair, ensuring her a spot at 

the Canada-wide Science Fair in Lethbridge this coming May. 

 

Tawnee’s project, an eco-house, uses solar panels, wind 

turbines, insulated concrete forms, and geothermal system, 

make it a complete self-sufficient house. It also includes a water 

system that makes rainwater drinkable. Tawnee chose an 

eco-house for her project because she’s been considering going 

into environmental engineering as a career and felt it would be 

a good place to start. 

 

Tawnee is the third student from École St-Isidore to make it to 

the national competition in the last six years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Tawnee on her success at the provincial level 

and wishing her the best at the Canada-wide Science Fair next 

month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Yorkton Terriers Win Canalta Cup 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very happy 

to rise in the House today, instead of the member for Humboldt, 

to recognize my constituency’s hometown hockey team, the 

Yorkton Terriers, as the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League 

champions for 2013 who took home the Canalta Cup . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . She’s heckling me. 

 

This past Sunday the Terriers claimed the cup in game 6 of the 

tournament against the Humboldt Broncos, and in their defence, 

Mr. Speaker, they have won the cup over and over again the 

last number of years so . . . 

 

In game 5 on Saturday, the Terriers had a close game and went 

into triple overtime to secure the win. The final game came on 

Sunday. It was tied 3 to 3 until the Terriers racked up the final 

point with 28 seconds left in the game and claimed the league 

title. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the Terriers’ first Canalta Cup win since 

2006, so all of us in Yorkton are ecstatic and proud of them for 

their victory. The Terriers now advance to the Western Canada 

Cup, April 26th to May 5th in Nanaimo, BC [British 

Columbia]. The winners of that tournament will advance to the 

RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] Cup Junior A championship 

tournament, May 11th to the 19th in Summerside, Prince 

Edward Island. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

congratulating the Yorkton Terriers organization and coach 

Trent Cassan on their Canalta Cup win and wish them the best 

of luck in Nanaimo at the end of the month. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Party Divisions 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The first task of 

any new political leader should be unifying the party. But the 

new leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party] appears to be 

failing this test. 

 

There was an article posted yesterday on The Huffington Post 

website called, “The divisions within Sask. NDP.” It shows that 

there are some pretty clear divisions between the NDP leader 

and his chief rival, Dr. Ryan Meili. When asked about running 

for a seat in the next election, Ryan Meili would not commit. 

He said, “We’ll have to see if we can work together . . . if Cam 

wants me there.” Not exactly a ringing vote of confidence. On 

top of that, Dr. Meili says he opposes the NDP leader’s position 

on the Keystone XL pipeline which he originally voted against 

but now supports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that many of Ryan Meili’s supporters 

share the same concern. One prominent NDP blogger recently 

wrote that the new leader has made no effort to reach out to the 

Meili camp at all except for a single email asking for money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that in the last election many NDP 

supporters simply could not support the leadership of Dwain 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3229 

Lingenfelter. They may have a different leader, but they still 

have the same old problems within the same old NDP. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Funding for First Nations and Métis Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the Deputy 

Leader of the Opposition tried to move a motion in this 

Chamber last March for Shannen’s dream for equitable 

education funding for First Nations children, the Sask Party 

refused to even discuss the motion. It was debated and passed 

unanimously by all parties in the federal parliament, but here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

wouldn’t even discuss the issue. 

 

My question to the Sask Party government: have they now 

changed their position on this policy? Do they now fully 

recognize that equitable education funding for First Nations 

children here in Saskatchewan is an issue of huge importance? 

 

The Speaker: — When a member is asking a question, they 

need it to direct it to someone other than the entire government. 

So I would ask the member to direct his question to a minister. I 

recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — To the Minister of Education: has the Sask 

Party government now changed its position on this policy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. Perhaps that’s a rookie mistake. Mr. Speaker, the 

Government of Saskatchewan takes very, very seriously the 

education of all children in the province of Saskatchewan and 

yesterday, at a very exciting event, we received the report of the 

joint task force. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $3 million that the government has set aside to 

begin to deal with the recommendations of the task force is a 

beginning, Mr. Speaker. It’s seed money. And one of the prime 

recommendations that came out of that report, Mr. Speaker, 

was the commitment to pursue, with the federal government, 

the whole area of mitigating and dealing with the disparity in 

educational funding for students on-reserve in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the joint task force on 

First Nations and Métis education and employment outcomes 

recommended that the provincial government lobby the federal 

government to provide equitable education for First Nations 

children. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, in the meantime, the 

task force recommended that the provincial government provide 

interim funding to reduce the cost for First Nations students, 

Mr. Speaker, the First Nations that send their children to 

off-reserve schools. 

 

My question to the Education Minister: until he can finally 

convince the federal government to step up to this issue, does 

he intend to provide interim funding as outlined in 

recommendation no. 4 of the task force report? If so, when will 

this funding be coming and how much will it be? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, we have 

made a commitment through our partnership with the FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] on the joint task 

force, Mr. Speaker, to deliver on that disparity, Mr. Speaker. As 

referenced, a recommendation refers to interim funding, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s exactly what we’re going to do. 

 

We’re going to pursue with the federal government, in 

conjunction with Vice-chief Bird, to pursue with the federal 

government discussions around how we go about dealing with 

that disparity in education funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in January, in response to yet 

another report on this issue, the Premier was interviewed 

regarding the underfunding of on-reserve schools. A story on 

the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] website 

reported: 

 

Wall, on Tuesday, said it was time for governments to 

stop passing the buck when it came to addressing the 

issue. 

 

“The time is over for the federal government to say ‘Go 

see the province,’ and the provincial government to say, 

‘Go see the feds,’” Wall said. 

 

Wall noted the province is providing adult basic education 

on reserves and more programs could follow. 

 

That’s what the Premier said back in January, Mr. Speaker. But 

then just a few months after that bold proclamation by the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, we saw a Sask Party government that 

devoted only $3 million to deal with the recommendations 

coming forward from the report that is tabled by the task force. 

 

My question to the Education minister: how far can $3 million 

go in meeting the recommendations of the task force, and how 

much of that $3 million, Mr. Speaker, will be going to 

recommendation no. 4 in the report? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the $3 million investment does not represent government’s full 

commitment to the agenda of First Nations and Métis success in 

schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are a number of initiatives that appeared in the 2013-14 

budget that deal directly with First Nations and Métis 

initiatives. For example, one and a half million dollars 

committed to adult basic education, Mr. Speaker, on-reserve; an 

additional half a million dollars to support skills training, Mr. 

Speaker; an additional one and a half million dollars committed 



3230 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

for employment development to support continuation of the 

Northern Career Quest, Mr. Speaker; 50 new kindergarten, 

pre-kindergarten programs, Mr. Speaker; an additional million 

dollars for capital in early learning, Mr. Speaker. And I could 

go on.  

 

The $3 million is seed money, and it will go a long way in 

helping us to begin to address the issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that improving 

educational outcomes for First Nations and Métis youth in our 

province is not only imperative from a moral perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s important from an economic perspective as 

well because the entire province will benefit when everyone is 

reaching their full potential. Economist Eric Howe has 

highlighted this, Mr. Speaker, by how closing the Aboriginal 

achievement gap, Mr. Speaker, it could mean $90 billion for 

our province. 

 

We know the Premier’s views on this issue has evolved, Mr. 

Speaker, since last March when he wouldn’t even debate the 

issue of Shannen’s dream. Now he admits, Mr. Speaker, that 

it’s time to stop passing the buck. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

when we look at the dollars, we see a Sask Party budget that 

has brought only $3 million to the table to deal with the 

recommendations from the task force. At the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re happy to spend $6 million on a computer 

program for standardized testing, but only bring $3 million to 

deal with the recommendations from the task force. 

 

My question to the Education minister: why doesn’t he bring 

dollars to the table to back up the talk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to the gap in educational outcomes for Aboriginal 

students, in the last decade, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, the 

non-Aboriginal high school completion actually increased from 

17.3 per cent to 21.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The gap in 

educational outcomes between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 

actually grew, Mr. Speaker. The answer is, Mr. Speaker, did 

they have a plan . . . The question is, did they have a plan? The 

answer is, there was no plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government’s acceptance of the joint task force, Mr. 

Speaker, is testament to our commitment to move to narrow 

that gap and make our commitment to First Nations and Métis 

students successful so that they can benefit from all the 

successes of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask that members put their 

comments, from both sides, through the Chair. I recognize the 

member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well sure thing, Mr. Speaker. Today’s 

Information Services Corporation annual report highlights 

another year of dividends for the province. This year’s dividend 

of $19.1 million brings the total dividend that ISC has provided 

to the people of Saskatchewan over the past five years to $83.3 

million. Those millions of dollars help to pay for health care, 

for seniors’ care, for education, and for highways. 

 

To the Minister Responsible for the Information Services Corp.: 

why is the Sask Party moving to privatize the profitable and 

well-run Information Services Corporation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 

before, the great work by the management and staff of ISC has 

put the corporation in a very good position, certainly a long 

ways from when it was originally founded under the NDP. But 

it’s a company that is doing very well in the province right now. 

 

A lot of their success is not only because of the management 

and staff, but also the success that we are realizing here in the 

province today. Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing property values go 

up, which helps the bottom line of ISC. We’re seeing the 

number of corporations increase, Mr. Speaker. There are a 

number of aspects that have led to the success of ISC. 

 

ISC has had a very good year this past year, Mr. Speaker. And 

with that, Mr. Speaker, we think it’s a great candidate for 

people to open it up for IPO [initial public offering], so that 

people can invest in this company, so it can carry its great 

product around the world, Mr. Speaker, across Canada and 

around the world, something that the opposition had full 

intentions of doing, Mr. Speaker, but they were trying to sell a 

dog at that time, Mr. Speaker. They weren’t very successful. 

We have an extremely successful company, Mr. Speaker, and I 

believe the IPO will be very successful as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party will be handing 

over ISC dividends to the private sector for a one-time profit, 

but the people of Saskatchewan will pay the price for this Sask 

Party privatization for years and years to come. 

 

The $83.3 million in dividends over the last five years have 

helped to provide valuable services like health care and 

education, and they have helped to keep taxes competitive. 

When the Sask Party gets firmly down the road of privatizing 

the Information Services Corporation, what happens after the 

one-time money is gone? Will they be raising taxes or cutting 

services like health care and education, or both? What’s the 

plan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we can certainly see 

how the opposition thinks. They don’t think about growth. 

They don’t think of growth of a company, Mr. Speaker, that 

will be more successful not only within this province but we 

hope around, across Canada and around the world. 

 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3231 

Mr. Speaker, this is not uncommon. I mean their brothers and 

sisters in Manitoba just simply privatized their land registry, 

Mr. Speaker, but for some reason we can’t do that here in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, if you looked at some of the quotes 

from the Manitoba Finance minister, he saw great reason as to 

turn their company, their land titles over to Teranet, a private 

company out of Ontario. 

 

That shows you, Mr. Speaker, I think, that jurisdictions around 

the world are looking for expertise in this area. We happen to 

have it here in Saskatchewan, and we’re going to allow the rest 

of the country and the world to benefit from our expertise. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister isn’t answering the 

question. ISC provides a much-valued service to the people of 

Saskatchewan. The men and women that work at ISC do a great 

job, as evidenced yet again today in this annual report. And 

instead of profits going into a small number of private pockets, 

the dividends of ISC help to keep taxes competitive and pay for 

services in health and education to the tune of $83.3 million 

since 2008. 

 

After the Sask Party government gets through spending the 

one-time money, what happens then? The Sask Party 

government didn’t tell the people of Saskatchewan about their 

privatization plans during the last election, and could they now 

at least tell people what the plan will be to deal with the impact 

of this decision when it comes to millions of fewer dollars for 

keeping taxes low or going towards valuable services like 

education and health care? 

 

Will they tell the people the plan? Will they have the decency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret. We’ve 

talked about it on the floor of this House before. The 

government will retain about 40 per cent of the shares of ISC. 

We expect that 40 per cent share to be worth more and produce 

dividends well into the future, not to mention the corporate tax 

that the other 60 per cent will be paying back into the coffers of 

the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we see this as a 

growth opportunity not only for ISC, Mr. Speaker, but for the 

company as a whole throughout the nation. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that they’re so, so upset that we 

would be moving ISC to an IPO. When they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker, and they put the Crown protection 

Act — I don’t know if they want to hear this again — but when 

they put the Crown protection Act in place, ISC was in the 

Crown protection Act. The member from Lakeview should very 

well know that, except he has amnesia on this matter, Mr. 

Speaker. He was part of the legislative instruments committee 

that oversaw taking ISC out of the Crown protection Act so that 

those members could sell it many, many years ago, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Combatting Discrimination and Bullying 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Halla 

Scott is here with us in the gallery today. She, like other 

students, are interested in forming gay-straight alliances in their 

schools. And the Premier said last week here in question period, 

and I quote, “. . . these clubs can be formed in schools today in 

the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think the Government of 

Saskatchewan would stand in the way of that happening.” But, 

Mr. Speaker, when we asked if the Sask Party government 

would simply update the government’s website to include 

information on how to form GSAs [gay-straight alliance], they 

refused. 

 

To the Minister of Education: why can’t the ministry put up 

information about GSAs on its website so that interested 

students and teachers have resources about how to form GSAs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, we take 

these matters very, very seriously. We believe that all children 

in our schools, in our school system have a right to a warm, 

caring, and safe environment to learn in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Over the course of my career, Mr. Speaker, I’ve dealt with 

many, many different kinds of issues, Mr. Speaker — 

name-calling, colour of hair, the side of the street you live on, 

the side of the town you live on, Mr. Speaker, racial slurs, 

clothes, and, Mr. Speaker, sexual orientation. Mr. Speaker, 

dealing with bullying really comes down to respecting 

differences. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan will do all 

that it can to ensure that our children learn about respecting 

differences. And we will continue to work with the Legislative 

Secretary, and I don’t want to preclude any kind of results from 

that, as our Premier has already alluded to, Mr. Speaker. And so 

we will continue to look at that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supporting GSAs is 

the right thing to do to create safe spaces in our schools. This 

morning in a radio interview, Halla talked of her struggles to 

form or start a GSA in her high school. She looked for help in 

forming one but felt that she didn’t have the support. 

 

The school board says forming a GSA is a straightforward 

process. An official from the school board said students or 

teachers are to, and I quote, “. . . approach a principal, and the 

principal relays it to me, and I basically give the application to 

our director of education.” Mr. Speaker, it sounds as if simply 

more information is needed by all parties. This is an easy 

solution and the government can play a lead role today. Mr. 

Speaker, why can’t the Sask Party government do the right 

thing and put the information about GSAs and how they are 

formed on the government’s website? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the solution to bullying is 



3232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

not simple. It’s a community, it’s a community issue, Mr. 

Speaker. There is a great deal of information that needs to be 

gathered, that needs to be discussed with many different 

community partners — our young people most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I know that our Legislative Secretary will be conducting forums 

throughout the province where she will talk directly with 

students to find out how they perceive life in their schools and 

how safe they feel. And through that whole process, Mr. 

Speaker, again which is a complicated process, we will 

hopefully come to a Saskatchewan action plan on bullying, Mr. 

Speaker, that will include GSAs and the many other differences 

that we need to learn to respect, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, students, parents, teachers, school 

administrators all know, they all know that GSAs are a positive 

option about creating safe spaces in our schools. But the Sask 

Party government is being stubborn and is out of touch with 

today’s Saskatchewan. Students need simple, 

easy-to-understand information about how GSAs can be formed 

and who they should talk to in their schools to create one today. 

 

Will the government admit they made a mistake last week? 

Will the minister direct his officials to put helpful information 

on the government’s website for students and teachers 

interested in forming gay-straight alliances today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again thank you to the 

member opposite for the question. This is a serious matter, Mr. 

Speaker. When I found out about the situation that was reported 

in the media this morning, I immediately had ministry officials 

contact the school division for confirmation. And indeed, they 

reported that it’s not the case, that they would be prepared to 

. . . In no way, shape, or form would they prohibit the formation 

of a GSA in their school, Mr. Speaker. And so we trust that and 

we will continue to work with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another part of our student achievement initiative 

that will help us to gauge the environment in our schools is the 

Tell Them for Me survey, Mr. Speaker. It’s a student perceptual 

survey that will provide endless data on student perceptions, 

community perceptions, and teaching perceptions of what goes 

on in the schools. And hopefully by gathering that data, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ll be able to protect our children, all children, Mr. 

Speaker, and respect all differences. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Repairs to School Gymnasium 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this morning CBC Radio 

reported on problems with the gymnasium at Sacred Heart 

Community School here in Regina. Last week, what are thought 

to be structural problems resulted in the scoreboard falling off 

the wall in the gym. Thankfully no one was hurt. But access to 

the gym has been restricted, and the school and the Regina 

Catholic School Board are uncertain as to what will come next 

and what will happen with the gym. Will that minister and this 

government work with the Regina Catholic School Board to fix 

the gym at Sacred Heart? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite for the question. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the safety of our students and staff in 

our schools is always number one priority when it comes to our 

students. And I’m aware of the issue with the gymnasium at 

Sacred Heart, Mr. Speaker, and we’re working closely with the 

officials there and my officials are working with them. I 

understand that engineers are currently working to assess the 

situation, Mr. Speaker, and will provide us with 

recommendations to ensure that the gym is safer for all 

students, teachers, and community members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that the 

Regina Catholic School Board had first identified concerns with 

the gym at Sacred Heart to that government five years ago. 

What has been a problem is now unacceptable. Will that 

government start seriously working with the Regina Catholic 

School Board and get the job done for the students of Sacred 

Heart Community School? Will they fix the gym at Sacred 

Heart? When will the kids and community of Sacred Heart be 

able to use the gym again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, on 

that matter we’re working with the officials, both mine and the 

Catholic school division, Mr. Speaker, to deal with that matter. 

But I need to remind the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 

we inherited a $1.2 billion infrastructure deficit, Mr. Speaker, 

remind them that over 70 per cent of our schools are more than 

40 years old, Mr. Speaker, and Sacred Heart is older than that, 

Mr. Speaker. Our government is increasing in this budget $7.2 

million for capital, raising that total to $119 million, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our first six years, total school infrastructure 

allocation has increased by 264 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party, six years, we invested $600 million, Mr. Speaker. In their 

last six years, $165 million, Mr. Speaker. I have no trouble 

justifying the investment in educational infrastructure that we 

have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, when those members took over 

government in 2007 there were $2 billion cash on hand in terms 

of a surplus, as opposed to the fact, 1991, when there was the 

whole deficit, deficit problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Over the years, I’ve had a lot of things to say about the great 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3233 

things happening at Sacred Heart, Mr. Speaker. The students 

are engaged in learning. The teachers and staff do tremendous 

work. Further evidence of this came just recently with principal 

Starla Grebinski being recognized as one of the best principals 

in Canada. This is an awesome school of which the 

neighbourhood is very proud, and the school’s gymnasium 

plays a crucial role in all of the great things happening at 

Sacred Heart, from gym class to assembly to community 

gatherings. Very simply, Mr. Speaker, when is that government 

going to work with the school board, work with the school, to 

get the gym fixed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the third 

time, the answer is that we are working with our officials. My 

officials are working with their officials to, number one, to 

determine what the problem is so that we can properly provide 

emergent funds to repair the gymnasium. We don’t want to put 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure the 

safety of our students and staff, and obviously we want our 

students and staff to be back in the gym doing the things. But 

first of all, Mr. Speaker, we need to be certain that what we’re 

fixing is going to work, Mr. Speaker. And I need again to 

remind members opposite that we’ve invested over $620 

million to try to catch up to the $1.2 billion deficit that we 

inherited, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Performance of Government 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we see from the 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, is a failure to think and 

act with a long-term view. Mr. Speaker, we see it with the issue 

of closing the Aboriginal education achievement gap. We see a 

task force, we see a report being tabled, but we don’t see 

resources being brought to the table to make sure there’s action, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see actions, Mr. Speaker, by the Sask Party government not 

allowing all Saskatchewan people to benefit from Crown 

corporations that are here in the province. We see a stubborn 

bureaucratic refusal, Mr. Speaker, to take a common sense 

approach in putting some information on a website about the 

benefits of GSAs. And, Mr. Speaker, we see a refusal to take 

the issue of a gym here in Regina seriously, so that students in 

north central Regina have the opportunity to have the exercise, 

to have the activity that they need. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: when will the short-sighted 

thinking, when will the short-sighted decisions and actions 

stop? When will they start acting on a long-term view? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, since the budget was presented on March the 20th, 

I’ve had the opportunity to travel around the province and talk 

to many individuals. I’m very glad to see that Saskatchewan is 

again setting the way, setting the way, Mr. Speaker, for growth. 

Setting in place the province that has now grown by 82,000 

people, Mr. Speaker, in the last five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year alone, last year alone, there were 15,035 

births in the province of Saskatchewan, something that the NDP 

never even knew about, Mr. Speaker, because for their years in 

office, they planned for decline, Mr. Speaker. School closures 

were common, Mr. Speaker, under their watch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we’re seeing growth. We’re seeing the 

opportunity to move forward, to shorten the wait-list, Mr. 

Speaker, for surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 

continue to move forward and we’re going to continue to build, 

Mr. Speaker, infrastructure this year over $847 million. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 315 to 317. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions no. 315 to 317 inclusive. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order 

answers to questions 318 to 356. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered answers 

for questions 318 to 356 inclusive. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 357 to 363. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 357 to 363 inclusive. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 94 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill increases the tobacco tax rate from 21 

cents per cigarette, tobacco stick, or gram of tobacco to 25 

cents. On a package of 25 cigarettes that sells for about $12, 

this amounts to a tobacco tax increase of $1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes contained within this bill are expected 



3234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

to yield approximately $45.2 million in additional revenue in 

2013-14. This is revenue that will continue to help pay for our 

vital public services required by Saskatchewan’s growing 

population, including health care. 

 

When it comes to comparing ourselves with our neighbouring 

provinces, Mr. Speaker, my notes did say that Saskatchewan is 

at the same price per cigarette as Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

just received the information about the Manitoba budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and a line in their budget now says this: the tobacco 

tax will go up by 4 cents a cigarette to 29 cents effective 

midnight tonight. So, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba will be much 

further ahead. And we have just learned also, Mr. Speaker, that 

British Columbia is also raising their tobacco taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, public education and awareness, bans on smoking 

in public places, and tobacco taxation are all key factors to 

reducing smoking rates. Over time those lower rates lead to 

improved health and fewer smoking-related deaths which, 

according to health groups, is the number one preventable cause 

of sickness and death in our province. 

 

Right now the percentage of Saskatchewan residents who 

smoke is the lowest it’s ever been. We are strengthening 

provincial efforts to create environments where it is easier for 

children, youth, and their families to live healthy, active lives. 

Preventing young people from starting to smoke and reducing 

exposure to environmental tobacco smoke is a major part of this 

work. 

 

Health care groups have already praised this tax increase, the 

first in three years, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately our province’s 

smoking rates remain stubbornly high, among the top in 

Canada. This is a statistic we desperately want to change. 

Studies indicate that higher costs for tobacco products will help. 

Mr. Speaker, careful thought went into this budget as we 

balance the needs of a growing population with decreasing 

resource revenues and many competing expenses. We believe 

an increase to discretionary costs is a responsible way to 

generate more revenue. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 

The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 94, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased and honoured to be able to stand today to respond 

to this bill. I think what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that 

obviously I think from our perspective as the official 

opposition, that trying to find ways in which we would 

encourage people to not take up smoking and certainly 

discourage those that are currently smoking, it’s obviously a 

very good effort on behalf of all of our parts as MLAs when we 

address this issue on behalf of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that what they refer to as sin 

taxes — whether it’s liquor tax or whether it’s cigarette tax — 

obviously sin taxes are a good way, a deterrent, if you will, for 

people to stop buying the products, Mr. Speaker. But the 

question that we have in the opposition is really how much of a 

deterrent does increasing taxes for cigarettes and for alcohol 

and so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker, how much of a factor does 

it make when we make an effort to discourage people from 

doing things like smoking, Mr. Speaker? So I think it’s really 

important that we assess that particular aspect of this particular 

tax. 

 

I think one of the things that I would certainly concur with in a 

sense that folks that want to see less smoke in our community, 

there is a lot of groups and organizations that have advocated 

for this over the years. They certainly see this as one avenue in 

which they would discourage smoking. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m very lucky, and I think my three 

children are also very lucky. We haven’t taken up the notion of 

smoking. And I think really, quite frankly, it was really some of 

the efforts in the old days of trying to discourage young people 

from picking up that cigarette and beginning a long life of 

smoking because it is really a very, very nasty problem for 

young people to get into. And cigarette smoking, Mr. Speaker, 

does contribute to a lot of problems with your health at later 

stages of your life. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can say from our perspective as the official 

opposition, when we began to work when we were in 

government to discourage smoking — things like putting a 

curtain over cigarettes that were in stores so young kids 

wouldn’t see that; discouraging advertising; I think some of the 

notions of discouraging smoking in restaurants, Mr. Speaker, 

and smoking in bars — at the time, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot 

of fights. And I can remember my colleague from, the former 

minister of Health, we had discussions in cabinet about the 

whole notion of smoking and the dangers of smoking, Mr. 

Speaker. And we had a lot of lobby groups coming our way to 

encourage us as government to take the proactive steps. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s really important on this 

particular file, on Bill 94, is to not only have the government 

tax the cigarette smokers, Mr. Speaker, because it is a huge 

problem, but to continue the effort and the work on the other 

fronts, of education, of reaching out to the young people, of 

making sure that smoking, cigarette smoking is something that 

we would discourage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s really important that we tell the groups out there 

that are paying attention to Bill 94, which really in fact 

increases taxes on a package of cigarettes by $1 as proposed by 

the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, and we are saying, what other 

initiatives, what other proactive measures are you taking to 

complement the intent behind Bill 94? 

 

If this is all simply a tax grab from the cigarette smokers, Mr. 

Speaker, it defeats the purpose of what a lot of the advocates 

say when it comes to trying to encourage people from not 

smoking. So my point is, Mr. Speaker, is we would encourage 

those groups out there that have an opinion, that have some 

advice and certainly have the solutions within their own 

organizations, to come forward and tell the government that 

you need to be a bit more proactive on some of these other 

fronts, not just view this particular sin tax as a tax grab to try 

and balance your books. 

 

What’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that we see the effects 

of the long-term smoking. It is very dangerous. It is very costly 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3235 

to the health system, and it costs a lot of lives, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve known all the stats. We see all the evidence. And time 

and time again, different groups bring these issues forward and 

they explain to us exactly what the problem is. So it’s not as if 

the government don’t know, Mr. Speaker. It’s not as if the 

people themselves that partake in the cigarette habit don’t 

know. There is advice out there. There is information. There are 

awareness campaigns. There is heightened information out 

there through the Internet. There’s thousands and thousands of 

reminders every day for people not to smoke. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So I would hope, Mr. Speaker, on this particular bill, Bill 94, 

that there are many other complementary efforts undertaken by 

the Sask Party government to discourage smoking in our 

province because it is really, really important that government 

show that particular effort, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I want to say in some of my closing comments, Mr. 

Speaker, 21 cents per cigarette is what the tax rate is now. The 

government is increasing that to 25 cents per cigarette. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, that obviously increases the total overall package 

of cigarettes by roughly $1. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we also ask the question 

is, based on the current taxes that you’re collecting, this 

increase and the other increases, exactly how much of a tax do 

you collect from smoking and exactly how much of that 

particular tax is going towards the education programs? That’s 

something that we ought to know as an opposition and certainly 

something that we will strive to undertake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, the whole notion of our preliminary discussion and 

some of the points that we want to make today is the fact that if 

Bill 94 is intended to increase taxes on cigarettes, (a) what are 

the other complementary efforts that are being taken by the 

Sask Party to reduce smoking prevalence in our province, Mr. 

Speaker? And which part of this tax grab that they’re 

undertaking today is going to be used to achieve the results that 

we all want, and that means less smoking in Saskatchewan? A 

dramatic, drastic cut is needed, Mr. Speaker. We support that 

notion and we encourage people to find out more information. 

And we encourage those people that are advocating for that to 

join the opposition, give us more information, because this is 

too important to be partisan and we must undertake all the 

efforts whenever necessary and wherever necessary. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have some questions on this 

particular bill, and we’ll go through the process and we’ll try 

and get that information from the Sask Party government. But 

rest assured. Any tax grab from the sin city, or the sin taxes, as 

is the case of the cigarettes, we want to see what kind of 

corresponding programs that they have to educate the public 

and discourage smoking. So on that notion, I make a motion 

that we adjourn debate on Bill 94. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 94, The Tobacco Act Amendment Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 95 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of the office of public registry statutes 

Act. Mr. Speaker, these bills are companion pieces to Bill 69 

which sets out the process for the sale of shares in ISC to the 

public. These bills address the ongoing governance of these 

registries by the government and their day-to-day operation and 

management by ISC on behalf of the government. An English 

bill and a separate related bilingual bill are required. The bill 

will provide legal authority for the government to enter into 

service agreements with a private sector ISC for the delivery of 

public registry services. It will confirm the continued 

government ownership of the information and records in a 

public registry. It will create a new office of public registry 

administration within the Ministry of Justice for the various 

public registry officers and provide a series of consequential 

amendments to a variety of Acts to reflect a new operating 

arrangement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these bills authorize the execution between 

government and ISC of detailed service agreements addressing 

the powers, duties, responsibilities, and remedies relating to the 

operation and management of the public registries by a private 

sector ISC. Where a service agreement has been entered into 

with respect to a public registry statute such as The Land Titles 

Act, it will authorize ISC to operate and manage the public 

registry on behalf of the government subject to the detailed 

terms of that agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these service agreements, which will be tabled in 

the Assembly, will address a full range of duties and 

responsibilities for ISC as the contractor and will include such 

matters as the expected outcomes to be achieved by the 

contractor in its management and operation of the public 

registry statute; the performance objectives of the contractor; 

the acceptance by the contractor of its responsibilities to 

exercise the powers and fulfill the duties and functions under 

the public registry statute and the service agreement and the 

relationship between the contractor and the Government of 

Saskatchewan under the public registry statute and the service 

agreement; the establishment of fees to be charged for services 

and functions required to be provided pursuant to the public 

registry statute and the procedure for reviewing those fees; and 

the remedies for non-compliance with the terms of the service 

agreement, including the obligations of the parties and penalties 

for non-compliance; and finally the settlement of disputes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important for members of the public to know 

that this bill will ensure that the legal position of members of 

the public using these registries will not change as a result of 

the new operating arrangement. It will be business as usual for 

users of these registries. 

 

One significant change from the existing process is that the 

position of the registrar of titles, director of corporations, 

registrar of personal property registry, and the controller of 

surveys will now be established within the Ministry of Justice. 



3236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

This change is being made to ensure their independence as 

statutory officers and so that the conduct of their quasi-judicial 

functions will remain within government. Their decisions will 

continue to be subject to all applicable judicial oversight and/or 

appeals. There will be no change in the statutory process in this 

regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to confirm that the existing 

government assurance of land titles will remain with the 

government and will not be transferred to ISC. All actions taken 

by ISC as a contractor under a service agreement are taken on 

behalf of the Crown, and the Crown remains responsible for the 

public registries in that regard. The government will have a 

right of indemnification for liability caused by ISC in the 

operation of a registry. 

 

On an ongoing basis, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Justice will 

retain responsibility for government policy development, 

supervision, and review of registry functions that will be 

provided by ISC. Mr. Speaker, as previously announced, this 

bill confirms that the vital statistics registry will not be subject 

to the service agreement provisions. The registry will be 

transferred from ISC to eHealth Saskatchewan so that it 

remains within the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill also makes a series of related 

amendments to various public registry statutes currently 

administered by ISC to reflect the transition of ISC to a private 

sector company and to consolidate the administration of these 

Acts under the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, I’m confident 

that this legislation provides a strong framework to facilitate the 

operation of these public registries by ISC under the terms of 

the service agreements while ensuring that the ongoing 

governance of these public registries is maintained and most 

importantly the interests of the public remain fully protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of the office 

of public registry statutes Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 95, The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

am going to offer initial comments on this particular bill. And 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, the bill itself is really talking about 

preparing ISC for the eventual sale. 

 

The Information Services Corporation, as we heard in question 

period today, Mr. Speaker, they have made millions of dollars 

over the years. And this is really a sad day, Mr. Speaker, when 

you see how the notion of Bill 95, which we’re speaking about 

now, of how it is a complementary bill to the original parent 

bill, Bill 69, which is really talking about the sale of the 

Information Services Corporation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I noticed in question period today, my 

colleague mentioned a lot about the value of the Information 

Services Corporation. And what’s happening with this 

particular bill is they’re trying to separate the corporation itself, 

to take away people’s personal information and to put it under 

eHealth and thereby preparing Information Services 

Corporation for public sale. Now, Mr. Speaker, make no bones 

about it, this is the first step in a privatization agenda, from our 

perspective, and this particular bill is attached to the overall, 

what I would call the overall mother bill, Bill 69, which is 

clearly the sale of ISC. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we sit in opposition here. And I noticed 

today that the minister that was talking about ISC actually 

mentioned the fact that he was talking about this on the floor 

for a number of months. Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things 

that we noted as a result of his comments during question 

period was the fact that he never mentioned this before the last 

election. The people of Saskatchewan are going to be very, very 

angry I think overall when they see that the Saskatchewan Party 

government, through bills of this sort, you know, where they’re 

preparing Information Services Corporation for public sale, Mr. 

Speaker. If they begin to see that trend — and this is obviously 

something that the opposition has been talking about for quite 

some time — then I think the people of Saskatchewan will get 

very angry, and they’ll start realizing that there is a hidden plan 

by the Sask Party to come back and finish off Saskatchewan. 

 

And one of the best ways to do that, Mr. Speaker, is start 

robbing the people of Saskatchewan from owning their own 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. It is a huge, huge issue, and 

the opposition is going to make every effort, Mr. Speaker, to 

expose the Saskatchewan Party government for their 

privatization scheme that’s identified through this particular 

bill, Bill 95, which is attached to Bill 69, which specifically 

talks about the sale of Information Services Corporation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That corporation makes us millions of dollars, and, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s great value. Now I look back and I’m 

wondering, why are the Tories selling off our Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker?  

 

And you know, I look at the historical perspective. Certainly 

when they formed government in 2007, six or seven months 

later they’re putting out billboard ads saying that they have 

reduced debt by 40 per cent. Now, Mr. Speaker, the question I 

have — and the Minister of Finance is here — how do you 

reduce debt in six months of your term by 40 per cent if there’s 

no money left in there, Mr. Speaker? There’s obviously a lot of 

money left in there from the previous NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s how they gloriously proclaim after six or 

seven months in power they paid off 40 per cent of our debt, 

Mr. Speaker. They took out big billboards, took out big 

billboards saying, we paid down 40 per cent. 

 

And surprise, six years later, Mr. Speaker, six years later we’re 

at the same debt level that we were in 2007, Mr. Speaker. In a 

full six years they got us right back to the level of debt that we 

were in when they took office, Mr. Speaker. So now the Tories 

are in a quandary. Now they’re in a quandary, Mr. Speaker. 

Now how do we keep, how do we keep things going here? 

 

Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, the next two things we’ve got to 

do is we’ve got to sell off the Crowns, which this bill is talking 

about, Mr. Speaker. And then you’ve got to . . . What’s the 

other trick they have up their sleeve? They’ve got things called 

P3s [public-private partnership] where they’re going to punt the 

debt down the road, Mr. Speaker, where our grandchildren will 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3237 

be paying for that. 

 

That is a typical Tory government, Mr. Speaker, where they 

come along and they claim credit for something they had 

absolutely nothing to do with, Mr. Speaker, and then they make 

all these fancy billboards that try to hoodwink the people of 

Saskatchewan by these fancy ads saying we paid 40 per cent 

down of the debt when all that money was left in the account, 

Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were tossed out of government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now the problem is they’re back to the original debt that 

they were six years ago. And now they’ve got to figure out a 

new way. They’ve got to figure out a new way to hoodwink the 

people, Mr. Speaker, and the best way is start selling off the 

Crowns as identified in Bill 95. That’s what they’re going to do 

here — start selling off the Crowns. And then we’ll use the 

magical formula of P3s where we’ll punt the debt down the 

road. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people paying very close 

attention to this particular bill, a lot of people paying very close 

attention to this particular bill. And I want to recap to the 

people out there that are listening, Mr. Speaker. And the people 

that are listening, I want to tell them this very clearly. When the 

Sask Party took over office in 2007, they had hundreds of 

millions — by our account, $2.3 billion in the bank, Mr. 

Speaker, $2.3 billion in the bank. 

 

They come along, they ran a bunch of expensive ads, a bunch 

of billboard ads saying, we paid 40 per cent down on the debt, 

six or seven months after they formed government, Mr. 

Speaker. Where in the world could a government six or seven 

months into their term pay down 40 per cent of their debt, Mr. 

Speaker? Because the money was there. The money was there. 

And they put on this facade that they’re doing all these 

wonderful things, and then years later, because of their 

mismanagement, now we’re back to the same levels. 

 

So now the Tories are sitting there thinking, what do we do 

now? Well how about we start selling off the Crowns? How 

about if we start selling off the Crowns, and we buy people with 

the money that we make off the Crowns. And then we’ll invent 

a process called P3s, so we’ll punt that debt further down the 

road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s what the Tories are up to now, Mr. Speaker. They are 

now in a situation where Bill 95 is preparing Information 

Services Corporation for a public sale, for a public sale, Mr. 

Speaker. And we challenge and I challenge the entire Sask 

Party caucus across the way to come clean with the people of 

Saskatchewan. Tell them exactly why you’re selling the Crown 

corporations. What corporation is next on the chopping block or 

the sale block, Mr. Speaker? People have a right to know. 

 

And Bill 95 is doing exactly that, Mr. Speaker. It is preparing 

Information Services Corporation for sale, and that’s the bottom 

line. That’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, at what this particular 

bill is doing. It is a complementary bill to simply prepare the 

sale of Information Services Corporation. 

 

And no matter how much assurance they give us that all 

people’s private information is going to be protected under 

eHealth, Mr. Speaker, I tell the people of Saskatchewan this. 

Information Services Corporation has made us millions of 

dollars over the last seven or eight years that it built itself up. 

That money, I think it’s $80 million if I’m correct, $80 million 

goes to pay for highways, goes to pay for education, goes to 

pay for health. That’s how Saskatchewan has been able to 

thrive and how Saskatchewan has been able to build itself up 

over the years, as the Crown corporations are a vital part of how 

we govern our province, Mr. Speaker. It is an integral part of 

what Saskatchewan’s all about. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And now we sit here and we see the Sask Party government, in 

their sly way and certainly in their way of stealth, Mr. Speaker, 

coming along and proposing bills and certainly complementary 

bills that prepare the Crown corporations for sale, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now the Tories are in a quandary now. The conservatives 

over there are in a quandary because how do we get this whole 

notion that we’re exciting, and how do we spend more money? 

Well obviously you blew your wad that you inherited. You 

blew it all because six years later, we’re back in debt the same 

level we were in 2007. And it’s right in your books. It’s right in 

their own books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now they’ve got to figure out a way they can get more 

money to continue hoodwinking the people of Saskatchewan, 

and the best way to do it is sell off the Crowns. The second best 

way to do it is create P3s and punt that debt down the road. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the conservative way of dealing with 

people of Saskatchewan, and that’s why for years, Mr. Speaker, 

for years they languished in opposition. 

 

And my prediction is, this particular bill and that particular 

effort to sell off Information Services Corporation and the 

Premier’s musing about the other Crown corporations, the 

people of Saskatchewan are going to start paying attention. And 

this is not what they campaigned on. The Sask Party, like a cute 

little kitten, didn’t say nothing in a corner about the Crowns 

during the election campaign, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t say a 

word. 

 

And for the minister to come along and start saying, oh we 

talked about it on the floor of the Assembly . . . That’s why you 

guys think it’s a secret. We’ve been talking about it on the floor 

of the Assembly. You were talking about it on the floor of the 

Assembly after the election — after the election. 

 

So now the Information Services Corporation is being prepared 

for sale under Bill 95. And that’s the first step, Mr. Speaker. 

That is the first step of the formula for failure that the Sask 

Party government is prescribing to the future growth and 

stability and opportunity that the people of Saskatchewan 

expect from their government, and the province of 

Saskatchewan certainly deserves better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So Bill 95, as the minister alluded to, is a complementary bill to 

quite frankly separate the private information from Information 

Services Corporation to eHealth so that there’s all the rules and 

regulations to put that process into place. That’s what this bill 

is. But clearly as he indicated, that this is a complementary 

effort as a bill to support Bill 69, which talks about the sale of 



3238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the other point I’ll raise, Mr. Speaker . . . This is not just 

one example. I’ll give you another example about the private 

liquor stores that they certainly are beginning to implement, Mr. 

Speaker. It is my prediction and it’s certainly my bold 

prediction that the Sask Party government will do anything to 

position those private-run stores, the liquor stores, to be very 

successful. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because they want those private 

stores to be so successful that the next time they want to sell off 

a public-owned liquor store which generates a lot of profits for 

the people, then they can argue, well look, it makes more 

money privately than it does publicly. That’s what they want to 

argue. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the fault and the faulty thinking from the 

Tories on this one is they’re giving the private liquor stores an 

additional 16 or 17 per cent marketing edge. They’re giving 

them a 16 or 17 per cent break on some of their costs. So the 

other people — and I’m thinking about some of the other folks 

that may run taverns or people that may run lounges or off-sales 

— well they don’t have that advantage of these three new liquor 

stores. The government is positioning those privately owned 

liquor stores to be wildly successful to qualify their effort to sell 

off all the other liquor stores which generate millions of dollars 

for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the problem they have is they’re being exposed by some of 

the other businesses out there that say, well why are these guys, 

these new guys, setting up these three new stores, have a 16 to 

17 per cent advantage over the private sector? Once again 

they’re meddling in the economy. 

 

And the sad part about this all, Mr. Speaker, the sad part about 

this all is people expect and think that the conservatives know 

how to build a vibrant economy, Mr. Speaker. Not true. They 

have failed on every front. And the sale of ISC, as 

complemented by Bill 95 today, proves to me and proves to a 

lot of people that their agenda from day one was to sell off the 

Crowns, to sell off the Crowns, and that’s what this bill does, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what this bill does. 

 

So at the end of the day, you punt down debt down the road for 

P3s. You come along, and you sell any asset that you have that 

generates revenue such as ISC. And then you put the province 

into debt, Mr. Speaker. What does that spell? That spells a lot 

of trouble for our grandchildren and great-grandchildren down 

the road. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a crying shame. That’s why 

the people of Saskatchewan do not tolerate things of selling off 

the Crowns when you clearly said before the elections that they 

wouldn’t do it. And now, Mr. Speaker, you’re seeing a number 

of steps as identified in Bill 95 to accomplish the sale of 

Information Services Corporation. 

 

And where does that money go once they sell it, Mr. Speaker? 

Where does that money go? It goes down to doing some more, 

some more of their debt management planning, Mr. Speaker. 

And once again they may have a billboard that shows that we’re 

going to do this great work, and then three years later, they’re 

back to where they started. Again there’s a lot of confusion that 

the Sask Party is showing in terms of trying to manage the 

economy, of trying to manage the finances. People in 

Saskatchewan just don’t buy it. And the opposition don’t buy it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So let’s be very clear. This bill and the next bill that’s going to 

be introduced by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, clearly positions 

ISC, Information Services Corporation, that’s made $80 million 

over the last five years in profit for the people of Saskatchewan, 

for health care, for highways, for a wide variety of needs, 

education, Mr. Speaker, all those needs — $80 million. And 

guess what, Mr. Speaker? That money’s now going to the 

private sector. 

 

And what price, what price is going to be accepted by the Sask 

Party, Mr. Speaker? Is it going to be a very promising price? 

The people of Saskatchewan don’t even know that discussion is 

happening because they’ve never ever had that experience 

before. And now they’re having the experience because the 

Sask Party is hell bent on privatizing our Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker. I want to be very, very clear . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to ask the member to be very 

careful about his use of language. He used some 

unparliamentary language there and needs to apologize and 

retract it. I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

apologize and I withdraw that comment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the thing that really, really is important to 

the people of Saskatchewan is Bill 95 and the next 

complementary bill are positioning Information Services 

Corporation to be sold. That’s what this bill is and the next bill. 

It is going to be sold, Mr. Speaker. And the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to find out about it, and they’re going 

to know about it, Mr. Speaker. We are going to make sure, as 

the opposition, they know this is their first step towards 

privatization. And they’re using the guise of trying to build a 

brighter future for the province when, Mr. Speaker, they’ve had 

that experience and they failed miserably. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot more things that I 

want to say and members of my caucus want to say and the 

public want to say and New Democrats want to say and the 

forward-thinking people want to say on the future of our 

Crowns. And they simply don’t trust the Sask Party in handling 

the future of our Crown corporation. 

 

And this evidence, this evidence today under Bill 95 clearly 

shows that they do have an agenda. And the whole notion of 

trying to organize a sale of our Crowns by stealth, now it’s fully 

blown. It’s fully open. This is what they intend to do, Mr. 

Speaker. And the NDP are calling them on it, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re telling the people of Saskatchewan, they betrayed your 

trust on the future of the Crown corporations, and Bill 95 is 

another nail in the coffin of our Crown corporations. And I 

hope the people of Saskatchewan wake up and toss the Sask 

Party government out of office for their betrayal on the future 

of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a lot more we want to say on this, Mr. Speaker. We 

have a lot more people who are going to get engaged, and this 

is the first stage of what I think is going to be a huge fight 

coming up to the next election when the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to be asked the question, who do you 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3239 

trust with the future of the Crown corporations? The Sask Party 

government who are on their way of selling all the Crown 

corporations? Or the New Democratic Party that’s going to 

protect the Crown corporations and not punt debt down to the 

future generations as the Sask Party is doing under their P3 

scheme? So on that notion, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill 95. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 95, The Operation of Public Registry 

Statutes Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hereby rise 

today to move second reading of the office of the public 

registry statutes consequential amendments Act, 2013. 

 

This Act makes amendments to certain bilingual Acts related to 

The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act. The changes to 

The Co-operatives Act, 1996, The Non-profit Corporations Act, 

1995 are made to make uniform the appointment, fee, and 

transition provisions between several Acts formerly 

administered by ISC as a Crown corporation. The amendments 

to The Vital Statistics Act, 2009 reflect that this registry will not 

be operated by ISC under a service agreement, and that instead 

it will be transferred from ISC to eHealth Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of the office 

of public registry statutes consequential amendments Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 96, The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

once again pleased to stand up and offer initial comments about 

this particular bill. And as I mentioned at the outset when we 

spoke about the privatization of the Information Services 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, this bill certainly complements the 

parent bill or the major bill, Bill 69, which talks about the sale 

of Information Services Corporation. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that from our perspective, 

when we began the process of privatizing liquor stores, we 

began the process of looking for a sale of Information Services 

Corporation. When we began the process of privatizing some of 

SaskTel’s services, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

really thought that the Sask Party wouldn’t do any of these 

things. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s proof in the pudding. There’s 

very clear evidence today that the sale of investment . . . or 

Information Services Corporation is well under way, and this 

particular bill, Bill 96, is once again a complementary bill to 

achieve that particular plan. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to find this out very, very quickly, and 

they’re going to have a huge sense that they had been betrayed 

by the Sask Party when it comes to the future of the Crowns. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what’s really more important is that the 

conscience of the sale of ISC as identified in this particular bill, 

this bill that we’re talking about right now, the sale of 

Information Services Corporation and the whole process to sell 

off all our Crowns is going to be on the conscience of the 

people that are advocating, and that is the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. Why would they sell something of 

significant value to the people of Saskatchewan? Bill 96 clearly 

once again positions the Government of Saskatchewan to be 

able to hive off information of the private nature from 

Investment Saskatchewan to prepare Investment Saskatchewan 

. . . or sorry, Information Services Corporation for sale, Mr. 

Speaker. That is the end objective of this particular bill. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan would simply say that the 

Sask Party ought to be ashamed of themselves for (a) allowing 

this process to go under . . . to go along as long as it has; and 

secondly is to not be clear with the public during the campaign, 

the election campaigns. They didn’t mention once that they 

ever had a plan to privatize Information Services Corporation. 

And lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, here we are in the middle of 

their second term, and now they begin the process of selling off 

the Crowns. Why? Because it gives them a little bit of 

separation between the next election and the past election and, 

Mr. Speaker, they figure maybe we can fool the people of 

Saskatchewan one more time on this front. And the opposition, 

we’re going to let people know that the process has begun. 

 

And the last time they tried to sell off the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, 

despite the fact that they had a lot of support throughout 

Saskatchewan, was 2003 when the people of Saskatchewan had 

a referendum on the future of the Crown corporations, and that 

referendum was called an election. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan clearly stated that they don’t want their 

Crowns messed with. They don’t want any meddling in their 

Crown corporations. And above all else, they don’t want the 

Crown corporations sold because the Crown corporations are 

owned by the people of Saskatchewan. They generate 

dividends. They create high-value jobs, Mr. Speaker. And these 

are some of the values of the Crown corporations of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And yet, Mr. Speaker, the Tories 

across the way simply want to sell . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I was listening carefully to the member in his 

comments, and he seemed to be indicating a political party 

opposite which is not the name of the political party opposite 

that he referred to. So I would caution the member to use the 

proper political names rather than his preferred ones. I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the 



3240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

whole notion of the privatization of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, 

people in Saskatchewan know this is going to happen. And I 

indicated at my earlier comments, if you look at how the Sask 

Party has been managing the economy, Mr. Speaker, the 

economy has been moving along very well. The economy has 

. . . [inaudible] . . . because, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is an 

exciting place to be, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I can remember the member from Kindersley was talking 

about the projections of potash and how at one time he was 

almost $2 billion off, you know, Mr. Speaker. So the point is, 

the point that we’re trying to make is that if he’s $2 billion off 

the mark on potash revenues, Mr. Speaker, then my question, I 

would point out to the people of Saskatchewan, how could we 

actually trust them to manage the economy and manage the 

finances of our province when the minister of economic 

development is only — what? — $2 billion off the mark. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s only 2 billion that he’s off the mark, and 

yet today they expect us to have confidence in a right wing 

government that is really quite frankly trying to hoodwink 

people when it comes to the management of their Crowns and 

the future growth of our province and, Mr. Speaker, managing 

the finances of our province for years to come. 

 

The sale of Information Services Corporation is wrong. You 

shouldn’t be selling any Crown corporation. The people of 

Saskatchewan didn’t give you the mandate to sell our Crown 

corporations, so you shouldn’t be doing that. The people of 

Saskatchewan said, no. The people of Saskatchewan have said, 

no, we want to keep our Crown corporations and public 

ownership because people from La Loche, people from 

Kindersley, people from Creighton, we all have ownership of 

SaskPower. We all have ownership of SaskTel. We all have 

ownership of SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], and 

we all have ownership of Information Services Corporation. 

And each of these Crowns, each of these Crowns generate 

revenues. Each of these Crowns create high paying, really 

high-skilled jobs. They attract people here to make 

Saskatchewan stronger, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Tories, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly are trying to come 

along, and they’re trying to confuse the issue and say, look, we 

need to sell our Crowns because we’re having some financial 

difficulties. And they’re trying to guise the sale of Information 

Services Corporation as necessary for the future success of our 

province. And that is not true, Mr. Speaker, not in the least bit. 

 

So I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan this. I want to recap 

because I’m given the opportunity through Bill 96, Mr. 

Speaker. I want to recap. So when the Saskatchewan Party 

government took over office in 2007, they had $2.3 billion in 

the bank left to them by the former NDP government. Not only 

did they have $2.3 billion in the bank, Mr. Speaker; they had a 

booming economy, Mr. Speaker. And not only did they have a 

booming economy; they had a rapidly growing population. So 

everything that was going so great for the province, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party, the Sask Party inherited that. 

 

So now after six months of being in office, they took out these 

big billboards saying, oh we paid down debt by 40 per cent. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you know why they paid down the debt 40 

per cent? Because they had the money in the bank left to them 

by the NDP.  

 

So now, six years later, they’re back to debt, where we were 

when they took over office. Once again they’re back to the 

debt, to the debt where they were since they took over office. 

So now what do they do? What do the right wingers do? Well 

let’s start selling off assets. They sold off social housing, Mr. 

Speaker. They sold off the social housing units, kicked out the 

low-income people out of their homes in the city and said, 

we’re selling off these assets. Good luck to you; we hope you 

make it. Mr. Speaker, wrong to do that, wrong to do that. 

 

The second thing they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, now is they 

looked at how they’re going to sell off and privatize SaskTel, 

and how they’re going to turn around and they’re going to sell 

off other . . . the liquor stores as an example, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re selling off the liquor stores. And not only are they 

selling off the liquor stores; they’re giving these new, private 

liquor stores a 17 per cent advantage over the existing private 

sector liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. How does that work? The 

reason why they’re going to do that, they’re going to do that, 

Mr. Speaker, because they want to prove, even if they have to 

artificially prove it, that a private liquor store can make good 

money. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that private liquor store can make good 

money (a) if it’s for themselves, and (b) if they’re given a 17 

per cent advantage over other competitors, Mr. Speaker, that 

are in the same business as them. So how is that the right thing 

to do, Mr. Speaker? How is that the right thing to do? It is not 

the right thing to do. 

 

And once again Information Services Corporation, this 

particular bill, Bill 96, it is preparing Information Services 

Corporation for sale, Mr. Speaker. And every single member of 

the Sask Party ought to be ashamed of themselves for allowing 

this process to proceed to the point it is today because they 

never asked for the mandate. They didn’t tell the people of 

Saskatchewan before the last election they were going to do 

this, Mr. Speaker. And they’re still insisting on trying to do this 

by stealth. 

 

And this is one more example, Mr. Speaker, of bit by bit, bit by 

bit, they are debasing, they are weakening, and they’re selling 

off bits and parts of our Crown corporations in the hope that 

nobody notices. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party ought to be 

put on notice today that the people of Saskatchewan are going 

to start paying notice to what you’re doing, and the opposition 

is going to make sure that people of Saskatchewan know 

exactly what’s your plans. 

 

Once again, selling off ISC is wrong. You shouldn’t do it. You 

never got the mandate to do it. You’re doing this at the 

detriment of the future of Saskatchewan. And they ought to be 

ashamed of themselves, Mr. Speaker. They ought to be totally 

ashamed of themselves because this is not what the people of 

Saskatchewan asked for. They didn’t ask for that . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Now some guy’s chirping over there. I don’t 

know what that individual, where he’s from, Mr. Speaker, 

because I never hear him at all in the Assembly. 

 

But I’ll say this. I’ll say this. The people of Saskatchewan better 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3241 

go to every single, every single Sask Party MLA and tell them, 

why are you selling off our liquor stores? Why are you selling 

off bits and parts of SaskTel? Why are you selling off 

Information Services Corporation? You never got the mandate 

to do that, and they ought to be ashamed of themselves. 

 

And every single forward-thinking person, put it in their mind 

that the Saskatchewan Party government has betrayed your trust 

on the Crown corporations. And Bill 96 simply asserts that 

they’re going to do this, Mr. Speaker. It’s as plain as this 

document, Mr. Speaker. They are on the road, and they’re on 

their way to sell off Information Services Corporation. And 

we’re going to tell absolutely everybody throughout 

Saskatchewan that this is their plan. And we’re going to let the 

people know, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to let the people know 

exactly what the Sask Party is up to, and that is selling off 

Crown corporations that generate jobs and profit for our 

children and grandchildren because, Mr. Speaker, they have 

ruined our financial position. They have put us so deep in debt, 

they have no other option today to start selling off assets like 

our Crown corporations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say about this 

particular bill. All our caucus does. We’re encouraging 

organizations out there to get active. We’re asking the voting 

public to pay attention to what the Sask Party is doing to their 

Crowns as evidenced in Bill 96, Mr. Speaker, and to show very, 

very close attention to the language they use on the future of 

our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s really 

important, is that people of Saskatchewan don’t know the Sask 

Party has a hidden agenda to sell off the Crowns. They have the 

hidden agenda. And once more 96, Bill 96 is evidence of that 

plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they can laugh and giggle from their seats, Mr. Speaker. 

They think it’s funny. They think it’s funny that we’re debasing 

a great Crown corporation, and they think it’s funny that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melville has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, four constituents of Melville-Saltcoats, but more 

importantly they’re also a reeve and councillors from the RM 

[rural municipality] of Churchbridge. 

 

Maybe they can give me a wave when, give us a wave when I 

mention their names. Neil Mehrer is the reeve of Churchbridge. 

David Zerr is councillor. Kenny Waldherr is councillor. And 

George Haas, I think many are familiar with, is also a 

councillor from the RM of Churchbridge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might also add that on Friday night, I had the 

good fortune of going to a ratepayers’ banquet in the RM of 

Churchbridge. And of course it’s just over the hundredth-year 

anniversary of the RM of Churchbridge, so it was partly the 

celebrations to do with that, but also the acknowledgement of 

the good work the council does out there. So I would ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming them to their 

legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to welcome on behalf of the opposition, the members that 

are joining us today, the folks from the RM of Churchbridge. 

And there’s no question, Mr. Speaker, it’s always important to 

have people join us in their Assembly so they’re able to witness 

some of the discussions and some of the issues that are raised in 

this Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll go back to my point on Bill 96. I think it’s 

important that the people of Saskatchewan again pay very close 

attention. Now some of the folks that are chirping from their 

chairs, you know, and they kind of giggle and laughing over 

there when we talk about some of the job losses that might 

occur if the ISC is turned over to the private sector. And what’s 

more important, Mr. Speaker, what’s more important is where 

does the profits of the operations of investments services 

corporation go? It doesn’t go back to the taxpayers or programs 

in Saskatchewan. It goes to the owners, the private people who 

are friends with the Sask Party. They’re the ones who are going 

to get the profits from Information Services Corporation. 

 

And what’s really important too, Mr. Speaker, is that the prices 

that the new corporation under private ownership will begin to 

charge our people. And Information Services Corporation, Mr. 

Speaker, have a variety of services. They have a great lineup of 

services. That’s why they are so profitable. Well guess what? If 

there is a private firm that owns Information Services 

Corporation, there’s not a thing that any Sask Party MLA can 

do to stop them if they decide to increase the rates for the 

services they provide to the people of Saskatchewan. And those 

rates will increase. 

 

If they are going to invest in Information Services Corporation 

they are not going to say, well after we buy it off you Sask 

Party guys, can you guys decide our prices for us? That’s not 

how it works. 

 

The private sector will decide how they are going to charge 

their customers. They alone decide that, not the government. 

And that is, Mr. Speaker, a really important point. The future 

increases in services, there’s not a thing that the Sask Party 



3242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

government can do about it because once it’s in private hands, 

Mr. Speaker, the private sector will decide how they’re going to 

get their money back that they invested in the Information 

Services Corporation. And they will not let the politicians 

across the way decide what rate they charge anybody from any 

RM or any village or any city. They will decide what rate they 

want to charge because they want to recoup their investment as 

quickly as they can. And that profit, Mr. Speaker, will not be 

used for the future growth of our province. 

 

We don’t know who is going to buy Information Services 

Corporation but, rest assured, once again the Sask Party 

government more than likely will sell this thing to the highest 

bidder, who may be from eastern Canada, who may be from the 

States, or who may be from some overseas country, Mr. 

Speaker. If it’s for sale, they want to get the highest bid, and 

they have no control as to who . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the member from Dewdney . . . I’m not sure which 

constituency he is from, Mr. Speaker. When we brought him in 

to run, we . . . I think the Sask Party government brought him 

back from, was it Calgary? And they created a position in 

SaskTel, the vice-president of some position in SaskTel, to 

position him to run for the Sask Party in the 2007 election, Mr. 

Speaker. We paid him triple figures — triple figures for two or 

three years — and then he jumped in to be the MLA. And the 

most amazing thing is, that Crown corporation of which he was 

a vice-president of, they didn’t even fill that position after he 

left. So what it was, it was a holding strategy for some of their 

candidates to bring him back from Calgary. 

 

So my argument is, we have, we have a million-dollar man 

right there, Mr. Speaker. A million-dollar man, just to get him 

to come back to Saskatchewan to run as an MLA, that’s what it 

cost us, through the Crown corporations. So when he chirps 

from his seat, when he chirps from his seat, I say hello there, 

million-dollar man. Because that’s exactly what it cost us to get 

him to move back from Calgary. 

 

And I think we got ripped off, Mr. Speaker. I think we got 

ripped off terribly on that front because the bottom line is, if he 

was that good as vice president of SaskTel, (a) why didn’t they 

keep him; and secondly, why did they not fill up his position 

after he left? Because the position was a redundant position. It 

was a holding pattern for him until he was able to join the Sask 

Party as a candidate, Mr. Speaker. We know that in this 

Assembly. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So when we say as MLAs it’s going to cost us millions of 

dollars, we use him as an example of how it costs millions of 

dollars to add more politicians to this Assembly. Instead of 

doing the right thing and holding the cost down for politicians, 

Mr. Speaker, and invest that money into programs and 

opportunities for our young people, it’s very simple: use the 

opportunities that we have now for the young people. Very 

simple, it’s called sacrifice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why would they sacrifice a vibrant, thriving Crown 

corporation like Information Services Corporation, just to fulfill 

and to backfill their mismanagement of our economy and our 

mismanage of our finances? And, Mr. Speaker, I say today once 

again that every Sask Party MLA across the way ought to be 

ashamed of themselves for proposing this particular bill, to 

support Bill 69, which sells off Information Services 

Corporation because (a) they never asked the people of 

Saskatchewan for that mandate; and more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, they betrayed the trust of the people who thought they 

wouldn’t do this once they became government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, today is the first day of that rude awakening 

for the people of Saskatchewan that Sask Party is bent on 

selling off our Crowns. And they’re banked on things like P3s 

to punt their debt further down the road so our grandchildren 

pay for that. And I’m asking every Saskatchewan man, woman, 

and youth to stand up and tell the Sask Party that’s not what 

Saskatchewan wants nor needs. And it’s time for them to be 

very, very loud on that front. So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot 

more we want to say on this bill, so I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill 96. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 96, The Operation of 

Public Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 91 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 91 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 91, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act (No. 2). And this is legislation 

that relates to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, which is a 

long-standing institution in Saskatchewan. 

 

For people who don’t know about this plan, its head office is in 

Kindersley, and it has provided a method for people in 

Saskatchewan to invest in a pension plan that allows them to 

basically have another product available to them. Now it used 

to be that this pension plan was originally set up to allow for 

people who didn’t have ordinary sources of income or declared 

income to actually put money into a pension plan. It was 

especially popular with spouses who weren’t working when 

their other spouse had a pension plan at work. 

 

Unfortunately the federal rules changed and so that forced a 

change in this pension plan, and so now it is effectively the 

same as a registered retirement savings plan option. But there 

are many people who invested money over the years in the plan 

who have a great deal of respect and trust for the investment 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3243 

that’s there. And they have continued in this plan to have good 

investments. So over the last couple of years now since the 

change, it operates effectively the same as a registered 

retirement savings plan. 

 

Now this particular legislation is being brought forward at this 

point by the Minister of Finance because the federal 

government has introduced legislation around pooled registered 

pension plans. And what this legislation does is effectively give 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan the opportunity to set up a 

special part of their operation that can offer pooled registered 

pension plans to their existing investors but also to new 

investors. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the next two bills that I’ll be 

speaking to, Bill 92 and Bill 93 will have more detail about the 

pooled registered pension plans. But I’ll make a few comments 

here as we proceed around what the Minister of Finance is 

trying to do in this particular situation. 

 

In Canada there’s been debate around how prepared are 

Canadians for their retirement. And what one looks at is, well 

what kinds of savings do people have as it relates to a number 

of different types of investments? We in Canada end up having 

an old age security system which is basic and general right 

across the board for everyone, and it’s in place and it has been 

in place for a long time. 

 

Then as a second tier we have the Canada Pension Plan which 

relates to employment income and gives people the chance to or 

actually requires people to put aside a certain portion of their 

income in a Canada Pension Plan on top of the old age security 

system. The debate over the last decade has been whether the 

Canada Pension Plan should be expanded because it is a very 

efficient system. Administratively it doesn’t cost a lot of money 

either for employees or for employers, for companies or 

businesses that hire people. And that discussion still continues. 

 

The federal government made a choice to not expand the 

Canada Pension Plan at this time. We had understood that the 

present Government of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party 

government, was still in the camp of pushing forward with a 

request, as many provinces have, for an expansion of the 

Canada Pension Plan. That was what we understood until we 

saw the budget documents in this session where it appears that 

the Minister of Finance has taken a different perspective and is 

much more in line with the federal Conservatives and Prime 

Minister Harper. 

 

And so what we have is another third layer of a system which 

sets up these registered, pooled registered pension plans. And 

that is a system that probably . . . Well we don’t know it’s 

going to cost more than a Canada Pension Plan expansion but it 

may end up costing slightly less or similar amount to a 

registered retirement savings plan. So where we have another 

piece of the system, in some ways you have to also, you know, 

mention the ability to invest money in tax-free savings accounts 

as another tool that’s available for individuals. 

 

As you can tell from what I’ve said so far in quite a concise 

way, this gets to be even more complicated than most people 

want to understand. Plus it ends up taking money voluntarily 

and so sometimes when people are short of cash — especially 

when they’re younger and have all the pressures of, you know, 

buying a house, children, those kinds of things — they end up 

saying, well I’ll maybe not put money into the pooled pension 

plan or the RRSP [registered retirement savings plan] because I 

can maybe have the room later; same with the tax-free savings 

account. 

 

One of the advantages of expansion of the Canada Pension Plan 

was that it was compulsory, and it would be something that was 

clearly there. This whole plan that’s part of this bill, Bill 91, is a 

voluntary plan and it has some, there are some issues around 

that, the fact that it is voluntary. 

 

So what we have in this legislation is basically, quite simply, 

the authorization to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan to set up a 

separate non-profit corporation to administer the pooled 

registered pension plan. This will clearly cost something to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and obviously they’ll have to 

figure out their fees and their costs and spread that over the 

people who are part of this particular plan. 

 

I know that they’re optimistic that they will get enough 

investors in the plan that it will pay for itself, and I think that 

that’s, you know, I wish them well on that, but it does beg this 

broader question about whether our national government has 

made the right choice for Canadians. I think this will continue 

to be a debate as we move forward to the next federal election. 

It may be that this whole concept of pooled registered pension 

plans will continue, but if there is a change of government on 

the national level, I wouldn’t be surprised that it would be 

complemented with an expansion of the Canada Pension Plan 

which is I think what the majority of Canadians would like to 

see happen. 

 

So on this particular legislation, I think that there are some 

questions, although the practical aspects of it are relatively 

straightforward. But I know that some of my colleagues are 

interested in making comments about the legislation, and so at 

this point I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 91, The Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 92 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 92 — The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 92, An Act respecting 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans and making consequential 

amendments to certain Acts. 



3244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is the legislation presented by the 

Finance minister to implement the use of a new national 

government initiative, which is to pool registered pension plans. 

What happens is that there are certain regulatory issues that 

have to be dealt with by the provinces as it relates to any federal 

pension legislation, and what this particular legislation then 

tries to do is to make sure that Saskatchewan people are 

protected as it relates to money that they will invest in a pooled 

registered pension plan. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the clauses of the Act, Bill No. 

92, are quite extensive, but what they do is effectively put in 

place the rules that protect Saskatchewan people. And so what 

we have then are basically the regulations that apply to how 

these pension plans will be used in Saskatchewan. And so what 

we have is very much something that tries to complement — or 

mimic I guess maybe is another word — the rules that we have 

around registered retirement savings plans with the appropriate 

adjustments to cover this new system. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The new system ends up basically trying to follow rules, so it 

doesn’t get too confusing, but as I had mentioned just a little 

while ago, when we have these pooled registered pension plans, 

they’re effectively a third- or fourth-tier type of investment for 

retirement. And so we have at the top . . . Well I guess maybe 

we’d even say fifth. At the top would be just money that you 

might be able to save that has the tax paid on it so you don’t 

have any worries about it later. 

 

Then you would end up having the old age security as a layer of 

protection. And for some people with low income, they might 

get a supplement, but probably not if they’re involved in all 

these other kinds of programs. 

 

Then you have the Canada Pension Plan, which I think most 

Canadians see as a positive initiative in the country. And I think 

probably a majority would have preferred that the federal 

government expanded the Canada Pension Plan rather than 

introduce the pooled registered pension plan. So you have that 

layer. 

 

Then you will have registered retirement savings plans, which 

are good tools for everybody except that you get a deduction 

when you put the money in. So in other words you don’t pay 

the tax on it when you invest in it, but when you take the 

money out of a registered retirement savings plan, you have to 

pay income tax on that money that comes out. 

 

We also then have tax-free savings accounts that have been set 

up and allow for a certain amount of money to be put into a 

tax-free savings account. Those have some other rules around 

them, how they can be used in saving money for specific 

purposes. They can be used whether for retirement purposes, 

but they can also be used for other purposes in your own 

personal life. 

 

And then now we have these pooled registered pension plans 

which effectively give people in smaller companies the ability 

to have something similar to large pension plans like you might 

have if you worked for the province of Saskatchewan or if you 

work for John Deere or if you work for many of the other larger 

companies in the country. And the rules here are such that 

you’ll get those same protections that a regular pension plan 

would have. 

 

And so when we look at what’s in this particular legislation, 

some of the things that are here relate to what happens if 

somebody tries to sue you and wants to get access to your 

money. It sets out the rules of whether or not any of these funds 

are available for execution, seizure, or attachment, execution 

being seize it and take the money, and attachment is the old 

system of grabbing your payments as they come out to pay off a 

debt. It sets out how the rules apply to that. 

 

It also deals with the question of maintenance and support 

orders. If you have an obligation to a family member and you 

haven’t been making those payments, it sets out the rules here 

of how these payments can be attached for that particular 

purpose. And it also recognizes that any money that would go 

into a pooled registered pension plan is an asset of an individual 

and therefore it can be divisible if a person is in a marriage or in 

a relationship that’s covered under The Family Property Act, 

that this can be then divided up according to the rules that we 

have in the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think there are 

any special rules other than they want to make it absolutely 

clear that this isn’t a place where you would be protected from 

the normal rules around division of community property. 

 

So what then goes on is a whole discussion of how the 

information that’s in these particular plans will be protected and 

what the rules are as it relates to that. And it has a whole appeal 

procedure which is clearly something that is important for some 

of the issues that are here. It is quite interesting to note that the 

regulations section, section 20, has the ability to create 

regulations. And normally we might have 10 or 12 areas where 

regulations will be created. This particular legislation, I think, 

has almost 40 different places where regulations can be created. 

That may be as a result of trying to anticipate all of the federal 

government’s moves over the next while so that you’re going to 

cover off any possible changes so that they can be done quite 

quickly as opposed to done in legislation. So I don’t necessarily 

have a problem with it, but it is interesting that this legislation 

is not exactly simple legislation. It has quite a few complicated 

parts to it, and that’s a recognition that it’s a part of Canada’s 

taxation law that we’re really dealing with here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is legislation that implements 

federal policy at a provincial level. The Finance minister has 

indicated that he’s wanting to make sure this gets through. I just 

make the comment that we shouldn’t forget the fact that I think 

the majority of Canadians still want an expansion of the Canada 

Pension Plan, as it is the more efficient method of saving for 

retirement and it’s one that people know exactly how it works. 

But in this particular case, I think we support what’s being done 

here, but we still end up having quite a few questions about 

how it works. 

 

I know that some of my other colleagues want to speak to this 

particular piece of legislation, and so at this point I will adjourn 

the debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 92. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3245 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 93 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 93 — The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension 

Plans (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise and speak to Bill No. 93, An Act to make 

consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is legislation that’s being brought forward in 

this format because we need to amend certain laws of 

Saskatchewan in both English and in French. And the 

importance of that is that over the years in Saskatchewan some 

of our crucial legislation for individuals is bilingual legislation, 

and so we see here that we have to have the text for the changes 

of legislation in both English and French. And so the piece of 

crucial legislation that’s most directly affected is in English, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. And what 

it says is basically that you have to, you know, define the 

entitlement to the pension and make sure that it can be attached, 

if required, for payment of support. And that legislation is in 

both English and French and so there’s, in Bill 93 we have the 

same definition that’s going to be included in the French 

definition. I think this is, you know, obviously important, and it 

does fit with the long-term plans of the province to have our 

legislation in both of the official languages of Canada. 

 

I think practically what we have here is a recognition that these 

pension funds are important for families, but there are certain 

times where there is a priority that needs to be taken to make 

sure that maintenance orders are paid, and it deals with how 

that particular issue is dealt with under The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. 

 

I know that I don’t have too many more comments on this 

legislation, but I think we’ll, I’ll end up requesting that debate 

be adjourned on this one as well so that it can move in 

conjunction with Bills 91 and 92. So at this point I request that 

the debate be adjourned. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 93, The Pooled 

Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2013. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 81 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 81 — The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter a brief discussion here today as it relates to Bill No. 81, 

The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act, and to certainly 

seek clarity from the minister at the committee level. 

Committee structure is what I’m looking forward to. 

 

So I’ll offer a few brief comments here today. And the 

opportunity I look forward to is to seek further questions and 

answers, certainly to I guess put forward questions, seek 

answers from the minister as it relates to the changes that are 

put forward for the Global Transportation Hub. 

 

Certainly the hub itself is a concept that has a lot of merit. It’s 

one that’s been worked towards for a long period of time, that 

has the potential to offer strong economic benefits back to the 

people of Regina and our province. But there’s, in the end, 

there’s been many concerns that have arisen as it relates to the 

management and structure and operation of this Global 

Transportation Hub under this government. And we need to 

make sure that with the significant investment that’s been made 

by Saskatchewan people into this hub, into this infrastructure, 

that we’re maximizing our return, that we’re receiving the value 

for dollar that’s required, making sure that it’s operating in a 

fair manner with municipalities, with stakeholders across our 

province. And those are the kinds of questions that I’ll be 

looking to put to the minister and will be looking for answers 

and responses on those fronts. 

 

What we see in this legislation is another shift from this 

government to take a lot of control potentially away from local 

decision makers, from municipalities. We see that in Bill 90 as 

well where we’re seeking further clarity, where we certainly see 

the potential for a very heavy hand from government. And we 

need to make sure that government works in a democratic 

fashion, in a co-operative fashion, one that works with our 

municipalities and understands the pressures and priorities that 

they’re working towards and making sure that the investments 

that are being made by the people of this province are there to 

benefit all of Saskatchewan and certainly an entire region. 

 

This decision takes full control of this public asset, something 

that’s been invested in by Saskatchewan people in a massive 

way. We need to continue to seek from this government the 

total investment that’s been placed into the Global 

Transportation Hub, not just on the site but also all the related 

infrastructure, to make sure that it’s being managed in a fashion 

that’s representing value for money and making sure that it’s 

serving the best interests of the taxpayer’s dollar and the people 

of our province. 

 

It’s interesting to see legislation move forward that gives this 

government, gives that independent authority full control of all 

land use planning, full control of governance structure and 

subdivision planning, approval planning — all the aspects that 



3246 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

are done in a traditional sense through democratic governments, 

through local governments and now taken under full control by 

this independent authority. And I think many people may ask 

when they look at these changes, would ask who this new 

structure under this government is accountable to. And maybe 

we’ll . . . Those are the types of questions we’ll be bringing to 

committee. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But certainly we need to make sure that this hub that has taken 

significant investment from the people of this province is 

offering the benefit back that it should to people and to the 

region from an economic perspective, as well as from a 

perspective as it relates to the organization of infrastructure. We 

need to make sure that it’s listening and reflective of the needs 

of the municipalities, both certainly the city of Regina as well 

the rural municipality, and the broader interests of the province. 

And the comments by the minister as it related to the 

introduction of this bill certainly haven’t delayed any potential 

concerns on that front. 

 

Not only is this a bill that places this hub, that’s been paid for 

by the people of Saskatchewan with their tax dollars, into full 

control of this government in a fashion that can certainly be, 

certainly has caused some concerns around its democratic 

accountability, but it also does so in a fashion that takes that 

information of that hub and potentially makes that information 

secret and private, exempting it from freedom of information 

requests, not making it a government entity or that can be called 

upon with the freedom of information requests by the people of 

this province, which denies the access to what should be argued 

was public information and available to the public. 

 

So there’s been a presentation that’s been put forward, a request 

by the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy Commissioner 

on this front to make sure that this legislation is amended to 

ensure that freedom of information requests will occur or can 

occur as it relates to this hub. And certainly that’s something 

that we see as being certainly very important because not only 

does this government with the change in legislation take control 

of this entity that’s been paid for with taxpayers’ dollars, full 

control, they now are driving into secrecy the decisions of that 

entity and as well the information of that entity. 

 

And we need not look much further then the IPAC 

[International Performance Assessment Centre for geologic 

storage of CO2] affair of this government, where it entered into 

funding circumstances that have huge questions on value for 

money, huge questions as it relates to waste of taxpayers’ 

dollars, and no level of accountability from that government 

that we need to understand why it’s in the best interests of the 

public to have access to the information as it relates to the 

entities that they’ve paid for, that they have purchased with 

their tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need to as well make sure, as I say, that the total investment 

into this hub is quantified by this government. And that’s not 

simply the development of the site itself. It’s also the 

development of related infrastructure, from highways and 

bypass infrastructure, and by all partners, whether that be 

Crown corporations or municipal governments or the provincial 

government itself, and just how many millions of dollars have 

been invested into this infrastructure, and is it being managed 

and organized in a way that’s offering the return that it should 

to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Are Saskatchewan people receiving the value for money that 

they should from something that was a strong concept worked 

towards for many years, but certainly now in its operation 

leaves many questioning whether or not it’s delivering the value 

for money that it should, making sure that it’s deriving the 

benefit that it needs to for the region, for the city, for the 

municipalities; making sure that it’s respectful in its 

relationships in doing so and ensuring that it’s not undermining 

municipal planning, infrastructure planning, or the benefits that 

are important to our city, to our municipalities, and to the 

people of the region; and it’s also making sure that it’s 

operating in a fair way as it relates to ensuring it’s not 

undermining the commercial investment, commercial interests 

of the region. And these are questions we can certainly put to 

the minister, and we’ll be looking for information or actions of 

this minister to respond to these questions. 

 

So it’s fair to say that we have concerns with the operation of 

this hub and the direction of this hub under this government. 

We certainly see merit in the model, have supported the 

concept, but we need to make sure that we are getting it right. 

We need to make sure that the economic model is sustainable 

and that it’s delivering for Saskatchewan people in the way that 

it should. And there’s pretty valuable questions and concerns 

that people are asking as it relates to, as I say, their investment, 

their tax dollar in this hub. 

 

We also, you know, have to recognize that there is other 

pressures and challenges that this government’s facing with this 

hub. Of course there’s the expropriation of land that has 

resulted in lawsuits, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know the full 

detail on those lawsuits; we’ll certainly clarify some of that at 

the committee level. But certainly it’s asserted by individuals 

that government came in and dealt with them in a less than fair 

way in expropriating their land and in controlling the 

designation and classification of that land. And the case that 

they put forward is that they’ve then been denied the market 

value for that land. 

 

And of course when land is being expropriated, it’s not 

something that’s done in a co-operative fashion. It’s not by their 

choice. And I believe, in the range that’s been put forward by 

way of the loss to, potential loss to those that have land 

expropriated has certainly been shared, has been a significant 

range, I believe, being paid for land as it’s been related to me 

for — I’m not sure we’ll seek from the minister the detail on 

this — but a price per acre anyways that’s far less than they 

would assert would be its full market value. So we’ll make sure 

we seek answers from this minister on this front. 

 

Certainly, as I say, there’s various concerns that we need to 

make sure are addressed. And it does represent, as I say, some 

concerns that seem to be emerging with this government that 

seems to be interested in taking control over decisions that are, 

in many cases and really in all cases, best left to those locally 

elected decision makers, decisions around regional planning 

where there’s a role for government to organize and co-operate. 

 

But it seems that with Bill 90, this government seems to be 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3247 

bringing a very heavy, heavy hand to the table and taking a lot 

of control away from municipalities, and in this case taking full 

control of an entity, and in fact, as I say, taking full control of 

land use planning, of municipal planning, of governance 

structures that are otherwise made by elected individuals, 

leaving so many asking, who is this structure accountable to? 

So keeping in mind that this has been a structure that’s been 

built by the people of Saskatchewan with their tax dollars, 

there’s good questions to bring to the minister on this front. 

And we’ll be seeking that sort of information at the committee 

structure. 

 

And certainly we urge the minister to make sure they’re 

working to bring forward the changes that are required to 

ensure that information will be accessible to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that they’re not denied that access to that 

information, that freedom of information requests will be 

allowable and that that’s supported through the legislation, 

something it’s currently not. 

 

Because certainly in a structure that’s so . . . that’s removing the 

control from municipal leaders, that’s removing democratic 

levers, we need to make sure that Saskatchewan people have 

access to the information around their investment and the return 

on their dollars. 

 

At this point in time, I will not offer any further questions or 

comment to this legislation, other than to say that for all parties, 

all stakeholders that have questions, that have concerns with, as 

it relates to this legislation, not to hesitate to connect directly 

with the opposition and certainly the minister, to bring forward 

those concerns, those questions. And we’ll do our best to seek 

clarity through the committee structure that’ll be ahead of us. 

At this point in time, I have nothing further to say as it relates to 

Bill 81. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? The question before the Assembly is the motion by 

the Minister of the Economy that Bill No. 81, The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act be now read a second time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 83 — The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s my pleasure today to rise to speak to Bill No. 83, 

which is The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration 

Services Act. An interesting bill, and one I think that certainly is 

timely in consideration of the activities that are taking place 

within the province these days in relation to foreign workers. 

 

The minister in his comments indicated that this is the first of 

its kind in Canada. And I would say with the growth of foreign 

workers coming into Saskatchewan and the success of the 

immigrant nominee program, which he highlights in his 

comments as well, is certainly is something that is required to 

protect innocent and vulnerable people when they come here 

seeking a better life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The minister 

indicated that the number of nominees in the nominee program 

grew from 200 nominations in 2005 to 4,000 annually now. 

 

And that’s a very significant growth and obviously an 

indication of the success of the program itself, where 

immigrants were given opportunities to move here to 

Saskatchewan and to ensure that their families came as well, 

which was much the same for when my grandpa moved here in 

1909 and his parents came out later. And then his wife, who 

was my grandma, eventually moved out as well. So it’s 

something that I think that we can be proud of. It’s a sign of 

growth in the economy and a sign of growth in our province. 

And we need those workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We see the 

shortages in many industries right now and the demand from 

employers. 

 

But of course when people come from a foreign country, 

especially where they don’t speak the language here, the 

predominant language of English, where they aren’t familiar 

with our customs and our ways of life, they are very vulnerable. 

So this type of bill that is established to protect them is 

something that’s very timely and very responsible on the part of 

this government. 

 

There’s a number of interesting aspects in the bill. First of all, 

it’s not entirely clear which minister is going to be responsible 

for this bill yet. So we don’t know yet what ministry will end 

up with the responsibility. Currently it was introduced by the 

Ministry of the Economy. And the minister himself, in the first 

definition section of the bill, the minister is responsible is 

described in clause (n) and the definition there reads:  

 

“minister” means the member of Executive Council to 

whom for the time being the administration of this Act is 

assigned. 

 

So at this point in time, we don’t know which ministry will be 

responsible for it, but I guess that will bear through once the 

Executive Council passes an order after the bill is passed. So 

it’s a bit unfortunate we don’t know which ministry will be 

responsible for it, but that’s the way the bill has been drafted. 

 

Another important definition in this bill is definition (q), 

recruitment services, and these describe the types of services 



3248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

that foreign nationals or employers use to obtain a foreign 

national to come and work in Saskatchewan. And I think most 

of us are familiar with those types of companies. 

 

Certainly I’ve talked to some of them since I’ve been elected, 

and we understand the difficulties that these services often have 

with placing foreign nationals in employment here in 

Saskatchewan. But there’s a fairly extensive definition of what 

those services are because this Act circulates a lot around the 

types of activities that those services would provide to foreign 

nationals or employers. 

 

And part II of the new bill, there’s the establishment of the 

director. And again it depends on what ministry will be 

responsible, but this minister will appoint the director. And the 

director then is responsible for establishing the new registry 

under this Act, so it’s another public registry. We’re not sure 

whether this is something ISC will be responsible for as a 

registry, or if it will remain within the government 

responsibilities. But at this point there’s nothing in the Act that 

describes where the registry will be managed. I’ll get into those 

clauses in a bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Part III talks a lot about how and when people in Saskatchewan 

can provide services for foreign workers and what kinds of fees 

they can charge. So the first thing in part III it sets out is who 

must have a licence. No one in Saskatchewan will be able to 

hold themselves out as a recruiter or a consultant or provide any 

kind of immigration services unless they get a licence. So that’s 

the new regime that’s being created by this Act. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Secondly, it doesn’t apply if you’re involved in recruitment 

services to find foreign nationals. It won’t apply to a number of 

people. You don’t have to have a licence if you’re doing it for 

your own business, or if you’re doing it for free, or if you’re 

doing it on behalf of a government or municipality, or if you’re 

doing it on behalf of a post-secondary educational institution, or 

prescribed classes of persons which would established under 

regs after the bill is passed, or people who are exempted by an 

order of the minister. So obviously there’s some discretion on 

the part of the government, but by and large if you are . . . You 

don’t need to get one of these licences to provide the services if 

you’re doing it for your own workplace or you’re doing it for 

free or for a public institution basically. 

 

And that same rules apply to immigration services as well. So 

recruitment would deal with getting a job, and immigration 

would obviously deal with relocating a person here with the 

proper immigration papers. And in that case if you are a lawyer, 

you do not have to have a licence either. Or someone who’s 

doing it for free or representing somebody under the 

Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, those people don’t 

require licences either. 

 

So it goes on in section 5 to establish that “Only an individual 

is eligible to be issued a licence as a foreign worker recruiter or 

immigration consultant.” And there’s a number of sections that 

deal with how the licences will be issued and the terms and 

conditions of the licence: how they will be amended or 

suspended or cancelled and what the effect of the suspension or 

cancellation is. So that’s part III of the Act. 

Part IV goes on to describe how employers can recruit foreign 

nationals, and any employer who wants to recruit foreign 

nationals must have a certificate of registration. So this is a new 

requirement on employers. They must obtain a certificate of 

registration unless there’s some exemptions, and that again is 

prescribed classes of employers or employers that are exempted 

by an order of the minister. So there is an out for the minister, 

and there is some discretion through the regulatory process to 

exempt certain employers from this requirement. But basically 

the way it stands right now, unless there is regulations applied 

or on an order of the minister, there’s no employer in 

Saskatchewan who can recruit foreign nationals for 

employment without a certificate of registration. 

 

So I think the point of this is to ensure that there’s a clear 

disclosure on the part of any employer who is recruiting foreign 

nationals that they are in that business, they are actively doing 

that, and that they are disclosing themselves to the government. 

If they don’t, they’ll be subject to the penalties and fines that 

are found later on in the bill. 

 

And again there is a number of clauses that, in this part IV, that 

deal with the nuts and bolts of registration. And the new 

director, whoever that will be, will be responsible for 

monitoring that. 

 

Part V of the new bill is called the prohibited practices and 

standards of service, and there’s a number of prohibited 

practices in here. And I think is something that the public really 

needs to pay attention to and be aware of because this is what 

you cannot do or can do if you are a consultant or a recruiter of 

foreign workers or immigrants in Saskatchewan. And I’m just 

going to read them off because there’s about one, two, three, 

seven of them that are in this clause. So: 

 

No foreign worker recruiter, employer or immigration 

consultant shall: 

 

(a) produce or distribute false or misleading information; 

 

(b) take possession of or retain a foreign national’s 

passport or other official documents or property. 

 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just pausing there, we hear 

stories of other countries where someone goes to work as a 

foreign national and they have to turn their passport over to the 

employer. And I’ve heard that in other jurisdictions, 

particularly nanny services and things where the workers are 

vulnerable. So this clause is very important, I think, that no one 

can secure someone’s passport. That’s just not allowed. 

 

The third clause, “(c) misrepresent employment opportunities 

. . .” So, including things like the position, the duties, the length 

of employment, wages and benefits. So you can’t make 

promises you can’t keep. As an employer or a recruiter, you 

can’t lie. You can’t tell and encourage somebody to come 

without holding true to those terms. 

 

The other thing you can’t do is threaten. This is: 

 

(d) threaten deportation or other action for which there is 

no lawful cause.  

 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3249 

Using the threat of deportation can be very, very threatening to 

a vulnerable foreign national or immigrant, and this Act makes 

it very clear that you can’t do that. 

 

Finally . . . Or sorry, there’s three more:  

 

(e) contact a foreign national or . . . [their] family or 

friends after being requested not to do so . . .  

 

So again, I think if a foreign national comes here for some 

reasons of their own, the employer cannot contact their family 

if they’ve been asked not to do so. 

 

(f) [says] take action against or threaten to take action 

against a person for participating in an investigation . . . 

[under this law.]  

 

And finally, no recruiter, employer, or immigration consultant 

can: 

 

(g) take unfair advantage of a foreign national’s trust or 

exploit a foreign national’s fear or lack of experience or 

knowledge.” 

 

So again, we’re dealing with very vulnerable people here, and 

those people who have power or control over them are 

prohibited from doing all of these things that could take 

advantage of these vulnerable immigrants and new Canadians. 

 

Section 23 deals with a recruitment fee. And the only people 

that can be charged a fee for recruitment is the employer, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and not the employee, so I think that’s a very 

important clause. And then there’s a number of clauses that 

require disclosure of those fees and licences. So again I think 

these are important provisions that are going to be helpful in the 

case where foreign workers are being exploited. 

 

For example clause 27 has a number of requirements for what 

has to be in the contract. The contract has to be in writing, and 

that’s very important, is to have . . . not have verbal contracts. 

We see what happens I think in even in the case of sole-source 

contracts that this government has entered into, that it’s 

important that it be in writing, it be written in clear and 

unambiguous language, and that it states clearly what the terms 

will be, what the services are going to be, and all of those 

factors. 

 

Again, you know, I know when people don’t speak the 

language that the contract’s in, I’m not sure if this is enough 

protection for these vulnerable workers. But at least it’s in law, 

and it’s encapsulated in law so that there is an avenue for these 

foreign workers if they get in trouble and get some good advice 

from people who understand the law, then they may be able to 

avail themselves of the law at that point. I don’t know that they 

would know at the point of arriving in Canada that they have 

these rights, but certainly and hopefully through the services 

provided by the government and the state, they would have 

access to that kind of protection. 

 

The next, part VI, sets up the registry. Section 30 says that the 

director shall establish and maintain a registry that contains 

information respecting the licences and the employees that are 

registered. Under part IV, there’s no name for this registry, so 

we don’t know what it’s going to be called. But I assume it 

would be the foreign worker recruiter and immigrant consultant 

registry. It’s a long name, but that seems to be . . . That’s the 

heading that we find in section 30. So we will now have a new 

registry here in the province that has the names of all these 

consultants and recruiters and employers, and it will be 

published in any way that the director feels is appropriate. So 

that will all be made available publicly. 

 

I think the part that’s probably most important in this bill is the 

part VII where we get into the enforcement procedures that will 

ensure that people follow the law. Division 2 of that part talks 

about inspections and investigations. And I think this is the 

crunch here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With these types of bills, you 

create a new registry. You create a director. You have a really 

nice law with a lot of provisions to protect these vulnerable 

workers. But the question is, where is the money and support 

behind it? 

 

We’ve seen this government cut the public service by 15 per 

cent in the last four years. This kind of investigatory work is 

going to require resources and staff, and that’s the one thing the 

minister didn’t talk about in his comments, is what kind of staff 

and what kind of financial support this government is willing to 

put behind this registry and behind the director to ensure that 

the inspections and the investigations described in division 2 

are going to be able to be done. And we see it with the things 

like the inspections that the Sask Water Security Agency has to 

do when it comes to illegal flooding, and we know that they’re 

behind six months to a year and that they just don’t have the 

staff they need to make those kinds of investigations. 

 

So unless this government is willing to put the proper funding 

and support into the investigations and inspections and the 

work of the director and the new registry, it will just be good 

words on paper, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we’ll certainly be 

looking very closely into that once this service gets . . . once 

this registry is established. And then we’ll see. The proof is in 

the pudding as I often say. And this is something where we 

have a fairly well-written-out concept here, and this law 

presents a nice framework. But whether or not it’ll be helpful 

depends on how much support the director has from the 

government in terms of the investigations and the inspections. 

 

Section 36 is the inspection section. It has a number of things 

that the director can do, very comparable to a lot of other 

investigations and inspections in different kinds of bills where 

people have the authority to do those types of things, and I 

won’t get into detail on that. 

 

Section 37 is the investigations process. And this is where the 

director can actually go to a judge and get a warrant for search 

and seizure, very powerful types of powers that are being given 

here to the director. And so these warrants allow the director to 

enter and stop, search vehicles, open . . . For example in clause 

37(2)(c) the director can, with a warrant, can open and examine 

the contents within any trunk, box, bag, parcel, closet, cupboard 

or other receptacle, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So there’s a lot of 

things that the director will be able to do under this bill.  

 

And in fact he can go in without a warrant. And you don’t see 

this very often, this very discretionary power being given to a 

public official. But in section 37(3)(b) the director can go in 



3250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

without a warrant if he believes that for example that there’ll be 

loss, removal, or destruction of evidence. So he can just walk 

into an employer’s place of work if he believes and has 

reasonable grounds to believe that if he doesn’t go in today, 

right now, that the evidence that that employer has will be 

destroyed. He can actually go in and do that without a warrant. 

So it’s a very broad power that’s being given here. 

 

Division 3 deals with the offences and penalties associated with 

infractions under the Act, and there’s a number of things — at 

least eight or nine — that are described in section 40 as the type 

of offences. But basically they have to co-operate with the 

director. They have to provide any information that the director 

requires. They can’t destroy records. They can’t fail to produce 

records or provide assistance or unlawfully obstruct or interfere 

with the director. So there’s a number of things that they cannot 

do there. 

 

And of course if they aren’t . . . if they are providing . . . If they 

are not acting with a licence or a — I forget the other term — a 

licence or if they’re not registered, then they are also subject to 

fines under the Act. So if an individual is guilty of an offence 

under the Act, it’s a $50,000 fine. And if it’s a corporation, it 

can be up to $50,000 that is . . . And in the case of a 

corporation, it’d be up to $100,000. So there’s a significant fine 

that is associated with failing to comply. 

 

Division 4 goes into enforcement. And the minister indicated in 

his opening comments that the initial impetus behind the bill 

and the way the director will carry out his or her activities is to 

work on education first. And so although the director has all 

these extraordinary punitive powers and investigative powers, 

part VII deals with the decisions, hearings, and appeals. 

 

And I think section 48 is the one to look at if people are 

interested in this law, where the director has, once he’s decided 

he’s going to investigate one of these hearings or one of the 

activities of an employer or an immigration consultant, they 

can, they have to . . . the director has to provide written notice 

of his or her intended action and the reasons. And then the 

person that receives the direction has an opportunity to write 

back to the director and saying why the director shouldn’t take 

that action. And so the director has a lot of discretion within 

section 48 in determining whether or not he or she will proceed 

with the action that he is intending to deal with. The rest of the 

section deals with things like reconsideration, appeals, and this 

kind of a decision of the director can be appealed to the Court 

of Queen’s Bench of Saskatchewan.  

 

And then finally part IX deals with the regulatory authority that 

I referred to earlier. There’s a number of things for which the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, the Executive Council can 

make regulations. And that’s basically the guts of this bill, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So although . . . As I indicated in the outset, this type of bill is 

new. It’s innovative. It’s something I think that will provide a 

good support for vulnerable foreign nationals and immigrants 

who come here at our invitation or at an employer’s invitation 

to be part of this economy in Saskatchewan. However until we 

know what kind of financial support the government can 

provide to the director in the support of his or her investigations 

and the necessary work to give teeth to the bill, we’ll see how 

successful it is. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So at that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know other of my 

colleagues would like to speak to this bill as well. It was just 

introduced very recently here. I guess, sorry, it was introduced 

in December. But there are definitely other ones of my 

colleagues who want to speak to this. And my only concern at 

this point is how this government will implement the bill. So 

that’s something we won’t know until after the fact once it’s 

passed. So I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

83. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 83, The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 89 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 89 — The 

Creative Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter debate as it relates to Bill No. 89, The Creative 

Saskatchewan Act here this afternoon. Certainly in one context 

this bill certainly speaks to the creative individuals that make 

their lives all across our province — the entrepreneurs, the 

artists that really tell our story, enrich our province in so many 

ways. And it speaks to both those individuals that have worked 

to develop their craft, their skill, their art, and that they share it 

with community and with others and with our world. 

 

It also highlights many entrepreneurs, many businesses that 

have worked so effectively to take that product that we’re all so 

proud of to market. And certainly we’re supportive of 

supporting structures that support further enhancement of that 

activity, that marketing. 

 

When I look at this piece of legislation, it looks to organize a 

structure that will serve the creative industries, some of the 

creative industries from a marketing perspective. And certainly 

on that front we’re supportive of supporting those efforts. What 

we need to do though is make sure that, as a government, and 

that that government is understanding of the unique nature of 

each of the different industries that it’s impacting, the various 

arts and industries for which this bill impacts and ensures that it 

doesn’t deal with it in a catch-all sort of approach, and I think 

that’s a flaw of this piece of legislation. 

 

But certainly having a government put forward some initiatives 

to work with our artists, with our industries to enhance the 

marketing of those works that are produced here in 

Saskatchewan is something that we would be supportive of. So 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3251 

this bill where it’s drawn critique has been that, hasn’t 

consulted with all industries, I understand, necessarily in a 

fashion that they feel was adequate. But also maybe treats all 

industries in very similar fashion as opposed to understanding 

the unique nature of each of the arts. 

 

It also speaks to and it uses the words film in this piece of 

legislation and that’s an area for which we see a significant 

separation between us and the current government, the official 

opposition New Democrats and the current government. And I 

see it as distasteful too for a minister or for government to 

suggest that somehow this bill is supporting the film industry 

here in Saskatchewan when it’s that very government that 

through hasty short-sighted decisions has effectively driven the 

film industry out of this province. And I know first-hand many, 

many individuals whose lives were turned upside-down by that 

decision. Many, many hard-working Saskatchewan people that 

have been forced out of our province, uprooting families, taking 

their efforts, their energies, their talents to other jurisdictions. 

And as well driving away, driving away the investment of many 

entrepreneurs and businesses that were improving the economic 

life of our province; hiring individuals, training individuals, and 

creating a brighter future for many. 

 

So where this bill speaks of Creative Saskatchewan and where 

its merits in this bill may be as improved marketing for some 

industries, where its flaws are is that it treats all industries the 

same, doesn’t respect the unique nature of the various 

industries, and does nothing to address the short-sighted and 

damaging decision to eliminate the film industry here in 

Saskatchewan, an industry that has certainly benefited all of 

Saskatchewan from an economic perspective but also benefited 

us as a province in being able to highlight our pride as a 

province, our story as a province, our history, and has added 

vibrancy to our communities. And in many ways, I know it’s 

that very cultural vibrancy that so many families are looking for 

within their communities and their province. And it’s 

something that we should continue to aspire to enrich. 

 

And we see a government that’s chosen for us at a time of 

really unprecedented opportunity as a province, for our 

government, for our province to be less instead of more, Mr. 

Speaker, to eliminate that cultural vibrancy, those offerings, to 

eliminate that creative industry, to eliminate that investment 

and those entrepreneurs, to eliminate those creative, 

hard-working jobs and the families that are directly impacted, 

and creating that sense of vibrancy within our communities that 

adds to the quality of life, that adds to our health as a 

community. 

 

And I think in many ways, it’s that vibrancy that is also very 

important as we develop and as we progress as a province. In 

fact, it sort of goes hand in hand with making sure that from 

growth that we make sure there’s progress, making sure that 

that vibrancy is part of our communities. 

 

And I know I’m always encouraged when I meet a new family 

that may have chosen to take up work in our province. I know 

some that have certainly moved from other jurisdictions such as 

different parts of Ontario, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s my belief that certainly it’s that job that’s important, 

but it’s going to be, over the long haul, our ability to retain that 

family and for them to become a full part of our province is 

going to be based on our ability to meet the needs in the 

classroom, our ability to meet the needs in the community, our 

ability to make sure that we’re a vibrant place to be. And the 

kind of actions we see with the elimination of the creative 

industry, or the cultural industry that is the film industry, is 

certainly a damaging cut on that front and something that 

created some unique diversification from an economic 

perspective in communities right across our province. 

 

We know that this government made that decision in the 

absence of information, that they pushed ahead, that that 

Premier pushed ahead with those cuts without looking at the 

facts. And when they were provided the facts, when they were 

provided the evidence, they couldn’t recognize that error in 

their ways. They couldn’t recognize the mistake and they chose 

not to address the problem they had created. And they’re 

forsaking an industry and forsaking the lives of so many people 

in this province for whom have been impacted. 

 

And I know we had a minister that had received report after 

report, a Premier that had received report after report, a new 

minister that’s received report after report, with the evidence 

being pretty clear and strongly in support of the film tax credit 

and measures to ensure we have a strong film industry, and 

something that this government has chosen not to listen to. 

 

And it does represent as well a government that on so many 

files chooses to have selective hearing and listens to a couple of 

close friends and insiders but doesn’t listen to the many. He 

doesn’t listen to those who are impacted and certainly didn’t 

listen to the film industry. 

 

And really what we saw was a government make a decision out 

of an ideological place, a political place, a partisan place, but 

certainly not a place that was in the best interests of an industry 

and certainly not in the best interests of a province. And then 

after that, instead of recognizing the mistake that they had 

made, they dug their heels in and they scrambled to push 

forward with as much spin control as they could. And certainly 

the impact has been felt by many across this province. 

 

It also has basically put our sound stage, which is just across 

the lake, Mr. Speaker, that certainly is something that can serve 

us proud from an international perspective . . . And it once had 

film production companies from around the world lining up at 

the gate to film here in Regina, bring their dollars, bring their 

investment, and fill that sound stage just around the other side 

of Wascana Lake. That sound stage is now at risk of being 

shuttered. It’s an investment that was once made by 

Saskatchewan people that was going to serve us many 

generations forward, that served to diversify our economy; to 

bring new investment, new people, new families to our 

province, that are now being driven away. 

 

And it’s a very short-sighted approach of this government to 

deny that investment in our province, to uproot families and 

send them packing or to see the many families that I know as 

well, Mr. Speaker, who have had their livelihood taken away 

and are now by way of the family roots and the other jobs 

within a family, who are now trying to juggle to find other 

employment and, in many cases, precarious employment in an 

interim perspective to make ends meet. 



3252 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

And that’s not a fair approach from government and it’s 

certainly not fulfilling the kind of future that we should all be 

working towards. I say at the time of unprecedented 

opportunity here in Saskatchewan, we should be enabling the 

creative industries, all of those creative industries, and that 

includes the film industry, to be a part of the future here in our 

province. And I find the fact that this government fails to 

address their elimination of the film industry here in 

Saskatchewan in this bill, failing to address that challenge is 

certainly unacceptable and certainly is where we have a distinct 

difference between the New Democratic Party opposition and 

the Sask Party government as it relates to our creative province. 

 

So as I’ve said in comments here, this bill seems to focus its 

efforts from a marketing perspective toward some of the 

creative industries. Certainly those efforts are likely something 

that we can support by way of . . . on an individual basis. But to 

treat all of those creative industries, all of those artists, as the 

same and to put forward catch-all structures in legislation is 

probably not the best approach when we’re looking at the 

unique natures of each industry, each art. 

 

And when I look at the discussion as well where we’re talking 

about building that sort of vibrant community that has the sort 

of services that are going to build families, build communities 

that we need to aspire towards . . . And I talked about the 

importance of a film industry on that front. 

 

I also recognize the importance of the classroom in our 

communities in fulfilling that important role in the very early 

developments of the creative industries. And that role of the 

classroom, the role of the teacher, the role of community 

organizations, and of community to ensure we’re providing the 

opportunity for our young people — the next generation of 

artists in Saskatchewan, the next generation of entrepreneurs in 

Saskatchewan — the opportunity to enrich their talents, to be 

afforded the opportunities that they should have. 

 

And when I see the cuts that are going on in our classrooms, as 

but one example, and the impacts on the elimination of 

opportunity that we need to be extending to our young people, I 

recognize that that’s not helpful, certainly from building a 

creative Saskatchewan or a strong Saskatchewan into the future. 

I recognize a member on his feet. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — To introduce a guest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you for the 

opportunity to introduce some guests. And thank you to the 

Deputy Leader of the Opposition . . . [inaudible] . . . for 

allowing me to introduce some very special guests. In your 

gallery, from Yorkton are some, I think I can honestly say, a lot 

of very good friends of mine. They’re here on behalf of a team 

from Yorkton for the Full Gospel banquet that will be held later 

this evening, this afternoon in the cafeteria downstairs. 

 

In the front row is Ms. Mary Thomas. She’s from Regina. She’s 

married to one of the main people of Full Gospel in 

Saskatchewan. Next to her is a friend of mine from Yorkton, 

Ms. Marlene Swan. And then in the row behind them on the far 

right is Mr. Dave Schmalz, Mr. Elwin Schindel, Ms. Sharon 

Schindel, and my brother from a different mother but the same 

father is George Cote. So I’d ask all members to welcome these 

special guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. I see the member from Yorkton has more guests to 

introduce. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just noticed 

another couple of special guests walk into the Assembly, and I 

thank the Deputy Leader of the Opposition for allowing me to 

introduce some more. 

 

On the right is my mother, currently from Regina. Her name is 

Pat Ottenbreit. And along with my mom is my cousin, Mr. 

Tony Walsh, who has a long history of working for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, over 35 years with Government 

Services before he retired, long, extensive history serving our 

county in the military as well, among other duties, a lot of 

volunteer duties as well. So I would ask all members to 

welcome my mom, Pat, and my cousin Tony to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

(continued) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s nice 

to have the guests that have just joined us here today, and 

certainly I welcome all of those individuals that have come in 

and joined us on an annual basis with Full Gospel, and we 

appreciate that relationship. And I know many are looking 

forward to the evening here tonight, and thank you for that. And 

also a pleasure to welcome the member from Yorkton’s mother 

to the Assembly. I hope you’re keeping your eye on your son 

here and keeping him in check, because sometimes the Speaker 

has trouble doing so. But it’s a pleasure to have you here, and 

certainly we respect your son as well. 

 

And shifting back to the legislation at hand, we are looking at 

the Creative Saskatchewan legislation, Bill No. 89 before us 

here today. And as I say, this legislation, we support parts of it. 

We certainly support parts where we see improved marketing 

efforts for industries in this province. And when we are looking 

at this industry, these are the artisans and the artists and the 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3253 

entrepreneurs that in many ways have given us such pride to 

each of our respective communities and in many ways have 

showcased who we are as a province to the rest of the world. 

And certainly it’s important for us to make sure we are 

supporting those efforts — whether they’re in music or whether 

they’re in dance or whether they’re in the publishing industries 

— to make sure we are supporting those industries and 

allowing those artists, those businesses, those entrepreneurs to 

fulfill their futures here in Saskatchewan and share their talents 

and their arts with the world. 

 

Where we are very disappointed by this government is with the 

elimination of the film industry here in Saskatchewan. And this 

bill doesn’t address the cut that occurred last year — a cut that 

was made without the evidence, a cut that denied the reports 

that were put before this government, independent reports that 

shared that this was in the best interests of our province. And as 

I say, a cut to the film industry that has caused entrepreneurs to 

be sent out of Saskatchewan, placing investment in other 

jurisdictions. We need that investment in our communities here 

in Saskatchewan that has sent far too many families packing, 

uprooted families that have had long roots here in 

Saskatchewan, and families that are a full part of our 

communities. And I think of all the economic benefits that have 

been derived by the film industry in Saskatchewan, the 

investment that’s there, the employment that’s there. And that’s 

all very important, and it’s extended right across our province. 

 

But I also think of what it means to us in telling the story of 

who we are as a province to the rest of the world, to showcasing 

our talents, to creating a cultural and community vibrancy all 

across this province. And I think of organizations or events 

such as the Yorkton Film Festival as just a prime example of 

bringing together these talented individuals, these entrepreneurs 

showcasing that work. And that film festival has done such a 

fine job of showcasing that artistic talent and as well the work 

of those entrepreneurs. 

 

And I find it so disappointing that this government has failed to 

recognize the error in the cut they made in last year’s budget 

when they had every opportunity to do so, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know, as I say, I know first-hand so many individuals, so many 

families that have been impacted by this cut, that have been 

forced to move to other jurisdictions, that have been forced to 

take on precarious employment causing economic insecurity for 

their families, lessening the opportunities. 

 

And this all at a time, Mr. Speaker, where we have the 

opportunity to seize the full potential of our province, the 

tremendous opportunity we’ve been presented, and a 

government that’s deliberately choosing for us as a province to 

be less instead of more, Mr. Speaker, to be cutting something 

that means something from an economic perspective, from a 

cultural perspective, from a community perspective by way of 

the vibrancy and quality of life that it derives. 

 

And that’s where my critique as it relates to the actions of this 

government and the creative files lays. And certainly it’s 

disappointing as it relates to Bill 89, The Creative 

Saskatchewan Act that’s been put before us to not see a 

government recognize the error in their ways and to take 

actions to fix the mistake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I’ve made those points, as have our critic and so many 

members on this side of the Assembly. Certainly we’ll be 

working together with all of Saskatchewan to be that voice for 

film industry as well in Saskatchewan, and to do what we can to 

rebuild that once proud industry here in Saskatchewan. 

 

At this point in time I don’t have a whole lot else to say as it 

relates to Bill 89. I know our critic has been engaged in 

consultations with all industries and will be bringing forward 

questions and those consultations to the committee structure. 

I’d urge the minister at this late time to reconsider the damaging 

approach of his government as it relates to the film industry and 

to see if there’s some efforts that can be brought forward to 

support that industry, to rebuild that industry, recognizing the 

importance of that industry to the communities all across our 

province and to the lives of so many families all across this 

province. 

 

But as it relates to Bill 89, I know our critic will be there to 

offer her perspective. Certainly there’s parts of this bill that we 

would be supportive of, but we’re also cautious in the fact that 

we need to make sure, in treating these artists and these skills 

and these industries, that we’re treating them in a way that’s 

respectful to the unique nature of each of those disciplines, each 

of those industries, and not treating them in a catch-all manner, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at this point in time as it relates to Bill 89, The Creative 

Saskatchewan Act, I will now adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 89, The Creative 

Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 90 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 90 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m very pleased to be rising today to speak to this bill, Bill No. 

90, An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 2007. 

 

And I could tell you this is one of the bills where I really wish I 

had been a fly on the wall in the Executive Council room when 

this bill was being prepared or proposed on the part of the 

minister. It’s a curious bill. It was one that came to us very late 

in the session; it was just introduced on April 8th. So we 

haven’t had a lot of time to check in with constituents and with 

the people of Saskatchewan to see whether this is a bill that is 

meeting the needs of the municipalities. 

 



3254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

But in many ways as I looked through this bill, I just can’t help 

but think that this is forced, in a way, a forced amalgamation. 

It’s a very draconian bill. It’s one that has . . . We see the 

implementation of a new section in the bill for regional 

planning authorities that gives the minister incredible powers to 

force municipalities to do things where they may not ordinarily 

agree to work together or have a need to work together. 

 

And so we know that this is a fairly heavy-handed bill, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and one that really overrules, if the minister 

thinks necessary, the independence and autonomy of individual 

municipalities. It seems to be targeted towards situations where 

the minister thinks municipalities should be getting along for 

whatever reason and, for whatever reason, they’re not getting 

along. We’ve seen his comments in the press about when he 

would step in with the extraordinary powers that he now would 

have under this bill. But it really seems to override the abilities 

of municipalities, over the last 100 years, who have managed to 

work things out and sort them out amongst themselves. 

 

If you look at the original planning and development Act, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s exactly what it did, is it provided a vehicle and a 

framework for municipalities — urban, rural, neighbouring 

municipalities — to work together and give them a framework 

for planning ahead, looking at the future of their respective 

jurisdictions. When you know there’s lots of back and forth, 

when there’s urban growth and expansion into rural areas, The 

Planning and Development Act of 2007 has proved to be very 

functional and one that worked as long as the municipalities 

had a reason to work together. 

 

And I think what’s happened, and we’ve seen some press lately 

where there’s been some difficulties with urban and rural 

municipalities not being able to find mutually acceptable . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from Yorkton on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Ask leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — This probably will be the last one for today, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. In your gallery on the far, far right — it’s 

fittingly so; far, far right — Mr. Randy King; a good friend of 

mine from Yorkton, a singer, songwriter, and welder, and also 

the president of the Yorkton chapter of the Full Gospel 

Businessmen’s Fellowship. So I’d ask all members to welcome 

Randy to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2013 

(continued) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’ve managed to misplace some papers I was looking for, and I 

think I’ll have to go on without them. 

 

So I’ll just get into the meat of the bill now in terms of what 

this bill seems to be attempting to do. The first few changes are 

just really introducing a new concept in The Planning and 

Development Act of 2007. The minister is creating a new entity 

called the regional planning authority and my first question is, 

why is this necessary when we already have ample provisions 

in the existing Act to create planning districts with 

accompanying planning commissions? So it’s a very curious 

move on the part of this government to create an entirely new 

entity when there’s already provision in the bill for the creation 

of a similar entity. But when I started digging into it a little bit, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I understand the goal of the 

minister in this case. And I think it’s supported by some of the 

conjectures that we found in the media as well. 

 

So what we have to do is look very closely at Division 4. This 

is a new division that’s being inserted in the bill, and it allows 

for the creation of a regional planning authority. But the very 

most interesting part of this is that the municipalities have no 

say. This is a situation where the Government of 

Saskatchewan’s imposing itself and forcing municipalities to do 

things together, where the municipalities have absolutely no 

option to get in or out of this authority. They are going to be 

told by the minister what they must do and they will do it.  

 

And that’s exactly what Division 4 seems to set out: the powers 

of the minister are clear and strong and forceful, and I would 

say, probably draconian in many instances where the minister 

can direct these municipalities to do many, many things, 

including creating a regional plan, who the members are going 

to be, what the makeup of the authority is going to be, the terms 

and conditions that the minister considers appropriate in 

establishing this planning authority, anything else that the 

minister considers necessary. 

 

You go on and look at the different sections of Division 4. 

Basically it’s section 119 and it goes on to a number of 

subsections there. Interestingly enough — and this is why it’s 

being introduced now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because it’s a 

budget bill — there is a provision, we know, in this year’s 

budget of $250,000 to provide for funding for these types of 

authorities. So in section 119.2, the minister, with Treasury 

Board approval, can determine what amount any regional 

planning authority would get. The question is, why couldn’t the 

minister just do that for district planning . . . for district 

planning commissions and district . . . the planning districts? 

I’m sorry, get the language right here. 

 

Planning districts already are established. There is already room 

for them to do that kind of work, but he won’t provide money 

for the planning districts in this bill. The only people that are 

going to receive money or funding for these types of 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3255 

organizations are the regional planning authorities. So right 

away, the planning districts are being cut out of the good work 

that they’re doing already in Saskatchewan. There’s a number 

of successful planning districts. And I mean they’re certainly 

not without their bumps and warts, but at least this 

municipalities working well together. 

 

So he’s reserving funding solely for the ones that he creates 

under his own authority without any consent. And I think the 

most powerful section in this entire part is section 119.3(1) 

where “The minister may, by order, direct the regional planning 

authority to do all or any of the things mentioned in section 

119.5.” And it goes on to say: 

 

After undertaking any consultations with the regional 

planning authority that the minister considers appropriate, 

the minister may direct the regional planning authority to 

undertake or address a matter on any terms and conditions 

that the minister considers appropriate. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So you can see here the type of extraordinary powers that the 

minister is being given under this Act. And as I said earlier, I 

can only question what kind of discussions must have taken 

place for this government to take this extraordinary measure. 

 

I’m also curious to know about what the member from Melfort 

has discovered because he was appointed Legislative Secretary 

last May to deal with these types of issues, and we haven’t 

heard a word since then. So I don’t know what the member 

from Melfort is working on, whether he’s going to reveal what 

he’s been working on to this Legislative Assembly. He is a 

Legislative Secretary and we haven’t heard a word yet on any 

of the work that he’s been doing in terms of these planning 

districts. So it seems that either the minister is superseding the 

work of the Legislative Secretary and has overruled his work, 

but we’re really not sure what’s going on over there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And we sure would be interested to find out 

whether the Legislative Secretary’s work has had any impact at 

all on the rather heavy-handed approaches of the minister in 

this bill. 

 

The other section I think that’s really, really telling — and this 

is the one that gives me the most concern and I’m going to 

really impress upon you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the importance 

of this section — section 119.4(2). This is the composition of 

these regional planning authorities. And the regional planning 

authorities under section 119.4(2) are going to be made up of, 

here’s the first one, “one council member from each included 

municipality.” And here’s where they deviate from the previous 

district planning authority, “one or more representatives of the 

Government of Saskatchewan.” And then the third is, “any 

other persons that the minister is satisfied have an interest or 

expertise pertaining to community planning.” 

 

Now what’s really, really telling about that section, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is if you looked at who will be found on a planning 

commission under the planning district portions of the Act, and 

in that case, I’m going to look at the section itself — I think it’s 

section 95 — of the existing Act, there’s a glaring omission in 

the current section when you look at the section 95 of the 

existing Act. And in there we see that the makeup of a planning 

commission . . . Hang on, I’ve just got to find the right page. 

Sorry, I think it’s not section 95. It is section 97(2)(a)(i), and in 

the district planning commission under the same Act that the 

minister’s proposing this new regional planning commission, 

you would have a person from the council of each affected 

municipality. That remains the same. But in a district planning 

commission you would also have representatives of Indian 

bands affected by the establishment of the planning district. 

 

Why has the minister left First Nations out of this bill? I think 

it’s a glaring omission and I think it’s one that should be fixed 

by amendment as soon as possible before this bill is passed 

because there’s no way that First Nations should be eliminated 

from the makeup of these commissions. And if the minister is 

using his very draconian powers that are establishing this bill to 

force municipalities to work together, why would he leave out 

First Nations in the area? It’s beyond belief to me that he would 

deliberately omit First Nations from the makeup of these new 

regional authorities. 

 

Finally, if you look at that it’s the municipalities themselves in 

the district planning commission who are able to decide who 

the other experts should be on the commission — not in the 

case of this new planning authority, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here 

we see that it’s only the people that the minister is satisfied 

should be on the commission. 

 

So it just shows you the incredible powers that are being 

provided to the minister in this new . . . the amendments . . . 

this Bill 90, which is amending The Planning and Development 

Act, 2007. So I’m just astonished at the need of a government to 

take these kinds of draconian actions. 

 

If you look at section 119.8(2), there’s no way that the 

municipalities can get out of this. They shall adopt any regional 

plan. They have no say whether they can amend it or anything 

else. If the plan is made, they shall adopt it. And I think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there’s just a whole bunch of other provisions 

under the new section 119 that seem to be very, very, very 

powerful on the part of this government. And one can only 

wonder what’s driving them to pass this type of law. 

 

Even in the dispute resolution clause, section 119.93(1), in the 

event of a dispute by municipalities, the minister can direct the 

municipalities “to follow any dispute resolution methods that 

the minister considers appropriate.” And that language is 

repeated throughout the entire part. 

 

And so there’s just a couple more comments. I think we’re 

going to have some really serious questions about this, and 

again we’re going to have to watch this government very 

closely to see why they decided such a drastic change was 

needed to The Planning and Development Act. 

 

There is a piece in the Leader-Post from Tuesday, April 16th, 

which is today. Oh no, sorry, it was published on Wednesday, 

April 3rd, and it was when the bill was introduced. And the 

speculation in the part of the media is that there’s difficulties 

with the city of Regina and the neighbouring RM of Sherwood 

on the talks that they are supposed to have to develop mutual 

interests. And apparently what’s happened, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that after 50 years the Regina-Sherwood District 

Planning Commission was terminated at the request of the RM 



3256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2013 

of Sherwood last year. 

 

So obviously those two municipalities had some difficulties 

after 50 years of working things out. We know that the Global 

Transportation Hub is located within the RM of Sherwood and 

certainly the interests of this government in relation to that hub 

is pretty apparent, that they’re very involved in what’s going on 

at the hub. And so we just have to wonder why the government 

is going to force municipalities to get along and force 

municipalities to do planning on the government’s direction, 

not on the part of the municipalities themselves. 

 

The only other point I wanted to make at this point on this bill, 

Mr. Speaker — and we’re surely going to take a closer look at 

it in committee — is that the previous minister was making 

great gains in this area through mutual support of the 

municipalities themselves. And a perfect example of that is 

WaterWolf down in the Outlook area where we have a number 

of municipalities and First Nations who have formed a planning 

commission or a regional plan on their own, with support from 

this government, but certainly one where there’s mutual 

respect. And I think that’s part of the concern in this instance is 

where, you know, people are being forced to do planning 

together even though there isn’t a respect on both parts. 

 

And the last comment I want to make is from a paper of 2009, 

and the author’s name is Paul Christensen. And it talks about 

regional planning and the barriers to regional planning. And 

what this said is that they had a meeting with a number of 

project participants and advisers to discuss barriers to greater 

regional co-operation involving infrastructure services. 

 

Interestingly, virtually all agreed that the principal barriers 

were cultural rather than institutional/legal. Cultural 

barriers included: (i) entrenched decision-making 

practices, (ii) perceptions of risk (financial and political) 

and (iii) governance issues (capacity building, 

infrastructure service standards, funding mechanisms, 

etc.). Perceived institutional/legal barriers . . . appear to 

reinforce the cultural barriers that exist. 

 

So what this bill is doing is forcing people who aren’t getting 

along to continue to exist even though they’re not getting along. 

And I think that’s a recipe for disaster, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

at this point, I think we’re prepared to see this bill being 

discussed in committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 

90, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 86 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 86 — The 

Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

am pleased to rise to speak to Bill No. 86, The Regulatory 

Modernization and Accountability Act. And it’s a very short 

bill, Mr. Speaker, but it’s one that again is very curious on the 

part of this government because, in my view, it’s completely 

unnecessary. This is just adding more red tape to ministries, 

forcing them to do stuff that they’re already doing and that 

they’re already charged to do in terms of responsible 

legislators, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This bill forces each ministry to review its regulatory 

responsibilities and, quote, modernize them, whatever that may 

mean. And I’m not exactly sure why the Minister of the 

Economy would think this is something that’s necessary when 

it’s already a responsibility that exists. So it seems to be 

unnecessary legislation that is redundant and certainly creating 

a lot more red tape in the instance where it’s designed to reduce 

red tape. So I’m not understanding why the minister thinks this 

is necessary. 

 

I’m certain that it is important to streamline and modernize 

regulation in any government; that’s not under any question at 

all. So by forcing ministers to create reports, which he does in 

section 3(1), then it just creates more work for ministers to 

ensure that they are doing what their job is in the first place. It’s 

unnecessary legislation. 

 

I think it also creates a signal that regulation is a burden on 

business and I think that’s the wrong message to send. 

Regulation has a very important role in the evolution of any 

institution or industry within the province, and we certainly 

know the role of government is to protect everyone and that 

includes the people that are operating industry and the people 

that are doing business in the province. So the message seems 

to be a bit unclear, but I’m worried about the message that this 

bill sends and I’m also worried that it’s creating additional red 

tape in the instance where the goal of the bill is to reduce red 

tape. 

 

So it’s a fairly short bill. There is not much to comment on 

further than that, Mr. Speaker, and again it’s one that we’re 

going to watch this government and see exactly sort of what 



April 16, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3257 

purposes they do want to put to, to effect by forcing each 

minister to do these reports under The Tabling of Documents 

Act in section 3(1). So at that point those are my comments on 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 

Minister of the Economy that Bill No. 86, The Regulatory 

Modernization and Accountability Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3225 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3225, 3226 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3225 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3225 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3225 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3225 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3225 

  Ottenbreit ............................................................................................................................................................ 3225, 3252, 3254 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3226 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3226 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3241 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3226 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3226 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Boston Marathon Tragedy 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3227 

 Emergency Telecommunications Week 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3227 

 Festival for Northern Youth 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3227 

 Family Treatment Centre Opens in Prince Albert 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3227 

 Grade 10 Student Provincial Science Fair Winner 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3228 

 Yorkton Terriers Win Canalta Cup 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3228 

 Party Divisions 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3228 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for First Nations and Métis Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3229 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3229 

 Information Services Corporation 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3230 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3230 

 Combatting Discrimination and Bullying 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3231 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3231 

 Repairs to School Gymnasium 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3232 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3232 

 Performance of Government 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3233 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3233 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3233 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 94 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2013 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3233 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3234 

 Bill No. 95 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3235 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3236 

 Bill No. 96 — The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Operation of Public Registry Statutes Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3239 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3239 

 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 91 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 (No. 2) 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3242 

 Bill No. 92 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3243 

 Bill No. 93 — The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2013 

 Loi de 2013 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Pooled Registered Pension Plans (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3245 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3245 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3247 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3247 

 Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3250 

 Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3253 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3256 

 Bill No. 86 — The Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3256 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3257 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


