




















































Hansard: March 26, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 39A  TUESDAY, MARCH 26, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2921 

 March 26, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, in your gallery we have a young lady by the name 

of Chelsea Valois. Chelsea is well-known in the bobsledding 

world not just in Canada but throughout the world, Mr. 

Speaker. And she hails from the village of Zenon Park, which is 

in the Carrot River Valley constituency, a French village in the 

constituency of Carrot River Valley. And I would like to 

welcome or have all members welcome her to her Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Attorney General has asked for leave for 

an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to this 

Assembly several visitors in your gallery. They are students at 

law who are completing their articles of clerkship with the 

Ministry of Justice and the courts this year in Regina. As many 

of the members of the Assembly will know, students at law 

must complete one full year of articles to be eligible for 

admission as a lawyer with the Law Society of Saskatchewan. 

 

Chris Davison and Jeffrey Crawford have been articling with 

the ministry since June 2012. Jeffrey studied law at the 

University of Saskatchewan. He has worked with Parks 

Canada, and his volunteer activities include being a member of 

Green Legal and working with Pro Bono Students Canada. 

Maybe just give us a wave. There you go. 

 

Chris Davison came to us from the University of Saskatchewan 

as well. He also studied at the University of Calgary to 

complete a Bachelor of Arts in religious studies. Chris’s work 

experience includes being an assistant student manager with 

community legal aid services for Saskatchewan inner city, 

known as CLASSIC [Community Legal Assistance Services for 

Saskatoon Inner City Inc.], and a legal assistant with the 

Saskatoon city criminal legal aid area office. 

 

Erin Smith and Adryan Toth also join us in the Legislative 

Assembly today. They’ve been clerking with the Saskatchewan 

Court of Appeal since 2012. Erin came to us from Queen’s 

University. She also studied political science at McGill 

University. Erin has worked as a summer student with 

MacPherson, Leslie & Tyerman and has been a member of the 

Queen’s law constitutional review committee. 

 

Adryan Toth studied law at the University of Saskatchewan 

after completing his Bachelor of Commerce degree. He has 

volunteered with Pro Bono Students Canada as well as 

Community Legal Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner 

City. 

 

I’d also like to introduce Darby Bachynski who is clerking with 

the Court of Queen’s Bench. Darby studied law at the 

University of Saskatchewan after receiving her Bachelor of 

Business Administration from the University of Regina. Darby 

has worked for the Insurance Councils of Saskatchewan and has 

volunteered at business infosource. 

 

Finally, David Zeggelaar joins us in the Assembly today. David 

is currently clerking with the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. 

He studied law at the University of Saskatchewan after 

completing a Bachelor of Arts in geography at Saint Mary’s 

University in Halifax. David worked as a student manager with 

the Community Legal Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner 

City and lived in South Korea for several years teaching 

English. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce such a strong group 

of articling students and I wish them all the best in the 

upcoming year. Members of the Assembly, would you please 

join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

join in on behalf of the opposition to welcome the students at 

law to the Chamber. I think it’s a sobering thought for all of us, 

and I know the Minister of Justice sees this as well, is when you 

have very capable, able lawyers who are working for the 

Department of Justice who are the children of your colleagues. 

And so I welcome them here and I very much know that you 

will contribute to Saskatchewan. People often forget the 

important role of lawyers in making the economy work. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 

you and through you I’d be remiss if not introducing Ms. 

Chelsea Valois myself. I had the wonderful opportunity of 

being a teammate of hers at the University of Regina on the 

track and field team for three years. She was much better at 

everything than I was. She won 10 Canada West medals, two 

CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sports] medals including one 

gold medal, and obviously she’s representing Canada 

wonderfully on the world bobsled circuit, Mr. Speaker. She’s a 

great friend of mine and a great friend to Regina, U of R 

[University of Regina]. She’s a great ambassador. She won the 

President’s Award last year and just a fantastic person overall, 

Mr. Speaker. So to you and through you, I’d like to introduce 



2922 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

Ms. Chelsea Valois. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members today 

seven adult students in the hospitality tourism apprentice 

program, and they’re in the Parkland College in Melville. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re in the west gallery today and they’re 

accompanied by their teacher, Carol Wiens, and also their 

program coordinator, Shelley Cherney. And I would ask 

members to welcome them to their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the member from Melville-Saltcoats welcoming the 

folks from Parkland College here. Certainly the regional college 

is a real advantage that we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan, taking those learning opportunities to the 

learners. So it’s really good to see these graduates here today, 

or these students, getting those skills to make a better living for 

themselves and their families and make our economy even 

stronger and growing ever stronger still. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. Welcome these folks to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise today to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage for the Northwest, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations and the community of Turnor 

Lake, including the neighbouring communities in each of 

those areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition have 

signed this petition from all throughout Saskatchewan. And this 

particular page, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this 

page have been primarily from Cole Bay. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know the proposed Saskatchewan employment Act, introduced 

in December 2012, is a sweeping rewrite of our labour laws, 

including but not limited to The Labour Standards Act, The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, The Health Labour 

Relations Reorganization Act, The Trade Union Act, and many 

others. We know that there are stable labour relations in all 

sectors running the risk of being thrown into turmoil as a result 

of Bill 85’s sweeping changes. Thousands of represented 

workers stand to lose their rights to bargain collectively and be 

represented by the union of their choice. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May, and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Purple Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today, March 26th, is Purple Day, 

the global day for epilepsy awareness. Purple Day was founded 

in 2008 by nine-year-old Cassidy Megan of Nova Scotia with 

the help of the Epilepsy Association of Nova Scotia. Cassidy 

chose the colour purple after the international colour for 

epilepsy, lavender. Cassidy's goal is for people with epilepsy 

everywhere to know that they are not alone. For almost 300,000 

people across Canada with epilepsy, this day is an important 

day for recognition and awareness building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, events have already taken place across the 

province in recognition of this day. Over the weekend the Royal 

University Hospital in Saskatoon, home of the Saskatchewan 

epilepsy program, hosted an education symposium for family 

physicians, nurses, residents, and technologists about diagnosis 

and management of epilepsy. The hospital is also hosting an 

event for the public today. 

 

The Saskatchewan epilepsy program started with the arrival of 

Dr. José Téllez-Zenteno to the province of Saskatchewan in 

2007. Dr. Téllez and his team have been working together for 

patients with epilepsy in Saskatchewan. This team of passionate 

people has been able, in a short period of time, to implement a 

program with provincial coverage to improve the quality of life 

for people in Saskatchewan with epilepsy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that my colleagues in the House join 

with me in recognizing Purple Day. I would ask that each of us 

take time out of our day to learn a bit more about this disorder 

and think about ways that we can reduce the isolation of 

individuals in our community who have epilepsy. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

The Power of Faith 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pleasure that I 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2923 

rise in this House to speak about a group of young people 

putting their faith into action. When word spread among a 

group of Moosomin and Rocanville young people that a 

friend’s father had been diagnosed with cancer, the students 

wasted no time in figuring out what they could do to help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday, February 27th, Mr. Kevin 

Whelpton of Moosomin was diagnosed with stage IV 

pancreatic cancer. These students found out about that 

diagnosis on Sunday, and by the end of the week, they had 

fundraising plans in place. The plans included a benefit hockey 

game, a supper, a silent auction, and a 50/50 draw. Mr. Speaker, 

in conjunction with these plans, these young people are also 

selling T-shirts that are titled We Believe in Prayer. Thus far 

these young people have managed to raise over $36,000. Now 

that’s real money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these young people rallied quickly to the cause of 

the Whelptons because the Whelptons are known around the 

community as a family who is always there to help others. 

Therefore it only made sense to lend a hand back. 

 

I would like all members in this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing these amazing young people who are truly putting 

their faith into action. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Wind Turbine Project First of its Kind in North America 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate the Cowessess First Nation on beginning 

construction on a wind turbine project. This project, the first of 

its kind in North America, will be located between the 

Trans-Canada Highway and Highway 33 on Cowessess First 

Nation land. This project is the result of a collaboration 

between the Cowessess First Nation and the Saskatchewan 

Research Council. 

 

What makes this project a first is that there will be a 

combination of wind turbine and battery storage system 

installed. The battery will be used to address the intermittent 

wind in southern Saskatchewan, and it’s hoped that the project 

will help demonstrate that a wind-battery system that can 

harness wind power and provide a constant, continuous output. 

The project will be supplying energy in the SaskPower grid 

through a 20-year power purchase agreement with SaskPower’s 

green options partners program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Cowessess First Nation is an example of a 

strong economic development, and I thank them for sharing the 

strength and vision of their community with the people of 

Saskatchewan. This vision for the future is best described by 

the Cowessess First Nation comprehensive community-based 

plan booklet, “The prospects of our future generations will 

grow with determination and the willingness to dream.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the members of the House join 

with me in congratulating the Cowessess First Nation on their 

success. Their creativity and willingness to support an 

environmentally friendly solution provides us all with an 

example of how to move our communities forward sustainably. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

[13:45] 

 

A Celebration of Cultures 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to rise in the House today to recognize a very 

special event that took place in my constituency this past 

Sunday which I was very happy to attend along with the 

member for Regina Dewdney. Community Connections, a 

celebration of cultures, was held at the Glencairn 

Neighbourhood Recreation Centre in the Regina Northeast 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. This special event, which was put 

on by the Glen Elm Library, the Open Door Society, and the 

Dewdney East Community Association embraces different 

cultures and brings a community together. Over 350 people 

came together to celebrate the many different cultures that 

make up our communities, our city, and our province to 

participate and take in the array of festivities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, eight different ethnic groups participated in the 

event which was full of various cultural exhibits, ethnic food 

and drink, singing, and dancing. It was wonderful to see all the 

different ethnic groups coming together, Mr. Speaker, and 

enjoying each other’s culture and company under one roof. 

 

I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in recognizing 

this great cultural event and thanking all the organizations and 

individuals that came together to make this event in the Regina 

Northeast constituency possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Little Princess Ball 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

Assembly today to speak about the Moose Jaw Health 

Foundation’s fifth annual Little Princess Ball. Each year, Amy 

Ofstie and her incredibly dedicated committee of volunteers 

create a fantastic environment for the royal guests to enjoy. 

 

This year once again was a feast for the senses with a room 

transformed into an underwater world. The theme of the Little 

Mermaid came to life and wowed everyone. The singers, the 

Royal Disney Princesses, who joined the 400 guests, made it a 

truly special night out on the town. 

 

The funds raised this year will purchase a new panda bed for 

the new Moose Jaw hospital. This bed provides a very special 

microenvironment for newborns in the mother baby unit. 

 

To date, the Little Princess Ball committee has raised over 

$80,000 for the Moose Jaw Health Foundation. A record 

amount was raised at this year’s event, thanks to a big help 

from K+S Potash who donated a generous $20,000. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in thanking Amy 

Ofstie, all the volunteers who assisted in creating a truly 

memorable evening for all the little princesses, as well as the 

community for their generous donations, including K+S Potash. 



2924 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Focus on Women Trade Show 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise in 

the House today to recognize a great event that I had the 

pleasure of attending. The Focus on Women trade show took 

place in Prince Albert March 16th and 17th, which I was very 

happy to attend along with my colleague, the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

This event was a dynamic trade show and sale that brings 

exhibitors from a variety of areas together with women of all 

ages to show them what is new, exciting, educational, and 

informative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this great trade show consistently draws crowds of 

over 2,000 people from the Prince Albert area, and the event 

drew over 900 people just in the first day. The event was 

completely sold out to exhibitors with over 90 exhibits at the 

trade show. The exhibitors had a social on Saturday night which 

gave businesses and people a chance to network as well as 

enjoy a great meal after a busy day of selling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that the members of this Assembly join with 

me in recognizing the hugely successful Focus on Women trade 

show and to thank all the organizers, exhibitors, and attendees. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Athlete Chases Olympic Dream 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I would like to talk about a young woman who hails from 

Zenon Park and is quickly becoming a name known to many, 

both nationally and internationally. Mr. Speaker, I am speaking 

about Chelsea Valois. 

 

While Chelsea may now be known in the world of bobsledding, 

she has a history that includes more than that. During her time 

with the U of R Cougars, Chelsea earned 10 Canada West 

medals in track and field as well as two Canadian 

Interuniversity Sport medals which included gold in women’s 

pentathlon. 

 

It was only last year that Chelsea got into the sport of 

bobsledding, and that year she paired with pilot Kallie 

Humphries and she became a gold medallist. Since then they 

have won medals at 6 out of the 10 World Cup events this year. 

On January 26th the pair won the women’s world bobsled 

championship in Switzerland. In the last race this season, which 

took place in Russia, they earned a bronze medal. This summer 

Chelsea will have her first summer of full-time bobsled training 

to better prepare her for her rigours of the season ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Chelsea on her 

accomplishments thus far and wish her the best of luck as she 

chases her Olympic dream of wearing the red and white in 

Sochi in 2014. We will all be watching you, Chelsea. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Funding for Universities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the last few days 

we’ve seen how the Sask Party government’s budget is not 

doing enough for education and how the attention is not there 

for kids in the classroom. We’ve also seen, Mr. Speaker, how 

the Sask Party government is off-loading funding cut decisions 

onto health regions and the Cancer Agency to the tune for $54 

million. But we’re also seeing negative steps, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to the funding of our universities here in the 

province. 

 

In last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

walked away from its promise to properly fund the Health 

Sciences Building and force nearly $100 million of debt onto 

the university’s books. And we know now, Mr. Speaker, there 

are cuts. There are programs being ended, Mr. Speaker, because 

of the decisions by this government. 

 

My question to the Premier: why did this year’s budget do 

nothing to address, to fix the problems created in last year’s 

budget when it comes to funding for our University of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again the 

member’s preamble is incorrect in terms of the budget and its 

treatment of health care and education. Yesterday we 

demonstrated that the Leader of the Opposition himself, when 

running for the leadership of his party, said he wanted to find 

more efficiencies within the health care system. I presume 

that’s still his position. If it isn’t, he should say that that 

position has changed like others he apparently held prior to 

becoming the leader of the party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to post-secondary education, we see 

in this particular budget the continuation of support for 

institutions, support for regional colleges, support for the 

universities, and historic support for students through the 

graduate retention plan, through the brand new Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship. That’s why those who head up our 

regional colleges are saying positive things about the budget in 

the media. That’s why the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

president is also saying positive things about the budget in the 

media, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It follows along with the record of this government where 

we’ve increased operating funding 52.8 per cent over the last 

six years. Compare that with the record of the NDP for their last 

six — 37 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. Actions on this side 

will always speak louder than the rhetoric from members 

opposite.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2925 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the $100 million of debt being 

forced onto the university’s books is not rhetoric. That’s clearly 

known by all people in the province. As the U of S grapples, 

Mr. Speaker, with soaring debt and insufficient operating funds, 

it’s the students, the faculty, and the staff, Mr. Speaker, who are 

feeling the negative effects of those decisions.  

 

And just yesterday we learned of 100 layoffs in the next few 

days, coming shortly at the University of Saskatchewan. And 

the university administration recognized that this is the fallout 

from last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. So we can understand 

why people in the university community, students, people in the 

province are concerned about what the impact will be from this 

year’s budget when it comes to our universities and the 

financial crunch that they are experiencing. The 100 staff that 

are laid off, Mr. Speaker, provided services to students and 

ensure that the university runs smoothly and efficiently. 

 

My question to the Premier: with the negative fallout from last 

year’s budget still being felt, cuts happening in the next few 

days, Mr. Speaker, what does he have to say to the students, to 

the faculty, to the staff who are deeply concerned that he didn’t 

do enough in this budget to address the problems created in last 

year’s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the record of the government, 

the record on members on this side of the House is quite simply 

this: a 52.8 per cent increase in operating budgets for the 

universities over the last number of years since the term of the 

government started, Mr. Speaker. That compares quite 

favourably with the 37 per cent that members offered when 

they were on this side of the House. It compares favourably 

with the cuts that came from the NDP [New Democratic Party], 

in ’97-98 most recently, Mr. Speaker, at both the U of S and the 

University of Saskatchewan. These are the facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the British Columbia government is cutting 

their post-secondary funding by $46 million over the next three 

years, while Quebec universities are told to cut 124 million by 

April, while Alberta’s cutting $147 million — a 7 per cent cut 

to the universities — we are increasing operating dollars. 

 

Universities have been asked though to find efficiencies, 

notwithstanding these significant increases in operating revenue 

that the Leader of the Opposition wants to ignore. We want 

them to find efficiencies just as members on this side of the 

House are finding efficiencies so that we have more resources 

for students, so that we have a sustainable post-secondary 

system through the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when the Premier talks about 

finding efficiencies on that side of the House, this was the 

government, this was the Sask Party that came forward with the 

plan to add three more MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], Mr. Speaker, to the Assembly. That’s not exactly 

efficient in my view. 

 

If the Premier thinks everything is perfect on campus, Mr. 

Speaker, I think he needs to speak to more people on campus. 

He needs to speak to the faculty members. He needs to speak to 

students who are concerned about the quality of education that 

they are receiving and that they will be receiving in the years to 

come. 

 

On the issue of cuts on our campuses on budget day, President 

Timmons had this to say: 

 

It’s tight. We’re a lean institution. We are below average 

in admin costs for our campus, significantly below the 

national average, so every time we need to do this it gets 

harder and harder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see cuts occurring now on campuses, and we 

know because of this Sask Party government’s budget that more 

cuts will be coming. My question to the Premier: it’s their 

budget, it’s their government that is insisting on cuts at the U of 

S and the U of R. So what specific cuts would the Premier like 

to see on campus, and can he guarantee that students’ education 

will not be compromised in that process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear. Is the 

hon. member, is the Leader of the Opposition saying that this 

side of the House, the government members on this side cut the 

budgets to the universities? Because if that’s what he’s saying, 

it would sort of be the latest in a string of examples where the 

hon. members are not necessarily coming forward with the facts 

of the budget because it doesn’t fit their rhetorical objectives, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The truth is quite the opposite. The truth is that we have seen 

the most recent in increases to their operating budgets of the 

universities in this province, Mr. Speaker. The University of 

Saskatchewan president said this on budget day: 

 

Representing the U of S, I have to say I am very pleased 

with this budget. At a time when the province has lots of 

priorities to address, lots of issues with infrastructure, 

when universities throughout Canada are finding 

themselves in pretty bleak situations, yet again this 

government has signalled their support for the entire 

sector and for the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Yet again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll take the word of the president of 

the U of S over the new Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, staff are being laid off. Programs 

are being eliminated, and this is under the watch of the Sask 

Party government. 

 

We’re seeing a common theme here, Mr. Speaker, where the 

Sask Party government likes to give decisions about funding 

cuts to other organizations. Yesterday we saw, with health 

regions and the Cancer Agency, how the government is 

insisting that the health regions find cuts. And we see, Mr. 

Speaker, that for Saskatoon and Regina, that the health regions 

are actually starting the year in the red, each with a deficit of 

about $25 million. And we know on the campuses, Mr. 

Speaker, that the financial crunch will continue to snowball 



2926 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

under the decisions being made by the Sask Party government. 

 

My question to the Premier: just like our health regions, both 

the U of S and the U of R have already made cuts, so how on 

earth does the Premier expect further cuts to occur that will not 

affect the quality of the education delivered by faculty and 

received by students here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We demonstrated yesterday that the Leader 

of the Opposition went running for the job to be leader of the 

New Democratic Party, campaigned on efficiencies. He 

campaigned on cuts, as he would describe them, in health. 

Here’s what he said again. This is the Leader of the Opposition 

now when he’s running to be the Leader of the Opposition: 

“More efficiency will be built into the public health care 

system. Our focus needs to be on establishing a more efficient 

system centred around the patient.” Mr. Speaker, why was that 

good enough for him when he was running for the leadership 

and now he’s changed his position? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we make no secret of the fact that we want all of 

the funding partners of the government to find efficiencies. 

We’re reducing the size of our government by 15 per cent over 

four years. We’d like the municipal sector to find efficiencies. 

We’d like universities to find efficiencies. We’d like health 

boards to find efficiencies. And, Mr. Speaker, the reason we 

want to do that is so we can sustain the growth in this province, 

so we can invest in the disabled, in paratransit, Mr. Speaker, so 

that we can invest in people, improve quality of life. That’s our 

vision, the cornerstone of which is balanced budgets and fiscal 

sustainability. 

 

Now that member wrote Mr. Lingenfelter’s $5 billion platform. 

I’d understand why he has no interest in fiscal sustainability. 

Woe betide this province if they ever form the government 

because we’d be back to massive deficits and increased debt, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the real member for Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Standardized Testing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

real question too. The Minister of Education has yet to explain 

why standardized testing is the way to go for our province. But 

in last week’s thin education budget, he managed to find $5.9 

million for computer software for standardized testing. Mr. 

Speaker, a lot of parents are wondering where the real priorities 

are for this government, and teachers are wondering too. The 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation said it’s a glaring evident 

that the only options have found, the minister has found are, 

and I quote, “. . . being allocated for data collection through 

standardized testing as opposed to classroom supports.” 

 

To the minister: how many educational assistants could have 

been hired this year for $5.9 million that he’s spending on 

standardized testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank the 

member opposite for the question. You know I’ve been, I’ve 

been a teacher, an administrator, and a school board member 

for almost 40 years, Mr. Speaker. I can’t tell you how many 

parent-teacher-student interviews I’ve ever had. I don’t, I can’t 

count them: hundreds maybe thousands. One of the common 

themes of those interviews, Mr. Speaker, was how well is my 

child doing? I need to be able to know how well my child is 

doing so that I can help them move forward for success, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That’s the reason why we’re introducing the student 

achievement initiative, Mr. Speaker, because for the first time 

we’ll be able to tell parents, we’ll be able to tell students, and 

we’ll be able to tell teachers the reasons, the rationale of how 

we can move their children forward, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll 

continue in that direction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — You know I am amazed that that minister’s 

saying that he couldn’t provide that answer in those interviews 

about how well those kids are doing. But we know this, Mr. 

Speaker, the need for English as an additional language are 

growing. As our province becomes more and more diverse, the 

needs in the classroom for supporting students who may not 

speak English at home are presenting teachers with challenges 

in ensuring students understand the material. That’s why this 

budget fails to put appropriate resources needed for EAL 

[English as an additional language]. 

 

The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation said, and I quote, 

“With the enrolment increases come the need for additional 

funding to support diversity, and specifically English as an 

additional language.” Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party made a 

choice to fund standardized testing last week. They didn’t have 

to make that choice. To the minister: how much support could 

be added for English as an additional language instead of the 

$5.9 million for standard testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

And again, thank the member opposite for the question. You 

know, 2.3 per cent increase in operating funding is not a status 

quo budget, Mr. Speaker, and contained in that amount of 

increase, Mr. Speaker, is an amount of $17 million to deal with 

current enrolment. And one of the factors in that current 

enrolment amount of money, Mr. Speaker, is for supports for 

learning, from where we get our teachers for English as a 

second language, educational assistants, etc. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, there’s more money in there for First Nations 

and Métis students as well, Mr. Speaker. So the supports to 

learning are present in that amount, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 

continue to do that. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

additional $10 million over last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2927 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister found the slim 

resources for 40 new portables at schools. But the budget also 

flagged there are now 4,500 new students in our classrooms. 

Either that means that classrooms are going to be packed with 

over 110 students each, or the ministry’s putting a drop in the 

bucket of what is needed to relieve the pressure on our 

classroom that this province is facing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new resources for education predominantly 

went to standardized testing, a policy that no one over there has 

been able to explain, instead of relieving the real pressures that 

we’re seeing in our classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: how many more classrooms could have been 

built instead of spending $5.9 million on standardized testing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker, and the 

member opposite for the question. You know, standards are all 

around us. I’m sure the member opposite has a driver’s licence. 

He needed a standard to get to that stage, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve got standards all throughout our province, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ll continue to . . . [inaudible]. 

 

Chinook School Division for example, Mr. Speaker, in their 

balanced literacy program, increased the reading level of their 

children by 21 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over the course of four 

years. Regina Public, using the early years identification tool, 

Mr. Speaker, decreased the deficiencies of students by 44 per 

cent over the course of a year, Mr. Speaker. Prairie Valley 

School Division, 23 of their 26 initiatives showed remarked 

increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t we want that for the best interests 

of our children? Why wouldn’t we want that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Changes to Canada Pension Plan 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, hidden in the back pages 

of the provincial budget was the Sask Party government’s 

reversal in position on the Canada Pension Plan. Instead of 

supporting a shift towards better retirement security for 

everyone in our province, the Sask Party’s taken a step 

backwards, saying in this budget, “. . . the Government is not 

supportive of a CPP enhancement . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan want to see retirement 

security enhanced, and the CPP [Canada Pension Plan] is the 

best way to do that. It’s affordable. It’s efficient. It’s portable. 

It’s common sense. Why is the Sask Party government 

reversing its position, walking away from improving the 

Canada Pension Plan, an important part of retirement security 

for every Saskatchewan resident? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The member opposite is very well aware of the changes that 

may happen at the CPP level and at the federal government 

level and what kind of, actually, decisions will need to be made 

before CPP can be announced. That discussion has been under 

way for about four years. There continues to be discussion. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the officials at the federal government 

level have been tasked with doing some reviews of the current 

CPP plan to see what kind of pressure would fall upon 

employers, upon employees, who might not be affected 

negatively if we indeed increase CPP contributions by a modest 

amount. So, Mr. Speaker, those discussions are under way. 

Minister Flaherty has indicated that the CPP discussion will 

again be on the table at our next meeting, which is proposed to 

be in June. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I’ll maybe push 

the Finance minister on this front then, because in the past he’s 

spoken about having some support for expanded CPP, 

something that certainly we’ve championed, something that 

we’ve called for, something that most other provinces in 

Canada support. Now we open up the budget, and we’ve had 

that commitment from the Finance Minister, now we open up 

the budget, and in the black and white ink of that budget it 

states, as I said there before . . . the Government is not 

supportive of a CPP enhancement . . .” And it references 

discussions that are going forward. 

 

Now I guess we’re looking for leadership from this government 

and from our Finance minister, while many other provinces 

have had that leadership from their Finance minister. Does our 

Finance minister and that government support the expansion of 

the CPP? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, we as one 

of the provinces at the table will continue to look at the 

expansion of CPP and what that might mean. We’re going to 

look at the definition of what modest increases might be, and at 

the appropriate time we’ll make that decision. One of the other 

tools, Mr. Speaker, that I kept hidden from the members 

opposite, and actually talked about it in my budget speech, Mr. 

Speaker, was the whole position of the federal government on 

pooled registered pension plans, PRPPs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, PRPPs are going to be another tool that people in 

the province of Saskatchewan and all across Canada might use 

to enhance their retirement. Mr. Speaker, we know that 

financial literacy in the province of Saskatchewan and 

throughout Canada is woefully inadequate. We need to ensure 

that people have choice, people have options. And we’re going 

to pursue that, as I indicated in my speech. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to introduce that by introducing the Act that will 

introduce pooled registered pension plans here in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Finance minister on 

this file is tough to track. He seems to have one position one 



2928 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

day, another position in the black and white of his budget, sort 

of flip-flopping around, Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking for 

some real commitment. 

 

Now while the PRPP is certainly a new tool that’s been 

introduced and something that we support as a new tool for 

retirement security, it’s limited in its scope. It’s voluntary and 

only applies to some. We’re looking for broad-based expansion 

of something that’s there for many, and that’s the Canada 

Pension Plan. So we support new tools, the PRPP that’s being 

brought forward, but not at the expense of expanding the 

Canada Pension Plan. 

 

So I guess my question to the Finance minister who’s confusing 

his position more here today: is it an error in his budget that 

he’s printed in the back that this government doesn’t support 

the expansion of the Canada Pension Plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite . . . I 

want to clarify a couple of things. As far as the expansion of the 

CPP across Canada, Mr. Speaker, we are going to look at the 

options. We’re going to ensure that if there is indeed a desire 

and the adequate support, Mr. Speaker, because you do need 

seven provinces to change that. If there’s adequate support to 

put in place modest increases to CPP without, without ensuring 

that the economy, the growing economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan doesn’t take a step backward because there is 

extreme pressures on employers, we’re going to look at that.  

 

That has been my position from day one, Mr. Speaker, as the 

Minister of Finance in this province. It’ll continue to be that. 

And I want to know whether the member opposite is indeed 

going to support pooled registered pension plans here in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Creative Industries and Film Employment Tax Credit 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year’s budget 

ended the Saskatchewan film employment tax credit, and last 

week’s budget confirmed the government’s stubborn streak and 

their failure to listen to people who know the tax credit worked. 

Mr. Speaker, when they made that decision, they scrambled. 

The Finance Department told the Ministry of Culture they had a 

bad story to tell about the end of the film industry in the 

province, so the minister and his officials looked for more spin. 

One week before the budget was released, they put together a 

contract that cost thousands of dollars to come up with their 

justifications and talking points. Mr. Speaker, why would this 

government spend money on research on a tax credit after 

making the decision to cut it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

find it strange, I mean here today and in the budget speech — 

we will have a reply to the budget speech later — we’ve had the 

opposition members consistently saying you need to spend 

more, you need to spend more. We heard it here again today: 

you need to spend more on post-secondary education, you need 

to spend more on health care. 

 

As a matter of fact, the member for Saskatoon Nutana last 

night, Mr. Speaker, in her budget speech said, even their 

increases are cuts, if I could put it that way, Mr. Speaker. What 

we have here, Mr. Speaker, what we have here in this year’s 

budget presented, the sixth consecutive balanced budget 

presented by this government, Mr. Speaker, is in our culture 

sectors. When the government is spending 3.1 per cent more 

than expenditures this year, Mr. Speaker, we have an 18 per 

cent budget lift in the culture sector of our budget in this year’s 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have $5 million for the film employment tax credit in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. And we have $5 million, brand new 

dollars, in Creative Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, an investment 

fund that all of our creative industries can access. And that 

member says, it won’t help this economy at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 

minister didn’t hear my question. Why would this government 

commission a study after making a decision to cut a particular 

program? Why would you spend money on analysis after 

you’ve cut it, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When the stubborn Sask Party government made the 

short-sighted decision to kill the film tax credit, they needed to 

find a reason to justify it. That’s why they scrambled to put 

together the spin and PR [public relations]. In a report that cost 

taxpayers thousands of dollars, commissioned after they already 

made their senseless decision to end the film tax credit, the 

government looked for anything to justify it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I asked in committee last April for the 

government to produce analysis on the film tax credit, the 

minister gave none. That wasn’t the only . . . I had asked 

several times last year for some analysis to be tabled. When 

asked, why did the minister not release this report or any other 

analysis on the film tax credit, and will he table those 

documents now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, in the context of last 

year’s balanced budget, this government made some very 

difficult decisions. We decided to invest in people living with 

disabilities. We decided to invest in our low-income seniors, 

Mr. Speaker, providing additional funding for them. We 

decided to change the tax code such that single moms making 

$25,000 a year, Mr. Speaker, paid 400 per cent less in 

provincial income tax in the province of Saskatchewan than 

they do in the province of Manitoba. Those were difficult 

decisions, Mr. Speaker, that this government made. We think 

that’s better public policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government undertook a consultation process 

with all of our creative industries in the province of 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2929 

Saskatchewan. We spent the better part of six months, Mr. 

Speaker, speaking and consulting with the creative industries to 

develop a support mechanism for those creative industries, Mr. 

Speaker. And what we came up with was on the basis of what 

was being provided to us with respect to feedback, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s Creative Saskatchewan. 

 

And we know, we know, Mr. Speaker, that in the province of 

British Columbia right now they’re spending over $300 million 

on a film tax credit, Mr. Speaker, and they’re at 80 per cent 

unemployment in that province. We think we have a better 

mechanism to support all of our creative industries in this 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. And again 

this minister failed to answer either question around why would 

they commission a study after they’ve already made a decision 

just days before the budget, Mr. Speaker, and why did they 

refuse to table that analysis or anything else. 

 

The day before last year’s budget, the government considered 

flexibility around their impending cuts. In their own notes, a 

Sask Party government official wrote they would consider 

flexibility “. . . if someone comes forward after the FETC 

cancelled.” Mr. Speaker, it appears that the government was 

open to change only one day before the budget. But instead 

they dug in their heels and continued this stubborn streak, 

refusing to admit what a disastrous mistake cutting the film 

employment tax credit was. 

 

Why was the government willing to be flexible on the film tax 

credit the day before the budget, but so entrenched in its 

wrong-headed decision the day after? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the hon. 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale has read the budget or not. 

There was an 18 per cent increase, an 18 per cent increase in 

the cultural spending in this province, Mr. Speaker, in this 

budget. We have 5 million new dollars, 5 million new dollars, 

Mr. Speaker, in Creative Saskatchewan for all of our creative 

industries, all of our creative industries to apply to for financial 

support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when asked, when asked, the Culture critic for the NDP 

said it’s “. . . not going to stimulate film production here in 

Saskatchewan . . . It does nothing for the economy, and that’s 

the bottom line.” Mr. Speaker, I suspect that musical producers, 

visual artists, theatrical producers, those that are involved in 

digital media woke up the morning after the budget and read 

those remarks, Mr. Speaker, and wondering how their work 

does not contribute to our economy. She ought to be ashamed 

of ever saying that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think we all heard. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 89, The 

Creative Saskatchewan Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: —The Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: —Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 228 through 235. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 228 to 235 inclusive. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and join in the budget debate on this fine day. 

The sun’s shining in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. We see here in question 

period the very reasons being presented why I and I know my 

colleagues in the official opposition are going to be voting 

against this budget, and why we sit back and scratch our heads 



2930 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

at some of the decisions of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On this last set of questions alone, you see what smacks of 

opinion-based evidence making in terms of the way this 

government has made their decisions. They took a vital sector 

of the creative industry in this province and destroyed it, Mr. 

Speaker, destroyed it. And then in the hurry to try and paper 

over the decision that they’d made and cover their tracks, they 

go out to different PR outfits and different . . . trying to develop 

an analysis that fits their situation. 

 

And you know, a year later here we are, and the minister 

introduces The Creative Saskatchewan Act. And you know, 

great, Mr. Speaker. You know, if that was coming in and of 

itself, that would be great. And on its own merits we will judge 

it, and we will weigh in on a more informed manner for that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But for that and the Saskatchewan Arts Board to finally get an 

increase under this government, Mr. Speaker, you know, the 

cost on the other side of the ledger is last year they trashed the 

film industry. And so, you know, if that’s some kind of 

equivalency game that they think they can play off in their 

Angus Reid polling, they’re sitting there saying, oh well we’ve 

got a problem with people that like the arts, and this is maybe 

something that we can take back out and give the member from 

Northeast something that he can shout about across the 

province in terms of the creative industry . . . Well, you know, 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, but for those initiatives in and of 

themselves, you know, on the face of them seem to be fine 

initiatives and, in some cases, well overdue initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But it’s always about the context with these members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s always about the big picture. So there 

may be this measure or that measure that can be tuned in on or 

focused in on, and it looks pretty good, Mr. Speaker. And some 

of these things, again in and of themselves, are good measures, 

would be, if we weren’t in the British parliamentary system that 

we’re in, Mr. Speaker, would even be supportable measures. 

But in the context of a budget and in the context of a record of a 

government that does things like the . . . Again the 

opinion-based evidence making that seems to have gone on 

with the film employment tax credit and the decision to kill it, 

Mr. Speaker, and along with that a vital sector of our creative 

industries in this province, again you have a hard time, I know 

on this side of the House, taking what is said on budget day as 

the full measure of that government’s commitment to different 

things that happen in this province. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to back up a bit and start 

where I should have to start, and that is to talk about the good 

people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, the way that I think this 

budget in some cases meets some of their expectations but in 

some cases doesn’t deal with them straight, doesn’t do the job 

that needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say even before I get into that, Mr. Speaker, a big 

thank you to the people that I work with to help to bring voice 

to the concerns and issues that are important to the people of 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. I want to say a very special thank 

you to Colleen Smith who I work with in the constituency 

office. Colleen and I have known each other for a lot of years 

and it’s a real honour and a privilege to work with her. And I 

know those are words that sometimes get tossed around in this 

business, Mr. Speaker, but in my case it’s really true. I’m quite 

thankful and I’m quite fortunate to be working with Ms. Smith 

in terms of trying to serve the good people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

I’m also thankful, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the support that I get 

and that I’m so fortunate for from family. And again we’re a 

ragtag bunch, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the McCalls. And some 

of us aren’t doing as well as maybe once was the case, but it’s a 

family that has a lot of love and a lot of support and had a lot to 

teach myself about how to carry yourself in the community, 

how to work for the community, how to sustain that work, 

sustain that effort, and to think about what is really important in 

this life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for that I’m very, very proud to be the son of Carolyn and 

Doug McCall and to be a member of the McCall family. I’m 

very thankful for the love and support of Theresa. And you 

know you get, sometimes you get very lucky in this life, Mr. 

Speaker, you get very fortunate, and sometimes you get some 

sunshine in what is otherwise darker patches on the road. But 

I’m very fortunate to have the love and support of Theresa. And 

it makes this work all the more rewarding and engaging, Mr. 

Speaker, when you have that love and support from family. 

 

So I’m thankful for the people I work with, I’m thankful for 

family, and I’m thankful for the good constituents and 

neighbours and friends that I have in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre — the people that are my neighbours, 

everybody that’s wondering where the heck we’re going to put 

all our snow, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll see how that goes in the 

week to come. But it’s, I’ve said this many times before, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ll say this on down the line, I know it’s popular 

amongst MLAs to talk about how special and unique their 

constituency is, but I think that’s actually the case for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

In terms of embodying the motto of our province, “from many 

peoples, strength,” you have people from literally around the 

globe that live in Regina Elphinstone-Centre. You have 

newcomers, you have long-settled citizens, you have First 

Nations, you have Métis. It’s a diverse place in terms of 

socioeconomics. It’s a diverse place in terms of just what makes 

up the ebb and flow of different parts of the neighbourhood, be 

it the residential areas and the vital sort of vibrant communities 

that you see in places like heritage and north central and 

Cathedral and Regent Park, the bit that is in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

The exciting sort of developments in the warehouse district, the 

always, always vitally beating pulse of this city, the downtown, 

Mr. Speaker, and the great sort of cultural opportunities on 

offer there, the great sort of administrative centre that that 

brings to both public and private sector — it’s a very interesting 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, and I feel very humbled and 

honoured to serve as their representative in this legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how this budget relates to the 

needs and the hopes and aspirations and the issues that are of 

concern to the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, again I’ll 

say off the top, there are items in this budget that constituents 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2931 

will look upon favourably. There are items in this budget that I 

look upon favourably, that I am glad to see them in this budget. 

But on balance, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way this 

government conducts its business, the way this government 

carries itself, the way that this government is increasingly 

stubborn and, in some cases, less than forthright in terms of the 

way that decisions are made or the impact of those decisions, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the balance that is talked about in 

rhetoric in this speech from the Minister of Finance, the 

balanced growth, a tagline that seems to be the mantra for this 

budget, well if there was balance in this, Mr. Speaker, then it 

would be a different speech that I’m giving today. But that 

balance is not there. 

 

The balance is not tipped in favour of support. And so I, for the 

reasons that are ably stated in the amendment and for the things 

that I’m going to talk about now, Mr. Speaker, I will not be 

supporting the budget. I will be supporting the amendment that 

states: 

 

That the Assembly disagrees with the government for 

tabling a credit card budget that pushes costs on future 

generations, hurts health care, fails students and schools, 

rolls back the clock on environment progress, denies 

transparency, and relies on short-sighted privatization 

schemes. 

 

And starting with the last and moving back to the first, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the P3 [public-private partnership] 

contemplation that we see in this budget, again this would seem 

to be a case of a government very anxious to manage the look 

of the books, very anxious to shove costs that should be 

incurred in the in years for these budgets to the out years, 

shovelling them over to the kids, to the grandkids, to those yet 

to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again you know, in some ways we’ve seen that act before. 

We’ve seen a way that the government in the 1980s made a 

bunch of decisions that we paid for until this very day, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And when we hear different things from members opposite in 

terms of the record of, you know, the former NDP government 

and the deficits that they like to talk about that were inherited, 

well when the Roy Romanow New Democratic Party took 

government in 1991, there was a deficit deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

That was a huge problem for this province. 

 

And in point of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you’ll cast your 

mind back to then, this province — because of the decisions 

that had been made through the 1980s and the way that they’d 

been passed forward to the next generation, the way that mess 

had been shovelled off to the next government — in that first 

budget, Mr. Speaker, the government had to spend more on the 

deficit and servicing the debt that had been racked up through 

the 1980s than on the entirety of education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if you think about that and what that means for the ability 

of the province to build for the future — let alone build for the 

future; build for that day, Mr. Speaker — it’s pretty rich 

listening to some of the members talk about . . . I think the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres was talking about a reign of 

terror that took place in the 1990s in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It’s hard to take that seriously, Mr. Speaker, and 

if you do take it seriously, it’s hard to not hold your head in 

your hands when you listen to those kind of things. 

 

When the NDP government left office in 2007, there was $2 

billion cash on hand that the members opposite . . . You know 

at the time, the Premier had the forthright ability to come 

forward and say, you know, thanks very much. There were 

good things done. And how we see that slide, Mr. Speaker. And 

I guess it’s up there with the pledges around humility, the 

pledges around we’re going to earn the support of the 

Saskatchewan people, and we’re going to do it every day. You 

know, we don’t see that as often as once we did in this 

Chamber. And I guess in some respects, Mr. Speaker, so be it, 

so be it. But if the members opposite want to honestly reckon 

with the record of this province and reckon with what were 

mistakes and what were good things for the province, you’d 

hear a different story than the kind of litany that gets unleashed 

on a daily basis about what happened in this province between 

1991 and 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if you can’t . . . Those that would deny history and those that 

can’t learn the lessons of history, you know, it’s going to be 

interesting to see how those lessons get repeated. And again in 

terms of the credit card nature of this budget and the way that 

these costs have been kicked on to future generations, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to see how that plays out in terms of P3s 

for, or privatization schemes for hospitals, for schools. We’re 

going to see how that plays out for roads, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again one of the problems with that is, you know, there’s 

no satisfaction in a decade down the line saying, you know, 

well it turns out that it was more expensive and that these costs 

got passed on to the next generation. You know, there’s not a 

lot of satisfaction in that, Mr. Speaker. But I think that’s what’s 

coming down the line. I think we can take that lesson from 

other jurisdictions where these privatization schemes have been 

entered into. And you know, we’ll see the proof in display. But 

my hope, Mr. Speaker, is that people in their wisdom cotton on 

to what is going on and tell this government something 

different, that this is not a path that should be pursued, that this 

is dangerous for the province. 

 

In terms of denying transparency, Mr. Speaker, again this 

government . . . This very day we had the questions around the 

film employment tax credit. And that one still has a lot of folks 

scratching their head in terms of why that decision was made. 

 

But in terms of what came forward in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

you know, perhaps we’ll get the fuller picture through freedom 

of information. And maybe we will get somebody finally 

wanting to get some things off their chest on that side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again you see a tendency on the part of that government to 

try to jam reality into their ideology, to take their opinions and 

then base evidence on that to make decisions. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a bad way to run the province. 

 

In terms of environmental progress, my colleague, last night, 

the member for Nutana, ably listed the cuts that are being made 



2932 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

in this year’s budget, again compounding other cuts that are 

made by this government. 

 

And again it’s one thing to work on the development side of the 

coin and to have that balanced approach to development, Mr. 

Speaker. But if you don’t have the environmental credibility on 

the other side, if you’re not looking to the environment, then of 

course you’re making decisions that future generations will pay 

for. And it’s the environmental edition of rolling the credit 

forward for next generations to pay off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if you’re doing that as a government, then don’t be 

surprised when you go to other provinces and other 

jurisdictions to say, you know, we are environmental stewards 

of the first rank; we’ve got a great environmental record. And 

they say to you, well it’s not the case; your actions say 

something very different. And these cuts that you’ve been 

making to the climate change fund, like in 2007, Mr. Speaker, 

that they said they were going to sustain but they couldn’t wait 

to get it cut right out of the gates, the cuts that we see in terms 

of the environmental oversight and regulatory capacity in the 

department, in the Ministry of the Environment, in this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, again the rhetoric does not add up to the record in 

terms of the way that these members are conducting their 

business. So we’ll see how that carries forward. 

 

In terms of failing students in schools, again we’ve heard about 

the monies being brought forward again by my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre, the Education critic for the official 

opposition, on what’s happening with standardized testing. And 

again a fairly contentious topic, Mr. Speaker, but one that 

ideologically this government seems to be committed to and is 

bulling forward with. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I wish they had 

shown the same sort of fortitude when it came to pursuing the 

work of the joint task force on employment and education 

opportunities for First Nations and Métis people in this 

province. And I know that there’s $3 million earmarked in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, and you know, for dollar one towards 

better educational outcomes for First Nations and Métis people 

in this province, it’s again a good thing to see. 

 

But in terms of the way that this whole file has been handled by 

this government, the way that the joint task force was 

announced in the May before the 2011 election . . . It was 

supposed to be up and running in the fall of 2011. It didn’t get 

up and running until the spring of 2012, Mr. Speaker, and the 

fact that there were $2 million put forward for that budget . . . 

And we don’t begrudge making sure that these kind of inquiries 

are properly funded so they can do their work and gather that 

research base. That’s as it should be. But I think it’s telling, Mr. 

Speaker, that they put up $2 million for the operations of it and 

now they’ve got a notional $3 million in terms of a response 

after the report finally comes from the joint task force later this 

spring. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s disappointing, to say the least, 

in terms of not doing what should be done, not taking the kind 

of action that should be taken on a front that is so critically 

important for this province’s present and future, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think, you know, last Thursday we had the provincial 

budget. The following day . . . Or last Wednesday, we had the 

provincial budget. The Thursday we had the federal budget. 

And again there was some expectation around whether or not 

the federal government would finally come forward to make 

sure that on-reserve First Nations education is equally funded or 

equitably funded with off-reserve education, Mr. Speaker. And 

in the province of Saskatchewan, again it’s hard to get the exact 

figures out of the federal government on this, but we know that 

it’s about a third less that goes for per-student funding 

on-reserve. 

 

And there was a great opportunity for this government to say 

that is a priority for the people of Saskatchewan, that kids are 

funded on an unlevel playing field, that it’s not fair, Mr. 

Speaker, that that should be addressed. There was a lot of 

expectation weighing in on Thursday’s budget in terms of what 

the federal government would finally do on that file. And of 

course, Mr. Speaker, it came up with nothing to address that 

unlevel playing field, to address that inequity that so hamstrings 

our system in this province, Mr. Speaker. And again the way 

that . . . If you haven’t got that level playing field for education, 

Mr. Speaker — education being one of the great levellers in 

life, in society, in the economy — if you don’t have that, Mr. 

Speaker, then a lot of the other problems that we see around us 

in this province, it’s not real hard to figure how these things 

happen, how they fit together. 

 

So again there was no action, no meaningful action other than 

this notional $3 million in terms of responding to the joint task 

force’s work. And the joint task force, which I would add 

moreover, Mr. Speaker, the joint task force which, in their 

interim report before Christmas said the most pressing issue 

that they encounter — in terms of the hearings that they were 

doing across the province and the stakeholders they were 

talking about and the research that they were conducting — the 

most pressing issue was that inequity between on- and 

off-reserve funding for education for First Nations. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, if you haven’t got something as fundamental to 

your system as that on a level playing field, on a fair footing, 

then it’s going to have consequences that we see playing out 

through other parts of the budget and through other parts of 

society. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again people are waiting a long time for this 

government to, you know, if they’ve got so much political 

capital, if they’ve got so much popularity, you know, would but 

they would use it in the service of something like this, Mr. 

Speaker. Would but they would use their preferred relationship 

with Stephen Harper to make sure that this issue was being 

addressed. 

 

But we don’t see that, Mr. Speaker. What we see instead is, you 

know, wait for the joint task force to report and, you know, 

we’ve got $3 million for that to come. And again, Mr. Speaker, 

that task force itself, through no fault of the good people that 

have shared that work, through no fault of theirs, has taken a 

long time. And now, Mr. Speaker, it comes after the budget and 

is going to get the notional 3 million, again when it was funded 

for 2 million to begin with. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t . . . I’m going to wrap up on 

that pretty quickly but it just, it makes you scratch your head in 

terms of seeing the decisions of this government, and it makes 

you wonder about the sincerity or the commitment that you 

hear in a lot of fine, high-blown speeches from members 

opposite, but when it comes to the real action, when that task 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2933 

force finally comes in, Mr. Speaker, again $3 million notional. 

We’ll see how that works out. When the federal budget comes 

in, you know, it gets an enthusiastic thumbs-up from the 

members opposite. I mean, it’s not a lot of help, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s something that needs that work. 

 

Carrying on through the amendment, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

health care there are some good measures in this budget around 

health care, to be sure. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, you know, 

what perplexes us in the opposition benches and what gives us 

cause for pause, Mr. Speaker, is the way that, you know, there 

are really great measures being mentioned in the speech by the 

Finance minister. And you know, they hit the applause line and 

it’s a great thing, but it’s always in the details that things seem 

to fall apart. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the monies coming forward 

for the Alzheimer’s First Link program to be able to expand 

that and to put it on a relatively equal footing with the kind of 

support that is shown for that program in other jurisdictions, 

Mr. Speaker, we think that’s a great thing. And I think the 

record shows very clearly the opinion of the official opposition 

on that. And I want to thank those folks with the Alzheimer 

Society, the work that they’ve done to raise that awareness and 

to very forcefully make the case. And I’m glad that the 

government said yes to it, and I’m glad that this measure is 

going forward. We’ll look to see how it’s implemented, Mr. 

Speaker, but again a good thing on the face of it. 

 

The home care pilot project that’s coming forward, you know, 

we’re glad to see that. We think that more needs to be done in 

terms of home care, in terms of helping seniors to be able to 

have that choice and to have the important home environment 

available to them. And if we don’t make these improvements to 

home care, Mr. Speaker, and the kind of stress that that will 

place on long-term care, a system that is already under 

significant stress and strain in this province . . . And we think 

that’s an investment that makes sense, and we’re again glad to 

see it in the budget. 

 

But I guess, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is also 

interesting to see, given references, the way that the long-term 

care beds that were first announced in 2009 come up for 

announcement yet again in this budget, Mr. Speaker, you know, 

fair enough but get the long-term care beds up and running and 

get on with the thing. 

 

The other thing we find interesting, to say the least, Mr. 

Speaker, is the P3 approach being offered up for the 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, that despite assurances made on other fronts by this 

government, to see it being shuffled off into some kind of 

privatization scheme . . . Uncertainty is something that gives us 

a lot of concern and a lot of pause for thought on this side of the 

House. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Another thing that again is a good announcement in the budget 

was the increased funds for the Cancer Agency. And again, as 

recent as today, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moosomin 

makes reference to a case in his constituency where cancer has 

afflicted a family. And I happen to know that family, Mr. 

Speaker, and I know the good, decent people that are being 

affected by this, Mr. Speaker. And I applaud the member from 

Moosomin for lifting up those young people for recognition, 

and to applaud them in their efforts and to rally around Mr. 

Whelpton in this time of severe challenge, of hard challenge. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the monies that always go forward to 

the Cancer Agency, that’s something that, you know, who 

wouldn’t support that? But on the other side of the ledger, Mr. 

Speaker, we see the $54 million that is being asked for from the 

RHAs [regional health authority] and from the Cancer Agency. 

And that’s not in the applause line of the Finance minister 

during his speech. That of course is in the fine print, and you 

have to read through these things and see how it plays out with 

these members to find out where they’re at, really and truly, on 

these things. 

 

So again there’s money coming forward on the one hand, Mr. 

Speaker, but for something like this, $54 million being asked 

back from the RHAs and from the Cancer Agency. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, these are the things that give us pause, that make 

us wonder about how straight this government is being with the 

people of Saskatchewan, how straight they’re being with the 

decisions that affect the people of this province. 

 

In terms of the way that this budget is structured and the 

different things that you find about it there, Mr. Speaker, you’d 

think that the auditor . . . It’s funny, the relationship of this 

government to the Provincial Auditor. Because of course, I 

think it was the question period on budget day itself, Mr. 

Speaker, where the Finance minister was feigning outrage about 

something that the member from Rosemont had said in terms of 

using the auditor’s words and the auditor’s reports to hold this 

government to account, and the way that the Finance minister 

reared up and got all, you know, into high dudgeon mode about 

what the member had said, and having the audacity to say that 

he was the defender of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if they’re going to truly defend the 

Provincial Auditor and if they’re going to respect the words and 

advice of that independent officer of this Legislative Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, well then how about it shows up in the budget? 

How about it shows when the Provincial Auditor says, your 

books are wrong; you’ve got two sets of books? You’ve got a 

proposition that is misleading, Mr. Speaker. How about when 

the Provincial Auditor says that? How about you take some of 

your outrage and take a long hard look in the mirror and say, 

yes, you know, maybe it’s time that we got with every other 

jurisdiction in the country of Canada and made sure that we 

lived up to what the auditor is saying we should do. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see that. We see the stubborn 

streak of this government, that they know best, that, you know, 

the auditor can have the auditor’s opinion, but they know best, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again when you’re the only province in Canada carrying 

out your books in a certain way, Mr. Speaker, well you know, 

maybe, maybe that should be the caveat for when they talk 

about how we’re the only province in Canada to have a 

balanced budget last year. And we’ll see about this year, Mr. 

Speaker. But if you ask them about whether or not the balance 

is there in the budget, of course you hear one thing. If you ask 



2934 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

an independent officer of the legislature tasked with this very 

duty, the provincial officers, Mr. Speaker, you hear something 

very different. We hear that they have two sets of books. You 

hear that the budget in fact was not balanced. You hear that the 

books that have been presented have been manipulated. You 

hear that they have been wrong and misleading. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to whose opinion about the 

books and the way that the oversight should evolve to keep 

track with the generally accepted accounting principles that are 

in practice across this country, when it comes to initiatives like 

that, Mr. Speaker, we of course would be taking the Provincial 

Auditor’s word over members opposite. And when they’re 

feigning outrage and when they’re getting up in the defence of 

the Provincial Auditor, maybe they should think about how 

things went on PAC [Public Accounts Committee] when they 

had members go after the auditor, Mr. Speaker, and play some 

games with the budget of the auditor. Maybe that’d be a great 

time to get the outrage cranked up, Mr. Speaker. So again we’ll 

see how these things play out, Mr. Speaker, but the record says 

one thing; the actions say something else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I want to make specific 

mention of before I get too far away from the structuring of the 

budget is the whole question of what’s going to happen with the 

funding for PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program]. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that the 

provincial disaster assistance program has been funded in past, 

we see an increasing draw on that program and an increasing 

draw over the last decade in terms of the way that program has 

been deployed. 

 

And we know that the average payout over the last three years 

was $105 million. So why wouldn’t they put something that 

bore a relationship to the monies that have been expended over 

the last three years — they know that there are problems 

coming ahead — why wouldn’t that be in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker? Because of course if you put something like that in 

the budget, then, you know, even on the face of the image 

management that they’re presenting around the budget, even on 

the face of that, Mr. Speaker, you no longer have a balanced 

budget. 

 

And so you know, will the money be there? And will it flow in 

terms of special warrants and all that? You know, I certainly 

hope so. I’d certainly expect that to be the case. And are there 

things that have been done to prepare, making sure that the 

possible flooding that is there, that we see in terms of the 

snowpack and what may be coming down the pike, Mr. 

Speaker? We certainly hope so. 

 

But in terms of the budget, you know, that they’ve punted to the 

rainy day fund, that they shuffle the books to make it look 

good, again, Mr. Speaker, it speaks to the way that the members 

opposite are more concerned about manipulation and image 

management than they are about being straight with the people 

of Saskatchewan. And again if they keep structuring the budget 

like that, then that’s going to have problems for not just them, 

Mr. Speaker, but it’s going to be a problem for the people of 

Saskatchewan. So maybe they could listen to the Provincial 

Auditor on these things. Maybe they could take these things 

into account as they plan forward. 

 

One thing I’d say as well, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite 

. . . that I was glad to see in this budget — and you know, I 

know this doesn’t come up much, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll see 

how this plays out — but I’m glad to see the additional funds 

being forwarded to address overcrowding in the correctional 

system in Saskatchewan. I am glad to see that perhaps the 

advice of the Provincial Ombudsman has been heeded in this 

regard in terms of the overcrowding that has a dramatically 

negative effect on the way our corrections system works or 

does not work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in terms of the investments that are made in this budget, 

we’ll be interested to see how that plays out. We’ll be interested 

to see if it puts our correctional system back on a footing that is 

more in fact about corrections than it is about warehousing and 

making the problem worse in terms of individuals that are in the 

correctional system. We’ll be interested to see if it has that 

salutary effect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again one thing we know for sure, if you’ve got a system 

that is in crisis, if you’ve got a system that is overcrowded, 

there is danger inherent in it for correctional workers. There is 

danger inherent in it for inmates. And there is danger inherent 

for all of us in terms of the way that if you don’t have some 

kind of rehabilitation going on, if you don’t have opportunities 

there in terms of the programming around life skills or around 

vocational upgrading, Mr. Speaker, in terms of individuals 

coming out of the system and being able to participate in the 

economy in an honest and straightforward way, if you don’t 

have those opportunities, Mr. Speaker, then you’re not just 

revolving the problem. That problem is spiralling into 

becoming worse. So how those investments work out, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the correctional system, we’ll be watching 

that closely to see how that plays out. 

 

And something else we’ll be watching closely, Mr. Speaker, is 

the way that . . . the impact of Bill C-10 federally and the way 

that this promises to improve the counts in our correctional 

system, the way that that continues to impact the system in 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, if this government is as good 

as its word, I think the current Minister for Corrections and 

Policing said that, well when the bill comes in, we’re going to 

ask the federal government to ante up because of course there’s 

changes in law that are being . . . the costs of those are being 

passed on to the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, on the opposition 

benches we’re interested to know what that cost is, when they 

anticipate that cost showing up on our books, when they 

anticipate the increased counts taking place in the correctional 

system overall, and what sort of plan there is to make sure that 

they deal with it. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, on the other side of the coin there is 

the Hub initiative or the community crime reduction initiative 

that’s being championed out of the Corrections and Policing. 

And you know, we’re glad to see that. I’m glad to see that, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the way that this model seeks to bring a 

community together to address and fight crime in a preventative 

way. And I’m glad to see it referenced in the budget. From 

what research I’ve done about it, it seems to be an interesting 

program. It seems to hold out a lot of promise for hope, Mr. 

Speaker. But again if you’re doing things on the preventative 

side that only run up against a correctional system that is so in 

crisis and so overcrowded that there’s no hope on that side of 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2935 

the ledger, it’s very hard to make that kind of progress in terms 

of overall crime reduction and overall community safety. 

 

Another thing that I’m very interested to see how it plays out, 

Mr. Speaker, is the way that the Regina anti-gang strategy that 

had been funded by the federal government was brought to a 

close. And we finally hear that the province is saying no to 

continuing that anti-gang strategy work here in the city of 

Regina. And again, Mr. Speaker, I guess my question is, if not 

that, then what? What kind of anti-gang strategy is being 

deployed by the members opposite in terms of addressing what 

is a huge problem for too many neighbourhoods? And if they 

don’t have a strategy, will they be owning up to that? 

 

Something else I wonder about, Mr. Speaker, is in terms of the 

way that the Community Mobilization initiative, the way that 

shows up in the city of Regina or not. And you know, my hope 

is that it does and soon. But one thing that’s interesting about 

that, Mr. Speaker, as I understand the fundamentals of the 

program, is that it bears some resemblance to the good work 

that was carried out under the inner city community partnership 

and the way that that brought community together with the 

province, the federal government, and the municipal 

government. And we know that that approach to fighting crime 

in inner city of Regina has taken a significant backseat from 

2007 on in terms of the way that this government has not been 

committed to the inner city community partnership. So I guess, 

Mr. Speaker, if it takes them introducing their own program 

that does the same thing, then so be it.  

 

What I’m interested in, Mr. Speaker, and what I think my 

neighbours and what the constituents of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre are interested in is the effect, and that is 

safer communities and safer streets. And you know, if it takes 

the Sask Party, you know, walking away from one program 

only to come around to introduce their own program so that 

they can feel good about the parentage of it, then that’s sad of 

course, Mr. Speaker, but so be it. It’s just that the resources and 

the efforts be deployed to fight that crime, to deal with that 

situation, Mr. Speaker. So my hope is that that is addressed and 

soon. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing that in a particular sense I’m interested 

to see is the way that the budget works out for advanced 

education and also for employment and skills training. And 

again there are, on the face of them, some good measures in this 

budget that in a broader context have much to recommend.  

 

But in a particular context, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

tradition of funding that has been put forward for 

post-secondary education in this province, in terms of the 

importance of the pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] 

system and the post-secondary system in terms of making sure 

that that we fully realize the opportunities that we have been 

blessed so abundantly with here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we’ll be looking to see that those are realized. 

And we’ll be looking to see the kind of gains that are boasted 

about on the one hand in terms of student support and 

scholarship, Mr. Speaker, to see that those aren’t taken with the 

other in terms of what now happens with potential increased 

tuition. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if you’re taking with the one hand, if 

you’re giving with the one hand and taking with the other, well 

where does that leave you? It leaves you at a zero. It leaves you 

with no gain, but again you only hear about one side of the 

ledger from these members opposite. You only hear about one 

side of the equation. So how that plays out, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 

be watching closely. 

 

Something else that we’ll see how it plays out, Mr. Speaker, is 

the federal government’s new approach around the jobs Canada 

program that they’re recommending everybody sign up for. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we know that the labour market 

agreement and the Labour Market Development Agreement are 

coming to an end, and the way that that influences the dollars 

available for post-secondary and skills training in this province, 

and we’ll be very interested to see if that change on the federal 

basis makes the province of Saskatchewan whole or if in fact 

there is a decrease that comes from the way that the federal 

government has changed their approach to supporting 

post-secondary education and skills training. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, these are initiatives that . . . There are a lot of really 

exciting things going on in this province. 

 

I was glad to see the announcement today out of the 

apprenticeship and trades commission. And again there’s a 

model where you have industry working with government, 

where you have management and labour working together, and 

you have that unique and innovative approach to making sure 

that people get skilled up so that they can take a more 

productive and more remunerative role in the economy. 

 

One of the hugest challenges that we have in front of us is the 

whole question of labour force development. Again, Mr. Chair 

of Committees, it goes back to the question at how we invest in 

this province and whether or not we have an entire segment of 

the population being stuck with a system that is not on a fair 

playing field, whether or not that K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 

12] system works on reserve for First Nations and then again, 

Mr. Speaker, the way that those ramifications roll forward 

through the system. 

 

In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, in terms of my home 

neighbourhood, there’s a lot of transfer of population between 

particularly the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council and my 

home neighbourhood. And if those kids, when they go to get 

their education on-reserve are given substandard education — 

through no fault of those educators, through no fault of those 

First Nations, but through the fault of the federal government 

that refuses to make sure that those kids are funded on a level 

playing field — then guess what, Mr. Speaker? It’s got a 

problem when those kids come to the Regina public system or 

to the Regina Catholic system. And there are some tremendous 

teachers doing some tremendous work, tremendous 

administrators throughout those two systems that I know very 

well, Mr. Speaker. And there are even some independent 

schools that are doing some great work in terms of improved 

outcomes and in terms of making sure that kids are advancing 

as they should.  

 

But if you don’t have that, you know, if on-reserve education is 

two-thirds at the rate, then guess what? It’s not just their 

problem, Mr. Chair of Committees. It’s not just the problem for 

kids on reserve. It’s a Saskatchewan problem. And if you don’t 



2936 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

have that fixed for on-reserve education, that equity and that 

fairness that needs to be there, then it isn’t fixed. It isn’t 

addressed for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan will pay a price for that in 

terms of . . . And again I’ve just referenced the labour force 

challenges that we have here in the province. We have a 

tremendous advantage here in the province of Saskatchewan in 

terms of what is primarily young and Aboriginal students that 

are out there. That opportunity is there, Mr. Speaker. But if we 

don’t realize it, if we don’t take the steps to promote that 

interest, to defend that interest, to secure that interest, then 

we’re going to keep on getting the same kind of results that 

we’ve had.  

 

And you know, that lends itself to a system that again . . . 

Professor Eric Howe I think has done a tremendous service to 

the people of Saskatchewan in terms of the analysis and the 

laying out in chapter and verse the consequences for the people 

of Saskatchewan to have those kind of inequities in our labour 

force, to have those kind of inequities in terms of income, to 

have those inequities there in our educational system. And I 

guess, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on record again saying thank 

you to Professor Howe in terms of the work that he has done, in 

terms of the contribution that that individual has made to public 

policy in this province. And again, Mr. Speaker, the way that he 

points to the record of this government is worse than Manitoba 

and Alberta when it comes to First Nations and Métis education 

and employment levels and the way that that individual has 

marshalled the case. 

 

And again it’s sort of like the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. Would but that this government gets the message. 

And maybe it’s just that it’s, you know, maybe we quote Dr. 

Howe too much in this House. But you know, this is a real 

interest for the people of Saskatchewan that is going poorly 

served by this government, and until it is, we’re not going to 

live up to our potential as a province. And it’s not a matter of 

somebody else’s problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a problem 

for all of us to address and to make progress on. 

 

And again there are other things under Advanced Education in 

terms of investments made around SIIT, the Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies, you know, that we think are 

admirable and worthy investments that should be made with 

public dollars, investments that are made to the regional college 

system, investments that are made to SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology], investments that 

are made to our universities, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

 

And again operationally there are some good things there to be 

seen. But if the overall . . . Again it gets into this kind of 

cognitive dissonance, Mr. Speaker. We see those good things 

and we certainly hear more than we’d ever want to in a lifetime 

about those good things from members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

But when you get out on campus and you talk to students and 

you talk to faculty, it turns out that, you know, it’s not this 

unrelenting parade of joy that members opposite would have 

you believe. 

 

You know, yesterday afternoon, last night was a good example. 

You know, a hundred individuals on the campus of the U of S 

were getting laid off and we had members opposite talking 

about how great things were. That’s the kind of cognitive 

dissonance that I’m talking about, Mr. Chair of Committees, 

because again you hear one thing from members opposite but 

you see something very different on the streets, often as not. So 

until the reality matches up with the rhetoric, we will not be 

supporting the measures of members opposite. 

 

And moreover, Mr. Speaker, one of the tendencies we see on 

display with this government, be it with the regional health 

authorities and the $50 million deficit that we have in 

Saskatoon and Regina or the RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region] and the Saskatoon Health District or the way 

that decisions are being passed off to school boards or decisions 

that are being passed off to the post-secondary sector, again we 

hear, you know, no small amount of self-congratulation from 

members opposite about the wrestling with the hard decisions 

that they engaged in, the hard decisions that they had to grapple 

with and how difficult it was and on and on. And you know, 

yes there were some hard decisions, Mr. Speaker, but it would 

seem that there is a trend with a great number of those hard 

decisions where the hard decision was to pass it off to another 

sector or another organization for them to make the hard 

decision. 

 

So again, is that leadership, Mr. Speaker? Is that the province 

living up to our full potential? Or is that, again, more 

hocus-pocus on the part of the Sask Party in terms of the 

rhetoric on the one hand and the reality on the other? 

 

One thing I do think I like to see in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

and one thing I’m glad to see in this budget is the way that 

revenue sharing has been carried forward with municipalities. 

And I think that’s as it should be. And we’ll be again watching 

closely year to year to make sure that they’re not putting their 

finger on the scale or anything like that. But again, it’s a boon 

to the province to make sure that the municipalities are 

appropriately funded. And we’re glad to see that the vehicle of l 

per cent of PST [provincial sales tax] was seized upon, and we 

see that going forward. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

something that we’re glad to see in the budget. 

 

Something we’re quite interested to see how it plays out, Mr. 

Speaker, is the whole question of regional planning authorities. 

And I know that certain other members opposite, they go back 

to the old, you know, forced amalgamation fight and all of that. 

But we’ll be interested to see how the monies that were put up 

in this budget, though admittedly very small, Mr. Speaker, have 

been seized upon by commentators like Alan Thomarat who’s, 

you know, of course a good . . . makes a great contribution to 

public life here in Saskatchewan, but is of course a good friend 

of this government. Another commentator such as John 

Gormley in his column last Friday, good friend apparently of 

the Deputy Speaker if I’m judging his reaction appropriately, 

both of those individuals have seized upon a $250,000 

expenditure in the Government Relations budget as significant 

in terms of what’s going to happen around the 786 

municipalities that we have in this province. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, maybe there’s some kind of plan that really isn’t on 

centre stage right now, but we’ll see how this works out and 

how the members opposite roll this forward. 

 

And of course the initiative also got a Legislative Secretary last 

May, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So, you know, you got your 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2937 

Legislative Secretary for regional co-operation. You got your 

250,000 bucks in the budget for regional planning authorities, 

and you got Thomarat and Gormley weighing in on, you know, 

this is the thing to watch. So we’ll take their advice. We’ll take 

their advice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll be watching to see 

how it works out and see whether or not it provides any sort of 

better footing for the kind of ongoing struggles we’ve seen 

around the city of Regina, city of Saskatoon, and the kind of 

conflicts that they’ve been getting into with different of their 

rural municipalities. We’ll see how that plays out, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll be watching with great interest for sure. 

 

Something else that I want to make sure I’m on record saying is 

a good thing in this budget is the . . . are the initiatives around 

support against domestic violence for women, the addition of 

the safe house in Melfort, and the additional resources brought 

forward for different of the operations through the province. 

This is again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, work that should be 

supported, and we’re glad to see its inclusion in terms of efforts 

being brought forward in this budget. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, though, it’s against a backdrop of a 

problem that is far too great to give anyone comfort or any false 

sense of security in this province. We all have to realize that 

violence against women is something that . . . It’s not just a 

problem for women. It’s a problem for men. It’s a problem for 

all of us to address, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we appreciate 

seeing that investment in the budget, but we realize that in the 

broader scope of things this is a problem that we collectively 

need to do a better job of responding to. And again, it’s not just 

the responsibility of some. It’s the responsibility of all as we 

seek to address this. 

 

There was some interesting things in the budget around 

housing, Mr. Speaker. And again I want to get on record saying 

that any sort of support that is put forward for housing is good 

to see. But again in terms of the way that the affordability crisis 

has gone on and on and the impact that has had in places like 

my home neighbourhood, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the face of a 

response on the part of members opposite that is not equal to 

the task, we’re glad to see the increased announcements in the 

budget. But again we’ve seen announcements from members 

opposite where, you know, how it plays out on the ground is 

maybe a different thing. 

 

One thing I am unreservedly happy about, Mr. Speaker, is the 

investment made with Habitat for Humanity. I think that’s a 

good thing and I’m glad to see that going forward. I’m sure that 

will now be thrown back at me in some kind of form by 

members opposite because, you know, no good word goes 

unpunished in this House. But I am glad to see that investment 

for Habitat in this budget, and I see the real difference that it 

makes for people in my neighbourhood on a daily basis in terms 

of Habitat houses that have been successfully built and homes 

that are now very much appreciated by those families. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess there are a lot of other things that 

could be said about this budget. There are a lot of things that, 

you know . . . Again there’s some other good measures in this 

budget that on the whole we’re glad to see. 

 

But on balance, in terms of the way that this budget addresses 

— or doesn’t — the needs that we see facing the province of 

Saskatchewan today, the way that this budget is a credit card 

budget, the way that this budget isn’t straightforward with the 

people of Saskatchewan, the way that this budget seizes upon 

some initiatives that I think are wrong-headed and let others go 

walking by, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think is unfortunate to see. 

 

So for all of those reasons that I’ve talked about here today, I 

will not be supporting the budget but I will be supporting the 

amendment. And should that amendment pass, then you know, 

we’ll see what happens from there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

before I begin I would like to say a few thank yous, and first off 

to team Telfer back in my office in Cudworth. I appreciate their 

hard work and their friendship. I would also like to say thank 

you to our Regina staff. Their work, their attentiveness, and 

their assistance is very much appreciated. I would also like to 

thank the Minister of Finance and his team for all the hard work 

they did in building this budget into such the fine piece it is. I’d 

also like to thank our Premier for his leadership and skill in 

guiding the Saskatchewan Party. And most of all I would like to 

thank my partner, my friend, my wife of 37 years, Valerie. 

 

I would also like to thank the people of Saskatchewan who 

were brave enough to stay in Saskatchewan through all the dark 

years and are now part of the new Saskatchewan. We are 

changing Saskatchewan for a bold and bright future. The 

boldest comment that I heard is a lady who said, very boldly, 

we are not going back. We were the have-not province for too 

long. We can now build for the future, for our family, for our 

grandchildren, and for generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the big news in the budget is that it is once again a 

balanced budget, probably the only one in Canada. In the past 

five years, Saskatchewan has changed in ways we didn’t 

believe possible under the NDP. 

 

The former interim leader of the NDP said that the new 

Saskatchewan was a myth, as if it wasn’t really happening. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan would beg to disagree 

with him. What they are seeing is real. What they are feeling is 

real. It is the new Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the NDP say it is 

by chance that we became government just as the boom was 

happening. Well, Mr. Speaker, what is happening in 

Saskatchewan just doesn’t happen by chance or by luck. Like 

one quote I know says, the harder I work, the luckier I get. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some people say governments are all the same. 

Well this fall I had the privilege of hearing the renowned author 

and policy expert Brian Lee Crowley from the 

Macdonald-Laurier Institute. He spoke about the happenings in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Crowley said from Saskatchewan’s birth 

and for the next 30 years until the Great Depression, 

Saskatchewan was the third most populated province in all of 

Canada. The Depression broke our back, broke our hearts, 

broke our spirit, and Saskatchewan lost faith. 

 



2938 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

Mr. Crowley said Saskatchewan’s rise was not inevitable. He 

listed countries where similar resources and advantages to that 

of Saskatchewan but who could not duplicate the success of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Crowley said the reason for our success lies 

with a government that can create a stable and competitive 

environment for growth, something that has eluded 

Saskatchewan governments for generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to prove the point beyond a shadow of a doubt, 

K+S Potash is back in Saskatchewan. This is a company that 

the NDP drove out of this province decades ago. Mr. Speaker, 

that same potash is still here in the ground. Nothing has 

changed. The only thing that has changed is the government. 

They are back now. They are back now due to that change of 

government. 

 

In other words translating the Saskatchewan story, everything 

was here — the resources, the people. All that needed to be 

done was to get the ball rolling. Mind you that’s no small feat, 

getting the ball rolling. The NDP tried for 60 years, and all they 

succeeded in doing was getting rolled over by the economy 

ball. The Saskatchewan Party along with the people of 

Saskatchewan have reversed that backward sliding and have 

gotten the ball rolling forward. Saskatchewan is now a have 

province that is becoming the province to be watched. Our 

province is the one that others want to emulate. We are the new 

Saskatchewan and proud of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are in an extensive review of labour laws in 

this province. The NDP say we don’t have to change labour 

laws because they are working and they have worked for 

generations. Mr. Speaker, that is what some people said about 

the horse and plow. It has worked for generations. Why change 

now? 

 

I will give you another example of that very philosophy. In the 

late 1940s and early ’50s, SaskPower was electrifying 

Saskatchewan. They would ask for a volunteer in a community 

to go and sign up farmers in that area that wanted electricity. In 

our area, my dad was that man. He was surprised at how many 

people asked, what do we need electricity for? I don’t see a use 

for it on my farm. My father had to do a lot of persuading to get 

enough neighbours to agree to have electricity brought in. 

Today how would we live without electricity? 

 

Some people are afraid of change even if it’s for the betterment 

of all people. The people who say no to our labour law changes 

are such people. Let us join together and reach out for the 

future, not sit and wait for it to run us over. We must be 

progressive, bold, and proactive if we are to keep building the 

new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, life can be stranger than fiction. Some things that 

happen and the reflections of those actions speak louder than 

words. The Saskatchewan Party chose the colour green to 

represent the party. The colour green is of course the colour that 

means go. Green is also the colour of spring, the colour of new 

beginnings. It is a colour we all love. Even in sports, our 

Roughriders are green. 

 

The NDP, on the other hand, they picked the colour orange. 

Think about that for a minute. Orange is the colour of danger 

zones. The colour means move slower; it is illegal to move fast. 

In some cases, in an orange zone you must even stop and wait. 

This has been the practice of the NDP — slow down the 

economy. If a company like K+S Potash is progressing too 

quickly, you penalize them, even kick them out. Mr. Speaker, 

orange is also the colour of Halloween, the time of tricks, the 

time of stories that don’t have any facts, only fiction. The time 

of scare tactics. Sound familiar? You can see how well orange 

fits the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now the great pumpkin of the NDP, Thomas 

Mulcair, says that western resources are a disease in Canada. 

Can you believe that, Mr. Speaker? A disease. He even went 

down to the US [United States] and preached that disgusting 

gospel based on half-truths and falsehood. His only goal is to 

gain power. He certainly wasn’t promoting the betterment of 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, he is willing to sacrifice Western Canada 

in his goal to become prime minister of Canada. The saddest 

part of this whole story is that the negative nine on that side of 

the House sit mute on the whole situation or, at best, say they 

don’t know. What’s not to know? This is the time to oppose 

such ideology. They should be yelling out loud in defence of 

Western Canada and our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Leader of the NDP is trying to distance 

himself from the 5 billion NDP election platform of 2011. He 

tries to stay mute on the issue of their election platform, but in 

fact when you look at a copy of their platform, you find his 

signature and his alone. Yes, he ignores the fact and tries to 

criticize the Saskatchewan Party budget. If he’d become 

premier, the province would be another $5 billion deeper in 

debt. That’s $5 billion away from a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Leader of the NDP is also trying to 

distance himself from their last leader, Dwain Lingenfelter. Let 

us not forget that the new NDP leader and also the Deputy 

Leader of the NDP were the right and left hands of team 

Lingenfelter. They did his bidding, and they learned their trade 

under his watchful eye. When the deputy leader starts his 

warped spin and rants on any budget topic, you can close your 

eyes and yes, Dwain is back once again. Sounds like 

Halloween. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget, like all budgets since the 

Saskatchewan Party has become the government, is once again 

breaking new ground. It is forging a strong link between the 

government and its people. Our government has changed this 

province like no other government since Walter Scott, our first 

premier. 

 

This budget is our sixth consecutive balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker. In Saskatchewan, agriculture is still the backbone of 

our economy. With 47 per cent of Canada’s cropland here in 

Saskatchewan and food becoming more important in the global 

economy, we must support Saskatchewan agriculture. To build 

on that, our government is investing $198 million in crop 

insurance. 

 

This year we’re spending a record 576 million on much-needed 

highways. That puts us well ahead of our four-year election 

target of 2.2 billion. Instead of closing hospitals, we’re building 

hospitals. There is more money for health care. Surgical wait 

times have been drastically, drastically reduced. We are 

investing more money in our students, both university and 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2939 

technical schools. We are building and repairing schools at a 

rate unheard of in past governments. We’re building long-term 

care facilities, not closing them. We are raising low-income 

seniors’ pensions to the tune of 300 per cent by the end of our 

term. We are funding the disabled and giving them a hand up 

not a handout. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many more highlights in this budget. 

And I would encourage the people of Saskatchewan to pick up 

a copy of the budget or go online and see for themselves the 

progress Saskatchewan is making. It is a great time for 

Saskatchewan as we take our rightful place in Canada as one of 

the leaders in this country. Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

enthusiastically support this budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on a separate note, I would like to say a 

blessed Easter to all the people in Saskatchewan on this Holy 

Week. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to enter into the budget debate today. And 

I’m very pleased to support this balanced budget put forward by 

my colleague and friend from Canora-Pelly and seconded by 

my colleague and friend from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

I will be happy to address the important details pertaining to the 

constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers that I represent. This is a 

very good report on the condition and direction of our province 

as we go into the future. And I would also like to take this time 

to thank and recognize the constituents of Sask Rivers for their 

continued support and trust. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my constituency 

staff, home in Saskatchewan Rivers. Marcus Abrametz is one of 

them, and Jason Beebe and Joan and Cora. And I’d like to 

thank them for their dedication to the province. They work in 

our two constituency offices: one in Red Wing — that’s the 

main one — and one in the town of Big River. 

 

I also want to thank my family for their love and support. As 

our family grows, we continue to live and work in 

Saskatchewan with much appreciation for all that Saskatchewan 

has to offer. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I’m very proud of my children, Mr. Speaker. I don’t believe 

I’ve talked about the four of them before in the House so I’m 

going to tell you all about them today. Markus is my baby and 

he has dual degrees in chemistry and science, and Lacey has 

completed her master’s in speech language pathology. Brigitt 

has dual degrees in social work and nursing, and she married a 

newcomer who happens to be a physician, and he has decided 

to live and work and raise his family in Saskatchewan. So we’re 

very happy with that. They have a little girl called Ella and 

another child on the way. And I have another child. My oldest 

boy Matthew and my daughter-in-law Kate are entrepreneurs 

and agriculture producers, and they too are raising their four 

children here in Saskatchewan. They have two young boys and 

twin baby girls. 

So we are truly blessed, Mr. Speaker. Grandma’s table needs 

another leaf. Not like a few short years ago when grandparents 

lamented that their grandchildren were in another province after 

the NDP drove out all our young people out of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this budget’s a story of investment and 

development. And facts are stubborn things, Mr. Speaker. 

Government’s first duty is to protect and invest in communities, 

not run their lives. This budget demonstrates our record and 

commitment to moving forward, planning for growth and not 

decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we tend to remember life lessons learned, and one 

of them being that there comes a day when you have to take a 

stand on something. You cannot continue to sail through life 

unbiased or undecided or unopinionated, especially in politics. 

You have to draw a line in the sand and decide which opinion 

you stand for, which debate, which side of the fence, which side 

of the House Assembly you want to sit on, which answer, 

which budget you approve, and which vote you can live with, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we have different political parties, 

different personalities, different genders, ages, religions, and 

education. No two are alike, Mr. Speaker, but we continue to 

grow as people, grow as a government, and grow as a province. 

 

Winston Churchill once said, and I quote, “It’s not enough that 

we do our best; sometimes we have to do what’s required.” 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also have to consider what the public ask 

for. 

 

I’d like to speak on the importance of municipal revenue 

sharing, record revenue sharing in this budget. This government 

will distribute 264.4 million to municipalities in municipal 

revenue sharing. This commitment represents an 11.4 per cent 

increase from the previous year and 137 million increase over 

2007. Mr. Speaker, this commitment will help with the 

successful growth of municipalities like the 229 per cent 

increase of revenue sharing from 2007 in my own home RM 

[rural municipality] of Buckland — 229 per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government and budget has invested nearly 

850 million in infrastructure for schools, post-secondary 

facilities, hospitals, and highways. Saskatchewan Rivers will 

benefit by the completion of the Highway 11 twinning initiative 

and the 25.5 million for grants to rural municipalities to 

improve their road systems. 

 

Saskatchewan Rivers constituency is home to many beautiful 

parks in our beautiful boreal forest, Mr. Speaker. Improvements 

to Saskatchewan provincial parks continue through enhanced 

capital funding including an additional 10 million over four 

years. Mr. Speaker, major projects include the planning and 

design for two new campground developments and additional 

electrical service to campsites. Now, Mr. Speaker, for those of 

you who have travelled to or camped at Emma, Christopher, 

Anglin, the candle lakes in my constituency, you know the 

value to families that enjoy this part of our beautiful province. 

Approximately 200 campsites will also be upgraded in 

electrical service, and three washroom shower facilities will be 

replaced. 

 

Lakeland and area has many tourist spots for travellers and 

tourists to visit and enjoy, from the Sundogs dogsledding 



2940 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

excursions next door to Elk Ridge, to our Prince Albert 

National Park at Waskesiu where you can travel to the cabin of 

the noted naturalist Grey Owl and his pet beavers, Jelly Roll 

and Rawhide. My mother told me stories of playing with Grey 

Owl’s daughter, Shirley Dawn, who was close in age with my 

mother. They were both born in the early ’30s. And Shirley 

Dawn and my mother would go to the sandy shore of 

Christopher Lake and they would play. So our area, Mr. 

Speaker, of Sask Rivers is so rich in history and stories. 

 

But time marches on and time moves on, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan’s time in the present has been good for all the 

people of Saskatchewan today. The gift of time is not ours 

alone. It is given equally to each person, Mr. Speaker. The 

benefits of experience have been good decisions made by our 

government, and we are seeing the results of that growth today. 

For Saskatchewan residents who live, work, and invest in the 

province, this budget provides an environment conducive to 

investment and growth, a vision of growth for all people, an 

inspiration to achieve more than others think is possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has decided to grow our province 

and make decisions for balanced growth. I’d like to quote 

Hermann Hesse: “People with courage and character always 

seem sinister to the rest.” Mr. Speaker, improving the quality of 

life and economy was what we were elected to do by the people 

of Saskatchewan. They elected us with a majority and believed 

in us. It’s our duty to achieve a better quality of life for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget includes an investment of close to 5.8 

billion in infrastructure over the term of our government — 

double what was invested from 2002 to 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government realizes the value and importance 

of Saskatchewan agriculture producers. The Ministry of 

Agriculture will continue its commitment to fully fund its 

portion of Growing Forward programming to support the 

business interest of some farmers. 

 

This year’s 198.3 million crop insurance budget is the largest in 

the history of the program and a 91 per cent increase since 

2007. I believe that’s a growing budget, a budget that looks far 

into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Agriculture is a major contributor to our province’s economic 

growth. Agriculture allows investment in the quality of life for 

Saskatchewan Rivers constituents, constituents like the 

Northern Fringe Grain Club, 30 grain and livestock producers 

who contribute to the economy of Saskatchewan. They are a 

farm management club interested in software, marketing, and 

advisors that today’s farms need for the high level management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, record funding for crop insurance and research in 

the 2013 budget will help continue and enhance crop 

production for farmers like this vital group, farmers who are my 

friends and neighbours attending community gatherings 

together. We are together in times of sorrow, in times of 

happiness. We are together for funerals and weddings and baby 

showers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, investments in market development will help 

Saskatchewan reach agriculture exports by 50 per cent, as well 

as establishing Saskatchewan as a global leader in bioscience. 

For over 100 years, agriculture has been the major economic 

force in the area of Canada’s central plains known as 

Saskatchewan, our great province. The farmers, their families, 

the scientists, and public servants who built this industry in this 

region of harsh climactic extremes inspire admiration and awe. 

It was 1866 that Reverend James Nisbet established a farm with 

livestock near Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t too many years ago that some 

Saskatchewan farmers were holding rallies and blocking roads. 

Those days of farm activism are now a distant memory. 

Saskatchewan agriculture producers are enjoying their greatest 

prosperity since the 1970s. 

 

Farm land has become a good investment for young people who 

are now excited to come back to the farm. Making room for 

another generation, many farms are in expansion mode. And I 

am very proud of our government’s initiative of this agriculture 

record funding and growing population, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This budget comes at a remarkable time in Saskatchewan’s 

history. In response to meeting the challenges of a growing 

province and growth pressures, Saskatchewan is investing in 

developing the knowledge and skills of its people so that 

education and employment outcomes allows our businesses, our 

people, and our communities to thrive — all with a balanced 

budget, Mr. Speaker. Government budgets need to facilitate, 

not undermine growth as others have done to the previous 

detriment of future prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the world wants what Saskatchewan has. But 

more importantly, Saskatchewan has what the world needs. 

Demand for Saskatchewan’s abundant resources is projected to 

remain strong, and for the foreseeable future the world will 

want to do business with Saskatchewan. 

 

With a capacity to absorb a larger workforce, the province has 

incredible growth potential. Our government’s budget includes 

labour force development for over 448 million to support base 

operating of Saskatchewan’s university and colleges. That’s an 

increase of 9.2 million. And providing work readiness, 

employment development funding for First Nations and Métis 

people will give them the essential skills to accelerate into the 

workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this government delivered a balanced 

growth budget ensuring a better quality of life for 

Saskatchewan people: a budget with heart, a budget with heart 

and soul. I am proud of Saskatchewan, and I’m proud to live 

and work and watch my children raise their children in 

Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I support 

this budget of 2013-14. And I’m very proud of my colleagues 

and my Premier. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I rise today, it’s an 

honour to speak to this great budget that we’ve tabled within 

the last couple weeks. But I just want to pause as I’ve got some 

thank yous coming. But I just want to reflect on what I view 

right now actually as I look across the aisle, and I see the 

member from Regina Lakeview, the only member over there. 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2941 

It’s a little bit of an indication of . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would just remind the member that 

members are not to reflect on the presence or absence of 

members in the House. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — I apologize for that. What I was speaking to is 

just in general. It’s a little tired. It’s been around for a while, 

and we’ll talk about that a little bit later on in my speech on the 

alternatives and what could be happening in Saskatchewan if 

we took a different path in the last election. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, just to start off with, I just wanted to talk 

about before this budget, is a couple of thank yous. And some 

important thank yous to thank out there is my CAs 

[constituency assistants] Helen and Conni. I know you’re 

watching back in the office unless you’re helping a resident that 

may have came into the office, but I just want to thank you for 

all you do and how much help they are to me. And I need a lot 

of help some days, and they keep me on the straight and 

narrow. And I just want to thank them for everything they do. 

 

[15:45] 

 

I also need to thank the people of Saskatoon Eastview. It’s a 

great honour to represent them down in Regina. And I think 

about Eastview and the people that call Eastview home every 

day. And it’s with that in mind that we make the decisions or 

my views that I share down here is with the heavy heart and 

with Eastview on my mind. And that goes from the important 

seniors that make Eastview their home, and the people that have 

built this province to what it is today, and along with them is 

the veterans that have fought for and have kept the peace and 

have made Canada the world leader that it is. 

 

And I need to thank those two groups and along with . . . It’s 

also the changing face of Eastview. We have a lot more 

families moving in. It’s exciting to see that you go out on a 

summer day, and there’d be kids running across the yards and 

playing in the parks. It’s so rewarding to see because not that 

long ago it was different and it was on a different, different 

direction, Mr. Speaker. But Eastview is a community in 

Saskatoon that has a lot to be very proud of. 

 

I’d also like to thank, before I get into my comments about the 

budget, is my family. And I’m very lucky to have my mom and 

dad who raised me in a way that valued hard work, valued 

common sense, valued living within one’s means. And I’m very 

appreciative of the upbringing and also their support. And as 

many people that are MLAs can contest that you can’t do it 

without the family, and I need to thank them for always being 

there for me. 

 

And now with family comes the newest kind of addition, and 

it’s . . . Danielle and I, many would know in here, but maybe 

not at home watching might not know is that we’re expecting 

our first child in July. And we’re very excited, and it is a 

tremendous time. And I’m very excited to see what the next 

chapter brings. But it also adds to the way that I carry on as a 

MLA and as the view of the different decisions to be made in 

government is also to remember now I’m going to have a little 

boy or girl. We don’t know yet what junior’s going to be, but I 

know junior’s going to be special. 

 

So with that in mind, I’m going to talk about the budget and 

how it reflects on my family and growing family and also the 

growing Saskatchewan. 

 

And today I’m going to be talking about the budget. So we have 

the one document which is . . . I’ve got to thank the minister 

and the people on Treasury Board on compiling this budget. I 

think this is a very balanced, very appropriate budget, and we’ll 

speak to that in a moment. We’re also going to speak to how it 

affects the growth plan. I’m going to read a couple pages from 

the growth plan, and it is our guiding star, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

on where we’re going to take the province. And it’s an 

important document. 

 

And it’s also very important to always have context as what 

could have been or what are the alternatives. Mr. Speaker. I’m 

going to read a little bit from this document, and this is from 

. . . this is the Chair of the policy review task force, and it’s an 

important document to have an idea of what might have 

happened. 

 

So to get right into it, let’s start looking at some of the budget 

items in here. And first up, we’ve got to understand we’ve got 

the growth plan, but we also have our vision for Saskatchewan 

to be the best place to live, to work, to start a business, to get 

education, to raise a family, and to build a life. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what this budget does. It really sets that 

foundation that has been poured with five years, or now this 

one being the sixth consecutive year of a balanced budget. And 

it’s important to remember that’s why we make the decisions 

we do, and it’s paying dividends, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we all know, there’s 80,000 more people that have voted 

with their feet that they have saw and heard what we’re doing 

in Saskatchewan, and they wanted to experience it. And we’re 

having all these newcomers come to Saskatchewan, and it’s 

such a new . . . and it adds to the energy of the province. 

 

And just this past weekend, Danielle and I were at a Hindu 

dinner up in Saskatoon, and it’s a wonderful dinner that has 

been growing over the years. And it’s a wonderful part of the 

new Saskatchewan, is these newcomers that are deciding to 

venture out and see what Saskatchewan is about. And it’s really 

rewarding to talk to some of the new families that have came 

here. 

 

And different comments that they brought up about the budget 

at the dinner was they’re very grateful it’s balanced. And that’s 

a little bit rare. And I know we spoke a little bit about it in here, 

about how rare a balanced budget is. But one has to just look 

across the country and you see a lot of red ink, and that is 

something that this government will never do, Mr. Speaker. 

And if you look at why that’s important, you only have to look 

at what’s going on in Europe right now. And especially a little 

timely, over in Europe, is there’s the run on the bank right now 

in Cyprus. There’s protests that are happening in the street. 

There’s governments over there for decades have been living 

well above their means. And what that does is add so much 

debt, and with that comes those debt payments. And 

unfortunately, what those governments can’t do is service that 

debt. So that socialist mindset that is Europe is somewhat 



2942 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

falling apart at the seams. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is a valuable lesson for the people of 

Saskatchewan to take in, is that we have to have balanced 

budgets. We can’t always fall into the trap of wanting 

everything up front and not concerning about our needs but 

more about our wants. And I think that’s what we’ve heard 

mostly from the opposition this session, is that they want more 

money here, they want more money there. But they never really 

speak about who’s going to pay for all these programs. And 

that’s important to keep in back of mind when you’re 

comparing this budget to others, is that it’s balanced, that we 

are taking care of the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, but 

we’re doing it in a balanced way and balancing off the priorities 

that we think are important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously I’m very supportive of this budget, and 

most people are. And the journalism in Saskatchewan have 

been very positive and they have an important role to play, but I 

believe what’s important is to listen to people that are even 

outside of the province. And one of those groups of people are 

the different companies that do credit ratings for provinces, 

because they get paid to judge the books of the province and the 

direction and the ability of each province going forward. And 

it’s important because they don’t really have a dog in the hunt; 

they are just looking at it and saying, okay, how are this 

jurisdiction going to do compared to others? And, Mr. Speaker, 

Moody’s have upgraded Saskatchewan to Aa1, which is the 

highest that this province has ever had. And that’s once again 

from, you know, an independent, non-partial, 

out-of-the-province observation. Also Standard & Poor’s, 

AAA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is important because it was not that long ago 

that our credit rating as a province was a lot, lot worse than 

those. And what we saw was a substantial amount of money 

that was being paid for in servicing the debt, Mr. Speaker. What 

we’ve seen is, now that we’ve dropped the debt by 40 per cent, 

we’re having significant savings. And that savings, Mr. 

Speaker, we can put back into health and education and the 

important programs the people of Saskatchewan deserve and, 

indeed, need. 

 

We spoke about education. And there’s important change that 

we made in the education property tax in Saskatchewan where, 

because there’s so many people that are wanting to move to 

Saskatchewan, and as the province grows, we know the value 

of Saskatchewan has increased. It’s over 60 per cent . . . No. I 

believe over 67 per cent increase in property values, and what 

that means is that if we didn’t change the property tax mill rate 

that everyone would have a substantial jump in their property 

taxes. And what this government made the decision to do is 

bring that down to neutrality, which means that there’s no 

additional revenue that’s going to be coming to the province 

because we’ve dropped the mill rate. We think that’s the right 

thing to do for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now one of the things that we believe as government is we 

should lead by example, and one area that the government is 

doing is reducing the number of public servants in the province. 

We set a goal that we were going to reduce the public service 

by 15 per cent. And why that’s important, Mr. Speaker, is we 

found that over the years of the NDP government, they kept 

expanding the public service, kept hiring people. As people 

were fleeing the province to find other opportunities, the 

government of the day kept hiring more public servants. And 

what that does is we had a smaller tax base to pay for a growing 

government which we thought was a little backwards, Mr. 

Speaker. So we’ve changed that and through . . . and we’re not 

talking about laying people off or pink slips going out. We’re 

talking about just managing the people retiring, that we’re 

reshaping the public service. And there’s dividends paid back to 

the people of Saskatchewan where they don’t have to pay as 

much tax to pay for this bloated public service. And that’s one 

area that we’re leading by example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another one that . . . very proud of is in health care. We’re now 

at $4.84 billion invested in health care and that is a record sum, 

Mr. Speaker. The largest health budget ever was under the 

Saskatchewan Party government. And that’s important. That’s 

important because that is what the main service I feel that the 

government provides the people of Saskatchewan is health care, 

and that’s one of the main reasons why I got involved in 

politics. 

 

Just quickly I’m going to run over some of the numbers in 

health care. The regional health authorities will receive a base 

operating funding of $3 billion. Mr. Speaker, that’s $131 

million more. So we hear the Leader of the Opposition in 

question period talking about these cuts, and it’s not to say that 

he’s wrong, but we’re increasing the budget. And so I’m not 

sure where he’s getting his numbers. We are asking for 

efficiencies, but the overall budget in health care is increasing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another one that’s very close to me and unfortunately many 

families in Saskatchewan is the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

And they will receive $157 million to provide an enhanced 

cancer care. That’s an $11.9 million increase over last year. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s close to me. And I spoke about this 

before, but I have two siblings that fought and won their battle 

with cancer. And I’m very appreciative of the good work that 

the people do in the Cancer Agency. And we all have someone 

that has been affected with cancer, and it’s just the right thing to 

do is to put a little bit more money back into that agency. 

 

Another important health initiative is the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiative. When we took over we had some of the historic 

longest wait times in the country, Mr. Speaker. It was ridiculous 

how long people had to wait for surgeries, and that was 

something that I know first-hand as well. My father-in-law 

roughly nine years ago had to get his hip done and, Mr. 

Speaker, he waited over a year. And I didn’t know them at the 

time, but I’ve heard stories of the hardship of having a loved 

one that is still working but waiting for a hip replacement and 

the pain and suffering it caused. 

 

And the reason why is because the NDP, the government of the 

day, refused to fund health care. And to be fair, they didn’t 

refuse to fund health care. They just didn’t have the money. 

And why they didn’t have the money is they made policies and 

decisions that didn’t help the economy. It hurt the economy. So 

for a party that have bragged long and hard about how 

important health care is to them and how convention after 

convention their members voted for resolutions to improve 

health care, actually what happened under them, it got worse, 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2943 

Mr. Speaker. They closed hospitals. They had the longest 

surgical wait times in Canada. And that’s what this party 

inherited when we took over in ’07. 

 

I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, that our initiative that we took on is no 

one’s going to wait more than three months for health care, or 

sorry, three months for surgery in this province. That is our 

goal. The members across the aisle would in the past claim that, 

why set goals that you don’t know you’re . . . you might not 

achieve, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[16:00] 

 

Well that mindset I believe is a failed mindset that produced 

failed results. And we set bold goals as the Saskatchewan Party, 

and this is one of them and we’re going to campaign on the next 

election. We’re going to get surgical waits down to three 

months. And, Mr. Speaker, just a follow-up with my 

father-in-law that needed hip surgery. Now it was roughly three 

years ago he needed to get another hip surgery. He waited only 

four months. Still, still, you know, four months is a long time to 

wait. But you know what, Mr. Speaker, it’s a lot less than a 

year. And we’re going to drive those surgical wait times down 

to three months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re doing that with this budget right now that’s going to 

receive an increase of $10 million. And that brings up the 

money for the surgical wait time initiative to $70 million in 

2013, Mr. Speaker. That is a commitment that we’re going to 

get those surgical wait times down to three months. And we’re 

going to use private clinics as well in that mix. This is 

something that the NDP refused to even consider, is looking at 

other alternatives, still in the public system, still, that no one’s 

going to put a credit card down and jump the queue. But you 

know what, there’s components of the health care that can be 

delivered in a much more efficient way by private business and 

private companies than within the public system, or within the 

public system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also increased the spending of 1.5 million, 

so a total of $3 million to support the 20 rural physician locum 

pool. And, Mr. Speaker, as many people in Saskatchewan, they 

are . . . I find myself, I live in Saskatoon but I still have parents 

that live in rural Saskatchewan. And this is an initiative that’s 

going to help communities such as theirs and many throughout 

the province where they’re having issues. Or it could be just a 

short-term measure that they need to find some physicians to 

fill in, and this is going to hopefully fill in those issues. 

 

There’s also going to be an increase of 2.3 million to a total of 

18.1 million for the supporting training seats as well as the 

recruitment of physicians. This includes new funding of 

$250,000 for a rural family recruitment incentive program. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that we have struggles out there. We know 

that we need more physicians. We have over 200 more doctors 

working in the province since we took over, but we do need 

more, and this is going to be one that really adds that capacity 

in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Another area that we’ve put additional dollars to — and we 

need to, unfortunately, compare it to the NDP’s record — is on 

Alzheimer’s. They’ve had different conventions, NDP 

conventions that they pass resolutions to support Alzheimer’s. 

And there’s unfortunately no action on 16 years of them being 

in government on Alzheimer’s. And you know what? That 

changes with this budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of 

the fact that we’re putting additional dollars into that program. 

 

Another area that we can be proud of is the increased support 

for people with disabilities. And you know, our growth plan set 

a goal of making Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live 

for people with disabilities. Mr. Speaker, this is one that is a 

little shameful for the history of Saskatchewan, that we didn’t 

do more for people with disabilities. And we’ve, in our first 

term, started to improve in that area, and we’re still not there. 

But we’re committed to put additional dollars into helping 

people with disabilities. 

 

We’re also . . . Within health includes an increase of $600,000 

to support the cost of three storefront projects in Saskatoon, 

Regina, and Prince Albert to provide intense support for FASD 

[fetal alcohol spectrum disorder]. And, Mr. Speaker, this is one 

unfortunately that is too high of rate of incidence in 

Saskatchewan. And this government is moving on improving 

that situation. 

 

We’re also in . . . The government relations budget provides an 

increase of 325,000 for transit assistance for people with 

disabilities program. That’s the total funding of 3.5 million, 

allows the program to expand to additional municipalities and 

double the capital grants available for buses within 

Saskatchewan, which is very important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the areas that I spoke about before is Saskatoon 

Eastview where I represent. There’s a large number of seniors, 

and I’m so thankful for all that they have done to help build 

Saskatchewan. And one of the ways that — a small way but a 

significant way for them — that we are helping out is the 

seniors’ income plan, and we’ll see a $3.2 million increase in 

that plan. That funding is now at $27.4 million which is once 

again just helping out seniors that are in need of care. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot in this budget, and I’m just going 

to touch on a couple of ones that are important to, I believe, to 

the province and to the people of Saskatoon Eastview, is the 

quality of life and the important investments that we made in 

parks and culture and the environment. And they’re paying off, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen some pretty substantial 

announcements of what’s taking place in our province, and 

we’re pretty proud. We have the Junos coming up in Regina 

here shortly. We have the Memorial Cup up in Saskatoon that 

we’re hopeful that the Blades can squeak out a win tonight. 

They’re down in the series two games to nothing right now, and 

we’re hopeful tonight they’ll get at least a move that . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . It’s not tonight, I hear? Okay. And 

then one of the biggest events of the country is the Grey Cup, 

and it’s coming back to Saskatchewan. So I’m pretty proud of 

that. 

 

We understand in the quality of life there’s different initiatives 

that we’ve helped to invest in. We’ve put $5 million into the 

new Creative Saskatchewan Investment Fund. And this is 

important, Mr. Speaker, because this supports culture across the 

spectrum, from music to TV to live theatre to music to the arts. 

And it’s important to have that investment, and I’m proud to 

say that we are putting money into that program. 



2944 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

Another area, and this is where the dollars really gets a little bit 

bigger, Mr. Speaker, is infrastructure. And the need is there, 

and that’s why we’re putting so much dollars into different 

programs. The government has invested over $5.8 billion in the 

infrastructure projects since 2008, Mr. Speaker. I’ve just got to 

repeat that. That’s not millions. That’s billions — $5.8 billion. 

And that’s a significant amount of dollars but there’s more need 

out there. And some of the reasons why is that we’ve inherited 

this infrastructure deficit. During those dark days in 

Saskatchewan, there was very little spent on infrastructure, and 

we’re correcting that, Mr. Speaker. And how we’re correcting it 

is with SaskBuilds, which is a new initiative that we’re starting 

up. And into this budget we put an additional $6 million to start 

the work of SaskBuilds, and it’s a number of P3 opportunities 

they’re going to look at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I need to just speak briefly about P3s and the 

importance and the history of how they affected us positively in 

Saskatoon Eastview. The opposition would rail about these 

different examples across Canada or internationally of how P3s 

have gone sideways. But there’s a concrete project that is 

getting completed right next to Saskatoon Eastview that the 

people can just drive by and see the work at hand, and it’s the 

South Circle bridge. That project started over 90 years ago and, 

Mr. Speaker, because of P3s, we’re going to have that wrapped 

up this summer, and it’s going to transform the city. And that’s 

a design build, Mr. Speaker, where we set the requirements of 

the project for private business that the bridge has to be this 

many lanes and this many exit ramps and what have you. And 

the project is a design build where we threw it out for bids and 

we asked the private sector, what could you do? Or within these 

requirements, what will the bill come? And because of that 

process, because it was competitive, and because of this 

competition — this is something the NDP does not like to talk 

about — but because there was competition in that, the bid, the 

actual winning bid came in below what was allotted for dollars 

which enabled us to get the interchange and the overpass done 

at Preston which is right near Saskatchewan Eastview. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a concrete example that P3s have 

helped this province and the city of Saskatoon, and we look 

forward to what the P3 work that is going to be completed 

under SaskBuilds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another important part of the infrastructure in this 

province and something that we have invested, $2.2 billion in 

highways over a four-year period. Mr. Speaker, this is 

significant increases over what the former government used to 

spend on highways, and the need is . . . We need to continue at 

this level for many years to catch up from the deficit that was 

inherited from the NDP. 

 

Now as I said in my opening statements, I’m very excited about 

our first child that’s going to be coming this summer. And one 

of the things you think of is schools, and the importance of 

schools and education in this province. And that’s something 

that we can be really proud of for this government, is the money 

that we’ve put into schools in operations and in capital. Over 

half the schools in this province either have been replaced or 

major repairs have been done to. That’s a significant increase 

over what the former government has done. 

 

Now on education, it fits into our growth plan and I’ll speak to 

that in a bit. But just in conclusion on education, it is an area 

where we’re going to try different things. We’re going to . . . 

On the school needs that are out there, we’re going to look at 

P3 options. We have the student achievement program and I’m 

very thankful that our government is going to bring forward a 

program that is going to look at the achievements of our 

students. And that is something I strongly support that’s in this 

budget. And these things that . . . What we’re able to do is put 

this money back into these programs and back into 

infrastructure. And that’s why we seek growth. That’s what we 

do with the dividends of growth, is put it back into the 

priorities, which is health care and education and infrastructure. 

 

Just on the education side, and I have to stress that, you know, 

some of these increases are substantial when you’re looking at 

the funding for education will reach $1.7 billion, which is an 

increase of $107 million. Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition and 

the negative nine would like to rail against how we’re cutting 

this and cutting that. Well here’s an example. The hard numbers 

is there’s over $100 million more for education in this budget 

and, Mr. Speaker, that’s something we can be proud of. 

 

This is also in this budget — and this ties back to junior on the 

way here — is on child care spaces. And Danielle and I are 

already talking about how are things going to work in the 

coming years, and child care space is important. And in this 

budget, well we meet the commitments to create 500 new child 

care spaces. And that’s significant when you start looking at 

how many kids are being born in Saskatchewan, and I know 

first-hand. And we talk about the birth rate in the province, and 

that’s up. And we talk about the in-migration of people from 

other provinces, and that’s up. And we talk about the different 

people moving to Saskatchewan, and we’re at an all-time high 

of 1,089,807, which is a new record high for Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a document that I know that 

many have worked very hard on and something that every 

member should be proud of, that there is substantial 

investments in the priorities that are needed for Saskatchewan. 

And it’s all done within a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. And 

why that this document is important, and it’s on the . . . It 

stands on its own, but it’s also in a series of balanced budgets 

which is now six in a row. And what that does is enables us to 

take that surplus and put it back on to the debt, pay that down 

lower so we have more money to invest in other things in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And what is guiding us in the creation of that document is this 

one, which is The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth, which is an 

important document and it’s kind of our North Star, that we’re 

looking at where do we want to be in 2020. And just a quick 

highlighting on this one is look at the addressing the 

infrastructure challenges and building infrastructure for growth. 

Mr. Speaker, you see that, you see us working on that priority 

with the investments we’ve made on highways and in 

SaskBuilds and P3s. And that’s going to pay dividends down 

the road because we’re going to have the infrastructure we need 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we’re also going to . . . One of the bold targets of vision 

2020 and the plan for growth is the growing development of 

Saskatchewan’s labour force. Mr. Speaker, we know that that’s 

changing. We have had record investments in universities on 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2945 

operations. They’re once again up. Mr. Speaker, the opposition 

likes to rail against cuts, but it’s up over 2 per cent. And I can 

only imagine what the opposition would say if we were in 

Alberta and they actually cut by 7 per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, 

you look at the difference — a 2 per cent increase and your 7 

per cent decrease in Alberta. That’s a 9 per cent variance, and 

that’s a lot. The people of Saskatchewan and what the 

universities are doing in Alberta . . . That’s going to pay, once 

again, with Saskatchewan putting in the money, is going to pay 

dividends. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And it goes back to the growth plan of improving 

Saskatchewan and making sure we have the schools and the 

educated people to compete in the world economy. But we’re 

also seeing a change that we need to have more skilled labour 

out there as well, through the good work that the people do at 

SIAST and the different colleges. And we’ve seen additional 

funds, over 3 per cent increased funding for operations at 

SIAST. And that’s going to fuel the economy going forward. 

 

Another bold goal in our growth plan is advancing 

Saskatchewan’s natural resource and agriculture advantage. 

We’ve seen the good work the Minister of Agriculture’s done 

in agriculture. We’ve also seen the natural resources and what 

that means to Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I grew up in a town that was reliant on 

potash immensely. It has three potash mines around there. And 

I’ve seen the benefit of having that resource in your town and 

community, and I’m very grateful for the good work and the 

high-paying jobs that come with that. But I also have my two 

brother-in-laws actually work at Mosaic, and they are getting as 

many hours as they want right now, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

how one of the bold initiatives in this plan is to make sure that 

we keep that advantage, keep our resource economy growing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what would risk that? What would risk the 

growth that we were in in Saskatchewan? And this is the final 

document that I’ve just got to briefly talk about is the tree book, 

the tree book, Mr. Speaker. This tree book was authored by the 

Leader of the Opposition and he was . . . Well yes right here on 

page no. 3 is the policy review task force. Mr. Speaker, this is 

what would risk us going back . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to make an 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Melfort has asked for leave 

to do introductions. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce four 

people from the town of LeRoy from the Evergreen Country 

Home who are down on a meeting with the Ministers of Health 

and Rural and Remote Health. And they’re from a CBO 

[community-based organization] organization in the town of 

LeRoy, very important to the community of LeRoy. We have 

Heather Block, the chairperson; Brenda Nabseth is the 

manager; and board members Chris Hanson and Lorne 

Schroeder. I would ask that the members welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All right. I had a 

little break, and I just want to . . . We’re going to regroup here. 

And what we were talking about before I got interrupted was 

that . . . And I’m fine with the interviewing our guests and I 

appreciate they’re come seeing the Assembly. 

 

And we’re going to talk about what would risk the new 

Saskatchewan and what they would experience in rural 

Saskatchewan and health and whatnot. And what would set our 

province back is this document, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This document is what the last NDP platform was built on. Mr. 

Speaker, this document was produced by the Leader of the 

Opposition, and this is what they believe. And I believe this $5 

billion of reckless spending would put our Saskatchewan back 

into the old Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There’s no way that 

this document or that platform, if it ever became government, 

the NDP, we would be in record deficits in matters of minutes, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they have record spending in every 

direction, every direction and every government service the 

opposition wanted to increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And how were they going to pay for that? Jack up the rates on 

potash, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the NDP would do. And I was 

just talking about how my two brothers . . . brothers-in-law that 

work in Mosaic, they would not be working right now, Mr. 

Speaker. No. If the NDP won the last election and jacked up 

royalties on potash, they would be at home not working, Mr. 

Speaker. You can’t take an industry and double their rates and 

consider that they’re not going to have any negative impacts, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We saw this in Alberta. And I’m going to just briefly speak 

about my other brother, my older brother who’s out in Calgary. 

He works in oil and gas, and, Mr. Speaker, he said one thing. 

And he said, the best premier that Saskatchewan ever had — 

and this was a couple of years ago — was Ed Stelmach. Yes, he 

said that the best premier we ever had was the premier of 

Alberta that jacked up the royalties.  



2946 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, you know what happened when you jack up 

royalties? People leave, business leaves, and government 

revenues go down, Mr. Speaker. And we saw this in the ’90s 

with the opposition. They kept shipping people out. The exodus 

of people and the exodus of the tax base caused record drops in 

revenue, that they couldn’t afford the programs. And what’d 

they do, Mr. Speaker? They kept growing government. So the 

dark years of when the NDP was in government created such a 

climate that people left in droves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s funny that you talk about the generation that left and the 

lost generations. I got a text earlier today that my good friend 

Lance Fairlie that was in Saskatoon — and I came through 

commerce with him — he had to leave to Alberta to get 

gainfully employed, and that was because of the decline of 

Saskatchewan under the NDP. He just texted. He’s in 

Saskatoon. He’s coming home for Easter, and I look forward to 

hopefully having a cup of coffee with him over the weekend 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how we . . . What’s, I say, the biggest risk, the 

biggest risk to Saskatchewan is the NDP, under their current 

leadership, that has written this document. We know exactly 

where they would take us. They would take us down the road of 

deficits, take us down the road of reckless spending, and they 

would take us down the road of decline, Mr. Speaker. And we 

won’t let that happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just in conclusion here, I just want to say that 

what we’re building here in Saskatchewan is special. It is a 

wonderful time to be here. It is a time of energy and 

opportunity. You see that in the people that you meet on the 

streets and the people that have moved here. And I’m so 

thankful. And I’m thankful to play that part of government in 

ensuring that we keep balanced budgets and balanced priorities. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to enter into the debate about 

this budget. 

 

And I just want to conclude with I’d like to thank my 

colleagues. It’s been just over a year now on this job, and I’ve 

appreciated everything that I’ve learnt and the support that I’ve 

got from the colleagues and everyone that works in the 

building.  

 

And it’s seen, the good work that we can do on this side is seen 

with the budget document and the budget we have tabled. And, 

Mr. Speaker, because of my fear of the reckless path that the 

NDP might put us on and the dangerous amendment that the 

NDP put forward on this budget, that I will not be supporting 

that dangerous amendment. But I will, Mr. Speaker, be 

supporting this budget. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

enter into the debate on our 2013-14 budget presented by the 

member from Canora-Pelly, the Minister of Finance and the 

Deputy Premier. 

 

It’s great to follow the member from Saskatoon Eastview. He’s 

very detailed in his remarks and facts, so it gives me the 

opportunity to stay a little bit more high level and just talk 

about things in general, Mr. Speaker. 

First off I’d be remiss if I didn’t join with my colleagues in 

thanking a number of people at the beginning of my remarks. 

Firstly the people of Yorkton, without their trust and 

confidence, I wouldn’t have the opportunity to stand in this 

Assembly and represent them today. So I’m very thankful to 

them. 

 

The first people I would really truly like to thank is my family. 

If it wasn’t for our spouses . . . I know my wife, Leone, is very 

supportive of my work here. She’s very supportive of what we 

do here and a very hard-working lady that keeps things running 

very well at home. So I’m so thankful for her love and support, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

My kids, my oldest daughter, Katelin, is actually going to 

nursing college in Regina here. She’s in her second year, 

finishing up her second year, which I’m very thankful she has 

that opportunity to do that. With investments by this 

government over the last number of years and ongoing 

investments, we see a significant increase in nurse training 

seats, which has helped us address that nurse shortage in the 

province and delivering better quality of care and more health 

care for the people of the province. And she has that 

opportunity instead of moving out east or out west or to 

Alberta, Mr. Speaker. She has the opportunity of not only 

staying here and creating a life and her own family but being 

closer to us and taking part in our economy and being a resident 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

My other daughter, Rayanne, is actually in Ottawa right now. 

It’s a lovely city. I love visiting there. She loves it as well, 

although her heart’s in Saskatchewan. She’s out there because 

her fiancé is on a hockey scholarship. He’s playing for the 

University of Ottawa and taking geology, which is exciting in 

itself. But he’ll have an opportunity to come back to this 

province, his home province — very much a prairie boy as well 

— and taking part in the economy, probably in agriculture 

because he does have a great history, a family tradition in 

agriculture. But with his training in geology, Mr. Speaker, he’ll 

have great opportunities here, whether it’s any type of mining 

or resource-based industries which we are so blessed by divine 

providence to have in this country, in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, the resources that we have to help balance our 

economy and to create a better quality of life for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

The staff both at home in my constituency office and here are 

just above . . . go above and beyond to help us do the jobs we 

do, are always very supportive. As well as my colleagues here 

on the floor and across the floor, Mr. Speaker, from time to 

time are helpful, particularly over here. 

 

I was honoured to be appointed as Government Whip by the 

Premier just after the last election. Prior to that . . . Or sorry, 

Deputy Whip prior to the election and Whip after the election. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if that was a blessing or a curse. 

I’m not sure if the Premier actually likes me or trusts me or he 

just wanted to, you know, get me in this position. But it is truly 

an honour to serve as Whip. The great thing about it is you get 

to interact with virtually every member of the caucus. And we 

have a very diverse caucus, a very well-rounded caucus, and it 

is quite an opportunity to be able to have daily contact with the 

majority of them and develop those relationships and work with 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2947 

them. 

 

My colleague, the member from Regina Dewdney, he’s our 

Deputy Whip, and he’s been a very great asset. And just a quick 

story about him, Mr. Speaker. You know, one of the key duties 

of the Whip and Government Whip and Deputy Whip is to keep 

track of the members in the House. And you know, some of the 

jokes that have gone around after previous Grey Cups, I don’t 

think they’re very funny. Well I’ve got to share this. I don’t 

think he’ll be too mad at me for sharing this story. But he sat 

down in his chair right after being appointed as Deputy Whip. 

And the comments across the floor: what’s he doing sitting 

there? He can’t count to 13. Well I found that sort of funny, 

maybe a little bit offensive, Mr. Speaker, but I loved his 

reaction. He’s very quick on his feet. He’s very quick of wit 

and a very intelligent, very good leader. He has this great 

leadership skill. His reaction? He says, maybe I have trouble 

counting to 13, Mr. Speaker, but I can count to nine. And that 

was, I think, one of the best speeches he’s given in the House. 

It’s very short but pointed. 

 

I spoke about the opportunities my family has here, Mr. 

Speaker, which is great. Now I get into our budget, again, high 

level, briefly I go through a lot of these items. Of course the 

theme of this budget is balanced growth. And that’s got a 

twofold meaning, Mr. Speaker — balance in respect of 

balancing the books, balancing the budget. We know the 

general revenue side, $65 million surplus; the summary side, 

$150 million surplus, Mr. Speaker. So a truly balanced budget 

— sixth consecutive balanced budget. Every one of ours have 

been balanced with cash, whereas I’ve heard it described in the 

past that former NDP budgets, although balanced, were at times 

balanced with a credit card. 

 

If you look at the investments that are through this budget, 

again balanced with the economy, creating a strong economy, 

giving people opportunities through the province through the 

government policies, but also balancing those economic 

policies with growth against policies that help those that are 

most vulnerable and need the most support in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I’m very encouraged by the direction our government is 

taking. We are basically a conservative government, 

conservative-type government with a strong social conscience, 

with which I’m very pleased to be a part of. 

 

[16:30] 

 

If we look at the deficit reductions we’ve been taking part in, 

we’ve been leading over the past number of years, Mr. Speaker; 

$3 billion dollars in debt has been reduced, which is a 

cumulative savings of $600 million in interest payments, Mr. 

Speaker. So that’s $600 million we know goes directly back 

into our economy into programs in the province to do things 

like helping some of our most vulnerable. Our growth plan is 

very, very much on track. 

 

One of the keys to our growth again is growing our provincial 

population. And that’s manyfold. And that goes in line with our 

immigration policy as well, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, I’ve 

got some criticism from time to time from people in my local 

community about maybe some of the immigration trips and the 

programs that happen and recently the one to Ireland, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m very much supportive of those initiatives, and let 

me tell you why. It’s because over the years we’ve seen with 

. . . Many members have talked about our children and our 

young people leaving the province for a number of reasons. 

Basically the direction the province was taking with our 

economy, with policies of the former administration, we had 

our young people leaving the province. 

 

So what we’ve come to now, Mr. Speaker, is an economic 

depression, a labour depression in our market, whereas we 

would see the ideal curve would be young people coming in, 

being trained, taking part in our economy and our jobs, and then 

slowly transitioning out as they become baby boomers, 

grandparents, and going into retirement. What we see now is a 

huge depression in the middle. We have the young people being 

trained, not able to take part in the labour force yet. We have 

baby boomers that are transferring out of the labour force into 

retirement. We have this huge depression. And a lot of the 

programs we put in place to this point, say when it comes to 

physicians and nurses, a lot of them are just starting to graduate, 

won’t be graduating for a couple years yet. They can’t take part 

in that looking after that depression at this point. 

 

We’ve got to immigrate people. We’ve got to bring people back 

to this province to help with that. But it’s not . . . Immigration 

isn’t necessarily our first point of attention. Firstly we have to 

look at our First Nations youth, our First Nations people, and 

our young people that would have gone away without those 

opportunities. And we see a lot of initiatives now in this 

province getting them engaged in the workforce, getting them 

engaged in the economy, helping to address that labour 

shortage, and helping in that respect. 

 

Then we have our expatriates that have that talent — that labour 

pool that we are trying to attract back, from Saskatchewan — 

wanting to come take part in our economy and be a part of our 

province again. And then we have the Canadians that would 

like to take part in the Saskatchewan economy. They might be 

living somewhere out east or in Ontario or Alberta or BC 

[British Columbia]. They’re all welcome here, Mr. Speaker, 

those that are coming in to help us out with our labour 

depression. 

 

And then we look further overseas to look at countries like 

Ireland that have a lot of similarities with us, that are wanting to 

come and take part in our economy and help us out as well. So 

you know, those are very key initiatives, I think, in a 

well-thought-out plan to attract people to the province and look 

after our economy and then expand, expand our economy, 

which gives us a lot more opportunity with a stronger economy 

— more finances in the province, more jobs to create a better 

quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Just some quick comments about a lot of these things, Mr. 

Speaker. Many of my colleagues have spoken of the seniors’ 

income plan, the Saskatchewan assured income disabilities 

program, both of them getting significant lifts to look after 

some of our most vulnerable and get them to be able to achieve 

a better quality of life. 

 

We look at significant investments in health care. We heard the 

members across talk about some of these cuts. But, Mr. 



2948 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

Speaker, I point out that because someone expects a 5 or a 6, or 

maybe they’re budgeting for a 5 or 6 per cent lift, they get a 2 

or 3 per cent lift, that does not constitute a 2, 3, or 4 per cent 

cut. That is still a 2 or 3 per cent increase. Maybe not what one 

was expecting but still a significant increase, Mr. Speaker. And 

I think that’s a point that has to be made. 

 

We look at some of the comments by some of the leaders of our 

institutions, our universities, and other sectors. Some of them 

planning for a 3, 2, 3, and 4 per cent cut and very encouraged 

by the 2.1 per cent lift we see in the post-secondary education, 

3.1 for SIAST, and 2.8 I believe in K-12, pre K-12, Mr. 

Speaker. So those are significant increases. 

 

Money being put back into health care again, 3.4, 3.5 per cent 

increase overall. About 5 per cent for regional health 

authorities, Mr. Speaker, which I know they’re very happy 

with, although admittedly they do have to find some 

efficiencies. We expect all entities, all arm’s-length entities of 

government, to be finding those efficiencies. We are caretakers 

of the public purse. We have to make sure we’re responsible 

with the money that the people entrust to us. 

 

The Saskatchewan surgical wait initiative: 7,000 more surgeries 

this year, funding for, so we can start, continue whittling away 

at those surgical wait times. And extra funding for 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. Speaker, which means a lot 

to me. 

 

When we look at some of the financial institutions, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t want to hamstring these post-secondary 

institutions by going down the road of tuition freezes. We’ve 

seen that happen before. In fact, I think the NDP tried that in 

the ’90s and what happened? As soon as you take that freeze 

off, the increase is so astronomical it’s just a shock to 

everybody. And it just puts a lot of people in hardship. 

 

So what we’ve done, we’ve funded the universities and 

post-secondary institutions to a very acceptable level, I believe. 

But then we’re putting money back in people’s pockets through 

the different initiatives like your graduate retention program, 

which has been very well accepted over the past number of 

years. We have a record number of young people taking 

advantage of that and staying in the province now and 

contributing to the province and building their families. 

 

The Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, I think, is something 

very important to talk about. Because when we look at the 

tuition increases that have happened over the past number of 

years, with the money available through that program — $2,000 

over a four-year period, $500 per year, Mr. Speaker — I would 

argue that if you look at past increases in the last four to five 

years, the future increases we’ll be looking at over the next few 

years, that far outpaces the increases of tuition. So we’re 

putting money back in people’s pockets and letting them spend 

it where they know best. 

 

And when we look at other initiatives like the $120,000 that 

doctors can access if they’re practising in underserved areas and 

the possibility to have them breaking that up, depending on 

how much they serve in underserved areas, Mr. Speaker, I think 

is a good step. And with the nurses and nurse practitioners in 

that same program to a $20,000 level, I think is very important. 

Significant investments in infrastructure I think are very 

important. We’re right on track with our $2.2 billion investment 

over the four-year period of this term, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

most people are very happy with that. Again challenges with 

the wet conditions and the temperatures that we do have in the 

province, but significant investment and significant progress 

being made there. 

 

I’ll just briefly touch on just a few more items that are very 

specific to my constituency, Mr. Speaker. Two of them are 

province-wide initiatives but very appreciated. I know Mayor 

Bob Maloney from Yorkton spoke about these when being 

interviewed on CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] on 

the day of the budget. The one thing is the revenue sharing for 

municipalities, very encouraged by that. If you look at the 

record when we took over — our first year, ’07-08 — the city 

of Yorkton had 1.32 million in revenue sharing; ’13-14 budget, 

3.334 and change. A very significant increase, about 350 to 

400,000 more than they were expecting, which puts them in 

good shape in their oncoming year. 

 

When we look at — the member from Saskatoon Eastview 

touched on this at length, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll just touch on it 

briefly — the education property tax mill rate, we know with 

reassessment we would have had significant increases in 

property tax. We want to do what we can to keep money in 

people’s pockets, have a very tax-friendly environment. And 

with that lowering of mill rate we know it’ll be a zero net 

increase to property taxes. Some taxpayers may see a slight 

increase, some a slight decrease, but overall a net zero increase. 

So we’re very happy to be able to do that and help the people of 

the province with minimizing their tax burden. 

 

When we look at the labour needs again, we touched on 

immigration, looked at the labour needs of the province. Mr. 

Speaker, we have to start training more kids. And there’s a 

project I’ve been somewhat involved with for a number of 

years, even prior to being elected. As a nominated candidate, I 

had stakeholders coming to visit me to see if I’d be supportive 

of this project, and then in the ensuing five years been working 

on it. And for whatever reason, the project would have 

difficulties: whether it’s location, agreed-upon location, funding 

model, size of the facility, or whatever the issue would have 

been, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m just so happy and thankful, firstly to the Premier, the 

Deputy Premier, the Finance minister, my colleagues, cabinet, 

and Treasury Board for approving this project. But also very 

thankful to the many people in Yorkton that worked so hard on 

this project I’m about to speak about — the administration, the 

board, and the staff, and then the people of Yorkton, the 

businesses and private citizens that put their hard-earned money 

towards supporting this project — and that’s the Parkland 

College Trades and Technology Centre. That’s going to be an 

exciting project, a value of about 15 million-plus, depending on 

the value of the land. The city stepped up and actually sold the 

land, now valued about $3.5 million, to the college for a dollar 

to make sure that project went ahead. 

 

We see numerous organizations from potash companies, 

smaller business, larger business, contributing a very significant 

amount of money, which will be announced fairly soon I 

believe, with $1 million investment termed as planning and 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2949 

development and design work. For design work, Mr. Speaker, 

those in Yorkton know a lot of that work has been done. We’re 

down to the design stage. We know what it’s going to look like. 

The majority of the architecture drawings are done. It’s a matter 

of developing those blueprints. 

 

And as the Minister of Finance, the Deputy Premier, and the 

Minister of Advanced Education said in a meeting with the 

college, get your shovel in the ground as soon as you can. So 

we’re not planning on doing a snow-turning. We’re going to do 

sod-turning when the time is right. But I’m so excited that that 

will be going forward, training 350 students, First Nations and 

non-First Nations alike in the city of Yorkton. 

 

And we know Yorkton, we’re surrounded by a significant 

amount of First Nations communities from Cote, Keeseekoose 

in the North; Gordon’s to the West; and to the South a number 

of, Ochapowace, Kahkewistahaw and a few others, that those 

individuals are going to have that opportunity to come and train 

in Yorkton, get significant training for skills and be able to 

engage in that economy. And some of them probably engage in 

some of the mining jobs that are going to be opening up in the 

North, Mr. Speaker, that are going to be, we know that will be 

coming with the expansion of mining that will be available with 

the new royalty structure that was announced recently. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I could go on at length, but I’m going to allow 

some more time for some of the other members to speak. The 

members of the opposition have I think some more good things 

to say. Although you know, when you look at so many good 

items in this budget . . . And I heard the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport yesterday go through his speech in detail and 

saying, I’ll bet they’re not going to support that. I’ll bet you 

they’re not going to support that. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking 

forward to seeing how the members opposite vote on this 

budget. 

 

So many good things. Granted, there’s going to be things they 

don’t agree with. But when you look at a budget like that, 

there’s got to be the majority that you agree with. You think 

they would support it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll wait with anticipation to see how the 

members across vote on, I think, Thursday. As it stands right 

now, Mr. Speaker, I am happy and honoured to support this 

budget brought forward by the member from Canora-Pelly — 

the Minister of Finance, the Deputy Premier — and I will not 

be supporting the amendment brought forward by the deputy 

leader. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in the 

debate on the budget. And it’s interesting to see. But before I 

start out, I’d like to acknowledge I guess my family and just to 

my wife and grandchildren. And thank you for your support and 

bearing with the busy schedule that an MLA is asked to do. 

And if you’re going to serve an area, people ask you to serve it 

well and they want to have you in their communities. And we 

all know that that job is not easy sometimes. Our families are 

the ones sometimes pay the price for that, our grandchildren 

who would love to have us more around. But having said that, I 

just want to acknowledge that and thank my wife and my 

family for their support. 

 

I’d like to thank my CA, Al Rivard; Devin Bernatchez who is a 

part-time CA; Pearl Doris Morin also works part-time; and just 

for the work that those individuals do with case work. That 

people come into the office, they’re always there willing to give 

support and help them deal with some of the tough situations 

we find some of our northern people dealing with when it 

comes to government agencies and some of the challenges that 

people are dealing. The staff do an excellent job, and I just want 

to commend them and say thank you for all the support they’ve 

given me. 

 

But also we have a lot of people behind the scenes that work 

with our executive to help out and to continue having a strong 

NDP support in the North, in the Cumberland constituency. I 

want to thank those individuals that do their hard work 

volunteering and always helping out. 

 

So having said that, I’d like to also acknowledge the elders, the 

leadership and elders of the North in the Cumberland 

constituency that give the advice and the guidance that they do. 

And you know, it is an honour to sit and talk and listen to the 

good advice and the wisdom that they share with us. And 

sometimes some of the challenges that we see and we’re left 

with as the North and a community to deal with, and our elders 

and our leadership, they do an excellent job of advocating for 

northern Saskatchewan, doing what they can do. Limited 

sometimes with getting the response, whether it’s federal or 

provincial governments, when it comes to programs, but we’ll 

get into those details in the budget a little clearer. But I just 

want to acknowledge and not forget anyone. And if I have 

forgot anyone, I apologize. So with that, we’ll get into some of 

them. 

 

[16:45] 

 

I’m excited in one way with a new leader. We have a new 

Leader of the Official Opposition. And I think it’s going to do 

some change and it’s going to be an opportunity to address 

some of the challenges that Saskatchewan families are faced. 

Whether they’re middle income, individuals who are living in 

poverty, or individuals who are working three and four jobs, 

there are challenges out there. And you know there are some 

areas. 

 

So I’m very pleased to say it is a honour to work with our 

leader. He will do an excellent job. I know that. He will bring 

our party forward. Is there challenges? Yes. He’s going to have 

challenges; we all do. 

 

But I think he’ll get the guidance and advice that he needs from 

individuals, whether it’s our elders, whether it’s our leaders. 

He’s willing to communicate. He’s willing to consult. He’s 

willing to get advice. And that’s what amazes me about our 

leader. He’s willing to consult and talk with individuals and 

look for advice. He isn’t bull-headed, stubborn, and willing to 

just move in his own direction. So it’s good to see, and I will 

stand behind him 100 per cent and say, here’s a man who truly 

cares about listening to individual people. 

 

So having said that I’ll go . . . [inaudible] . . . We’ve got room 

to grow. And I remind those members opposite can sit there 



2950 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

from their chairs and chirp. They should do and the 

backbenchers maybe should do a little more arguing for the 

constituents back home, instead of like . . . When I think about 

Prince Albert and their second bridge. When I think about some 

of the other communities, North Battleford. When I think about 

Moose Jaw. So there are some of those areas where I would say 

truly, they should fight. 

 

So just having said that, Mr. Speaker, clearly there are areas 

where we have to work together. And I just want to, you know, 

make it clear that our leader has made it sense. Our leader has 

made it very clear he will work with the government when 

things and ideas that the government comes up makes sense. He 

will work with them. He will support that if it benefits 

Saskatchewan people and it’s good for them. 

 

But when it’s not the best for Saskatchewan people, he will 

stand up and he will fight, just like we will as the opposition, 

for those individuals who aren’t heard and want their voice 

heard in this House. And that’s what we’ll do, and he’s agreed. 

And he has common sense. He will do that. 

 

So that’s one side of it. I know he will work with the 

government when it makes sense, when it’s the right thing to 

do, when it benefits Saskatchewan people — whether they’re 

low income, whether they’re middle class, whether they’re 

business people, if it makes sense, whether it’s the film 

industry, whether it’s . . . You’re looking at all the different 

industries that we have — the tourism sector — if it makes 

sense, he’s willing to work with that. And our party will work 

with that. 

 

Having said that, I look at a program, and I want to give credit 

to our Leader of the Opposition. When you look at the budget, 

First Link for Alzheimer’s, when you look at the program, they 

used to get $50,000. And with the good work that they have 

done for themselves, the organization, they have brought 

forward . . . and with the help, and I say this, with . . . Our 

leader has raised the issue and has lobbied this government. 

And I’m pleased to see in the budget that the government has 

moved it from 50,000 a year to 350. That is something that we 

give credit, and it’s good. In that part of the budget I will give 

credit. It helps the First Link, individuals and families that are 

dealing with Alzheimer’s an opportunity and some support. 

Could we do more? Let’s hope we can do more. But at least 

right now, it’s definitely a good start. We’ve gone in the right 

direction. 

 

Now having said that, I know there’s a few other areas where, 

you know, we make comments on the budget and give credit to 

the government. You know, the transition house in Melfort, it’s 

going to help individuals and families and, you know, I guess a 

wife and a mother and her children, a place of shelter. If they’re 

in a situation where it’s not safe for them to be in their home or 

in their community, they have an opportunity to go to a place 

where before they may have to travel quite a distance to have a 

shelter for them. Now there is a shelter being built there, and I 

give credit to the government. And that’s good. They’ve heard 

the concern. It’s been years that that concern has been raised 

with the government. In this budget, the government provided 

that, so that’s a good thing. We’ll say that. That’s fine. 

 

Now having said that, there’s a few other areas I know my 

colleagues have expressed and have given some credit, and 

there’s nothing wrong with that. We’re supposed to work 

together for what’s best for Saskatchewan people and the 

residents of our province. But let me tell you something, Mr. 

Speaker. In this budget, in this budget there are areas where we 

didn’t see. And I know organizations like in northern 

Saskatchewan, the commercial fisherman would have loved to 

have an announcement that they were going to get support from 

their government who talks about the growth plan, who talks 

about economics, who talks about a vision of growth for 

everyone. 

 

Unfortunately the northern fisherman did not get an 

opportunity. There’s nothing that I can see in this budget to 

assist them. Whether it’s the subsidy, transportation subsidy, 

freight subsidy that they used to get, whether it’s a new facility, 

again this government has turned their back, and it is not a 

priority for the commercial fisherman of northern 

Saskatchewan. And that’s unfortunate, clearly unfortunate. 

 

Now we look at the trappers, Northern Trappers Association. 

They have applied and they’ve asked for support from the 

government in moving their organization forward. And they’ve 

tried too. They submitted proposals. And unfortunately that was 

not announced, and I did not find anything in the budget that 

dealt with their request. 

 

So again the northern trappers, when it comes to their proposal 

that they requested from this government, again the government 

has other priorities, turned their back on our northern trappers 

who do an excellent job. And we’ve talked about the good work 

that the northern trappers do, the lifestyle and a custom. And 

that’s sad to see that this government couldn’t deal with the 

small amount that they were asking, in the neighbourhood of 80 

to 90,000 with their proposal. The government could not find 

any money in it. But it found money for other areas that they 

call a priority. And we’ve criticized some of the challenges, and 

we’ll get into that. 

 

But having said that, we look at northern roads. And it’s about 

safety, safety for community members to travel. They want safe 

roads. Whether it’s tourism sector, whether it’s business sector, 

whether it’s the mining industry, whether it’s the trucking 

companies, whether it’s people that are hauling freight into the 

northern communities, they want safe roads. 

 

Whether it’s an ambulance who has to travel to a community 

. . . And some of our communities, they don’t have access to an 

airport. And there’s work where we need to look, and there 

needs to be work done. And I know there are some 

communities in northern Saskatchewan would love the 

government to find more money to deal with having an airport 

that would deal with an air ambulance, would deal with, you 

know, all 24 hours a day where they could land an airport. 

 

When it comes to safety of taking a community member out, 

instead of travelling in an ambulance for hours, you know . . . 

And some of the communities are . . . A round trip could be 

seven hours where the ambulance would come into the 

community, take the patient out. That timeline is just is not 

what the community and the leadership of those communities 

want for their residents and for their communities. It’s not what 

grandparents want for their grandkids. It’s not what I guess the 



March 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2951 

children want for their grandparents. 

 

Or you know, it has its challenges with individuals coming 

forward when it comes to safety about that. When you have a 

loved one who needs medical attention, they need a hospital. 

You want that immediately. You can’t wait, and you don’t want 

your loved one waiting for hours to get medical treatment. That 

isn’t right. 

 

So government could do that, and we’re going to push for that. 

And I know there’s some communities in the North, and clearly 

we’ll ask for that and will be lobbying hard. And I wish them 

well, and they’ll continue. But we didn’t see any money 

targeted for airports in, you know, northern Saskatchewan, but 

hopefully that will change, and those negotiations can happen. 

 

But having said that, we’re looking at the roads, and I said that. 

The government can announce, and it can say it allocates all 

this money for roads. We see the type of industry, and we see 

maybe it’s a growing industry and we see . . . And I’m going to 

get in some of the comments later on about the mining sector 

and stuff, and some of the Premier’s comments. And we’ll talk 

about that and, you know, some of the comments he made. 

 

But northern roads in general, if you look at the quality of some 

of the northern roads, and you know, my colleague has referred 

to some of those as the moose trails. And it’s interesting to say 

the member from Athabasca refers to those as moose trails. Just 

like in the South I think — what is it? — the goat paths they 

were calling them last year in the South. And it’s interesting to 

see. 

 

And I think some of those roads . . . CAA [Canadian 

Automobile Association ] has the worst roads in the province, 

and I think clearly we see what’s happened. And that’s 

interesting to see who wins the awards that way. 

 

So we see the challenges with roads. And a government can sit 

there and say it’s spending all this so-called money on roads, 

but I think the people are seeing what’s going on. It will be the 

people at the end of the day. The quality of the roads . . . And if 

you’re seeing what the conditions are like in this province — 

and it’s not just northern roads; it’s rural roads; it’s roads 

throughout — we see the challenges, and we know that more 

needs to be done. And clearly the government has an obligation 

to do more. 

 

You talk about a government that talks about a budget that’s the 

so-called . . . they want to brag about, they want to put up 

billboards about. And it’s amazing when you talk about their 

numbers, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately they’ve also won 

awards. That’s amazing to watch the award they won. They 

won an award. It’s not an award I would want to win, but I 

guess it’s theirs, their award, and the Premier and his 

government can keep that award. And you know, that was 

interesting to see. And we’ve made our own little comments 

about that, and I think my colleagues have talked about that. 

 

But having said that, I guess you look at some of the challenges 

that were faced when it deals with roads and roads in the North, 

and we’re talking about that. And you know, I want to give 

credit, and I’ve said this before, and I’ve seen some of the 

highways people, and they do an excellent job. They’re just 

trying to make a living for their family. They’re trying to 

provide a service so that the roads are safe for individuals. 

They’re limited to what they can do. And I give them credit, the 

highways workers in northern Saskatchewan, but all over the 

province. They do an excellent job, and they try to do what they 

can do with the resources they’re provided with, with the 

challenges that the Sask Party government has given them. 

 

And I say the Sask Party government has given them. This is 

not a new government — you know? — six years, going to go 

seven years. I mean they’re going to have to start looking at 

their record. And when I see some of them screaming out and 

sometimes in their frustration . . . And maybe they should talk 

to their own colleagues and the ministers and say, why have we 

had this much control of all the resources in the province for 

this many years? This many years have we had control, and 

why are things in such a mess still? 

 

Yet they’re told that they have to talk a certain way. They have 

a certain speech they have to read, and there’s only certain 

things they can say. So they’re kind of handcuffed as 

backbenchers. And you know, you can feel for them. I mean 

hopefully they care about their communities. But I think their 

communities are going to see that when they’re not in with that 

inner group, with the ministers and with cabinet, they don’t get 

that much say. So you know what? Maybe those individuals 

back home are wondering, well why do we have them? But 

let’s be clear about that. They have an obligation to do and, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ll do that. 

 

So when we talk about the numbers, what I find really 

interesting in budgets and a lot of the comments that were made 

by members opposite referring to the budgets, they refer to 

going back, and they want to talk about 16 years of the NDP. 

And that’s nothing wrong with that. That’s fine. But they don’t 

want to go back further than that. They don’t want to. 

 

Some of them do not want to talk about the ’80s. Why is that? 

Why do they not want to talk about the ’80s? And some of them 

were there. Some of them mentored in the ’80s. Some of them 

worked in the office of certain premiers and certain ministers 

and MLAs. So there was a group of people that worked, but 

why don’t they want to discuss those years in the ’80s when our 

province was put into the mess it is and the hard work for 16 

years that Saskatchewan residents had to put up with, had to put 

up with, and they, you know, clearly had to put up with? 

 

And the good people of our province, the good people of our 

province, the good, the good people of our province did what 

they were asked to do. And there was some tough decisions. 

They weren’t easy decisions. I know that. They weren’t easy. 

But I’ll tell you, there’s members opposite over there that were 

involved in that and know exactly what went on. They know 

why our province was just about bankrupt. They know why. 

But do they want to talk about that, Mr. Speaker? No, no, no. 

They want to just talk about 16 years. They don’t want to talk 

about the ’80s, the mess that went on. 

 

And they don’t want to talk about, they don’t want to talk about 

why people left this province. No, no, no. We’ll blame. We’ll 

blame. We’ll blame. We’ll blame everyone. But you know 

what? The one thing they do as soon as, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it’s in this budget or any other comments they have, if it’s to 



2952 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2013 

take credit for something good, oh then they want to. They want 

the photo ops. They want to be there for the photo ops. Don’t 

get me wrong. Don’t miss out on a picture. That’s fine. That’s 

exactly what I mean. And that will one day come back to deal 

with them. They can stand up and smile and do what they want. 

That’s fine. 

 

Clearly this budget, this budget, you know, has some areas and 

challenges. And let’s be honest. We hear the Provincial Auditor 

talking about that stuff. When you have the Provincial Auditor 

talking and making her comments and putting out her concerns 

and raising, raising concerns . . . And that’s what I want to say. 

It is raising concerns about the way the government reports the 

numbers and the numbers that they’re reporting and the way 

they’re doing it. And we should be reporting the way the rest of 

Canada is and so that the public can see exactly the debt that’s 

incurring under that government, or the finances. And if it’s so 

good, they should be able to report that and it should be easy. 

But you know what? Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to do that 

because they don’t want the public to know exactly what’s 

going on. But the public needs to know what’s going on, and 

the public will understand. And I think there is going to be an 

opportunity for individuals . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, the 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2921 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2921 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2921 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2921 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2922 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2922 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2945 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2922 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2922 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Purple Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2922 

 The Power of Faith 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2922 

 Wind Turbine Project First of its Kind in North America 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2923 

 A Celebration of Cultures 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2923 

 Little Princess Ball 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2923 

 Focus on Women Trade Show 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2924 

 Athlete Chases Olympic Dream 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2924 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for Universities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2924 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2924 

 Standardized Testing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2926 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2926 

 Changes to Canada Pension Plan 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2927 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2927 

 Creative Industries and Film Employment Tax Credit 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2928 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2928 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2929 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2929 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2929 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2937 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2939 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2940 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2946 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2949 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


