




















































Hansard: November 04, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 7B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2013, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3829 

 November 4, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will 

continue on the reply to the Throne Speech, concurrently both 

on the main motion and the amendment. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Makowsky, seconded by Mr. 

Merriman, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Wotherspoon.] 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to have the opportunity to wade into the debate on the 

Throne Speech. And prior to supper I had the opportunity to 

thank all the many important people in my life, and I think it’s 

important to get down to the Throne Speech now. 

 

I want to start by pointing out a quote actually from The 

StarPhoenix editorial board. They said about this current 

government, “. . . what’s frustratingly weak is its vision for 

Saskatchewan.” So I usually like to think that actions speak 

louder than words, so I am going to talk a little bit, I’m going to 

talk a little bit about the action or the lack thereof action, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with respect to the traffic safety . . . I’d like to start actually, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with something that took up a great deal 

of time basically from adjournment last spring until August. So 

it was a big part of my life this summer, and that was the 

opportunity to sit on the all-party Traffic Safety Committee, 

which was actually a really great opportunity. I appreciated the 

chance to take part in something that was a little less partisan 

actually. You put your partisanship aside and the goal is to 

come up with the best possible policy. And it was a really 

wonderful opportunity. 

 

I was heartened to see this mentioned in the Throne Speech 

actually. What was quoted in the Throne Speech is: 

 

Sadly, our province has seen an increase in the number of 

traffic fatalities. 

 

Many of those accidents involved alcohol. 

 

During the session, my government will act on the 

recommendations of the Legislative Assembly’s Special 

Committee on Traffic Safety, with a particular focus on 

tougher penalties for drinking and driving. 

 

So the mandate of the Traffic Safety Committee was to reduce 

fatalities. And it wasn’t specific to alcohol-related fatalities, but 

alcohol-related fatalities did dominate a large part of our work. 

As I said, it was a really great experience to hear from people 

who had lived experience in, well, with impaired driving: 

working with people who had been convicted of impaired 

driving, policy experts who’ve been in the field for 30 years, 

just people generally concerned about the deaths on the road. 

Last year we had almost 200 people who lost their lives on our 

roads, our highways last year in Saskatchewan. 

 

The interesting thing, there was consensus on most issues. And 

there was some pretty heated behind-closed-doors 

conversations that happened on the committee, but I think 

generally we had consensus on almost every issue. But my 

colleague from Cumberland and I chose to put forward a 

minority opinion because we felt that there was a key piece of 

evidence or the government members chose to ignore some key 

evidence that we think has been shown to save lives, and that 

made absolutely no sense to us since the goal of this committee 

was to make recommendations to save Saskatchewan people’s 

lives. 

 

So according to SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], 

between 2000 and 2013, impaired driving was responsible for 

41 per cent of the traffic fatalities and 12 per cent of the injuries 

in Saskatchewan. It is not acceptable, and this is completely 

preventable. We talk about the high number of fatalities but, as 

I said a couple of weeks ago when I had the opportunity to 

respond to the report, these are people. These are not statistics; 

these are people whose deaths have left huge holes in the hearts 

of those who they’ve left behind, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan has an absolutely abysmal track record when it 

comes to impaired driving fatalities. We have the highest 

number of impairment-related crash deaths among all the 

provinces and have for quite some time. In fact when death 

rates have been going down in Canada over the past decade by 

almost 17 per cent, they’ve gone up in this province by almost 

23 per cent. So clearly here in Saskatchewan we’re doing things 

. . . We don’t have it right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We don’t have 

the right mix of policies and education to ensure our roads are 

as safe as they can be. And there are things that we can do as 

members of this legislature. And like I said, I was glad to hear 

the Throne Speech was committing to doing something about it, 

but I’m hopeful that the government members will take the 

minority opinion very seriously because the people of 

Saskatchewan are counting on us to help keep them safe. And 

that was the mandate of the committee. 

 

I know that the Chair of the committee had talked about baby 

steps or some incrementalism, and now is not the time for 

incrementalism. We are so far behind what other provinces are 

doing, and on the way we’ve dealt with impaired driving, in 

death rate increases. So undoubtedly if the government 

implemented all the recommendations as is and ignored the 

minority report, I think that we could probably save some lives. 

I think there’s some good things in the report, but I think we 

would be missing a key opportunity to take some . . . well 

they’re not even bold steps. They’re steps that other provinces 

have already taken. 

 

Two conservative governments in Alberta and BC [British 

Columbia] have in fact implemented stiffer penalties. In BC, 

measures in both the administrative or warning range and the 

criminal range, they’ve put in place. So the administrative range 



3830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

is that warning range between, it’s .05 and .08 in BC; so that’s 

not criminal yet, and over .08 is criminal. So they put in 

multiple measures, but one of the key things was vehicle 

impoundments for those people in the warning ranges as well as 

those over .08. So there was a three-day vehicle impoundment 

on the first-time offence for those in the warning range. 

 

In two years they saw a reduction in their death rate by 50 per 

cent — in two years. I actually had someone who ended up 

presenting to the committee who I’d had a conversation with. 

He’s worked in traffic safety for 30 years. He says he’s never 

seen a policy in his 30 years in traffic safety that had such a 

dramatic impact. Alberta did the same and implemented vehicle 

impoundments on first-time offenders in that warning range as 

well, again that .05 to .08. And their early results last year: fatal 

crashes where alcohol was involved dropped by 46 per cent 

between July and December 2012, compared to the five-year 

average for the same months. So it holds some promise. 

 

So why does it work? Well impoundments are . . . It’s much 

harder to hide an impoundment from your spouse or your 

parent than it is to hide a three-day suspension, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It does in fact impact your work and family life. And 

that is the whole point. The goal is to change behaviours, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and this is a measure that has been proven to 

change behaviours. 

 

So the government members did choose to focus on licence 

suspensions for first-time offenders in the warning range. So we 

did hear and read submitted testimony on licence suspensions. 

And there’s two problems with them, and not that they don’t 

work, but they work in conjunction with other things. 

 

The two problems with the license suspensions, we heard that 

as many as 70 per cent of suspended drivers violate their 

suspension. So you might get suspended on Friday night, have 

your licence taken away for three days, but you’re still willing 

to take that risk to drive without your licence and have very 

little fear of getting caught. And there was also another piece of 

literature that was submitted to our committee that illustrates 

that those who do get short-term suspensions in the warning 

range are within the next two years more likely to get a driving 

while impaired, eight times more likely than you and I, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They are considered high-risk drivers. 

 

So wouldn’t you rather nip this behaviour in the bud, before 

someone becomes a .08 driver, to help people understand that 

you shouldn’t be drinking and driving? I actually need to point 

out the irony in the report, that according to MADD [Mothers 

Against Drunk Driving] Canada, there is one drink difference in 

a three-hour period if you are a 200-pound man. So if you drink 

five drinks in a three-hour period and you are a 200-pound man, 

that will put you at .06, still in the administrative range. If you 

happen to be that same man who has six drinks, you’re at .08. 

So a one-drink difference. And what this committee has 

recommended, a one-drink difference for a first-time offender 

in that warning range, you just get a licence suspension, but a 

first-time offence at .08 you would get a 30-day vehicle 

impoundment. So the committee recommended, for the .08 

drivers, a 30-day vehicle impoundment for someone who hits 

.08 and no impoundment on first offence for the warning range. 

 

So a one-drink difference, and we’re willing to take a car away 

for 30 days. I think that it would be prudent to want to prevent 

that behaviour before it even happens. And wouldn’t you rather 

have a three-day impoundment, lose your car — I don’t think 

any of us would want that anyway and I hope that that isn’t the 

case for any of us — but wouldn’t you prefer to have a 

three-day impoundment rather than a 30-day impoundment 

where you even possibly even kill or severely injury someone? 

 

So I do hope that the government will seriously consider the 

minority opinion, and I’m looking forward to hearing what the 

government decides to do on the recommendations from the 

Traffic Safety Committee. It was, as I said, a great committee. 

And I think we all worked very well. It was a learning process 

for sure, and I think one of the highlights of my experience in 

this legislature thus far. So I think that I . . . I have a bit of a 

cold here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think it’s important that we talk here a little bit about 

education. I come from a family of teachers. I happen to hear 

all about teachers’ experiences at the family dinner table. I have 

a brother who is a teacher, a sister-in-law who is a teacher, a 

nephew who is a teacher, many friends who are teachers, and a 

great number of constituents who are teachers as well. So I 

have no shortage of conversations with educators and their 

thoughts of the last few years here in Saskatchewan. 

 

What I’ve heard and seen — and I’m a parent who has children 

in elementary and in high school in Saskatoon — so some of 

the things that I’ve heard from educators and seen with my own 

eyes are crowded classrooms. For example, 32 children in a 

grade 1 class. Thirty-two children in a grade 1 class. And it’s 

not just because of a lack of space; it’s often because of a lack 

of resources. So 32 kids are in that class, not simply because 

there isn’t any more room in the building, but because the 

resources are not necessarily there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There’s a kindergarten that I’m aware of that has 26 children in 

one class, 25 children in another. I have a five-year-old, and I 

know how it’s like to wrangle that five-year-old in the morning 

out the door. So I can’t even imagine what a class of 26 

five-year-olds, 26 Ophelias looks like, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Can you imagine all those little kids, brand new to school, and 

teachers not having the resources that they need to ensure that 

those kids are getting what they need? 

 

The ill-conceived notion of standardized testing. Both the 

Education minister and the Premier in this House, both today 

and last week, can’t say no to standardized testing. A 

straight-up question, yes or no: have you shelved that? Have 

you not paused it? Have you put it . . . Have you scrapped it? 

Neither the Minister for Education nor the Premier could say 

no, that standardized testing is not off the table. I mean their 

answers clearly indicate that in fact we will possibly see a 

rebranding of standardized testing once the consultations are 

finished, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I know the teachers and the families that I talked to, they want 

those resources in the classroom. The $6 million budgeted this 

year for standardized testing could make a huge difference in 

the classrooms, I know the classrooms in my constituency with 

cuts to educational assistants, or the students that I know, 

English as an additional language students. 

 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3831 

I happen to represent a community that has schools that have 30 

different countries represented, many different languages 

spoken. I have children in the schools in Saskatoon Riversdale 

who were born and spent the first several years of their lives, 

their little young lives, in refugee camps. These are kids who 

don’t speak incredible English and have some cultural 

challenges and shocks. I was talking to a teacher last week. So 

Halloween should be a great, fun experience for our kids, but I 

was talking to a teacher last week. Some of these poor little kids 

who are brand new to Canada, Halloween scared the dickens 

out of them. They didn’t know what to make of the costumes. It 

was not a positive experience. 

 

So you’ve got cultural difficulties. You’ve got language 

difficulties. And this is where we have to, if you want 

newcomers to come to Saskatchewan, which we do — we were 

all ultimately newcomers to this province at one time or another 

— you want to make sure that the resources are there so they 

can adjust and so they can grow and so they can eventually 

thrive here and really make Saskatchewan home. 

 

So English as an additional language, those resources are just 

not available. I talked to one teacher at the end of last year who 

had six . . . She had 31 children in her grade 1 class — 31 

children in her grade 1 class — she had six English as an 

additional language students in a more affluent school in 

Saskatoon, and those kids were receiving 10 minutes of EAL 

[English as an additional language] a week. Not a day, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, a week. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So those are resources that are sorely lacking here. That’s what 

teachers are telling me they want. Educational assistants. They 

want the resources for English as an additional language. They 

want capped classroom sizes. They want to be respected. 

Actually that’s the biggest thing that teachers have shared with 

me, one of the overarching things. It’s not so much about 

respect. It’s about recognizing that teachers and school boards 

actually know a great deal about this sector. 

 

And we heard lots of mea culpas at the STF [Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation] council from the Premier. Lots of mea 

culpas, we’re going to do things better. But these answers that 

we’ve had this last week in question period around standardized 

testing does not illustrate a government who is really sorry and 

really is going to do what they need to do to connect with 

teachers. 

 

I know that the Premier likes to say the best predictor of future 

behaviour is past behaviour. And actually I’ve heard two 

members of his party, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

and Regina Walsh Acres, use that same quote in their response 

to the Throne Speech. Well that’s . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Exactly. That is what teachers are worried about, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So how is it that teachers and school boards, and families, for 

that matter, are able to trust that this government is going to 

engage in real and meaningful consultation? They’ve plowed 

ahead on so many decisions without any input from those who 

know schools best — educators and boards. They’ve done 

curriculum changes, standardized testing, changes to the school 

day, changes to the school year. But the Premier talks about 

hearing that it was too much change too fast. That is not what 

I’m hearing. It was a matter of change without talking to folks 

who know the sector well. 

 

Frankly, despite the Premier’s words, this government has a lot 

of ground to make up in the education sector to illustrate that 

his government really is willing to listen. So again, the 

Premier’s response today to questions about standardized 

testing don’t increase that trust factor. 

 

So I think one thing that we also have to talk about when we 

talk about education are P3s [public–private partnership]. I am 

a parent of school-age children and I know many people whose 

children are learning in spaces that are less than ideal. I am very 

well aware of that. And there is no doubt that this government 

needs to invest in building schools, but P3s can pose a serious 

problem. In Alberta we have three vastly different opposition 

parties opposed to the P3 school builds there. It has nothing to 

do with ideology. It’s about common sense. We’ve heard about 

lack of community space because in these builds that hasn’t 

been factored in. We’ve heard about the inability to add 

portables. 

 

I want to talk about a case at Elizabeth Finch school in 

Edmonton, a K to 9 [kindergarten to grade 9] school that as of 

last year had 740 students enrolled. And the school had a 

maximum capacity of 850 students, but even with these 742 

students the school was already over capacity. They had to give 

up enrichment classrooms such as the art lab and the wood shop 

classroom, as well as some small auxiliary rooms off the 

library, into core subject classrooms. So this school was 

constructed over a P3 arrangement, and as such they have some 

restrictions for adding additions to the structure. In this 

particular case they are restricted to adding two portables to the 

school, and those portables cannot house more than one 

classroom each, leaving the school with a capacity to expand by 

only two classrooms. So I’m glad that the minister has said that 

they’ve learned from Alberta, but I don’t know if they have 

entirely. 

 

Today in question period we also talked about P3s, and the 

minister used the number 98 million, that they had a $98 

million savings building the first 18 schools built under the P3 

model rather than the conventional procurement process. But I 

think it’s important to point out that the auditor . . . So the 

Auditor General pointed out that that was in fact the savings. 

But it’s important to note the auditor said that the government 

had not retained the documents it used to estimate maintenance 

process of the contract, nor had it validated its estimate of cost 

overrun risk if it built and operated the school itself. In fact the 

Alberta auditor’s staff are currently looking at whether or not 

two subsequent P3 school contracts offered value for money to 

taxpayers. And this report will be out publicly in February. 

 

So I think that the jury is still out on these particular P3s, and 

that’s why we’re calling for an upfront costing. Let’s see how 

much these schools are going to cost. I know the member from 

Warman actually today said, “Parents don’t care how it gets 

built.” And in part, I’ve actually heard from parents who do 

care. I’ve heard from teachers who care. But okay, let’s give 

her the benefit of the doubt. Parents want their kids in good 

classrooms. She may be right today but they sure as heck will 



3832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

care about how those schools get built when you have to make 

decisions because these schools cost us more money in the end. 

If they cost us more money in the end, the short-term or 

long-term costs, the reality is there’s not a magic money tree 

and if these end up costing us more money, that means there are 

fewer things. There are fewer things that you can do, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So families and parents will care when that 

means that there are fewer things that the government can offer 

— fewer programs, fewer resources because they’ve sunk their 

money into P3s that turned out to be too costly. 

 

So I don’t know what the government’s difficulty is with being 

clear and transparent and having an independent outside source 

do an upfront evaluation of this. I think we would all appreciate 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, families and parents included. 

 

I’d also like to talk a little bit about child care, which falls 

under education. But again in my role as a parent, as a mother 

— as I’ve said before, that’s the lens through which I see much 

of what I do in this Assembly — I was hoping for more in child 

care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I know the one thing that the 

government did say, it actually talked about its budget 

announcement of 500 more spaces, looking at past budget 

commitment. I know we’ve all heard the stories this summer 

and they’re not unusual, the stories about people having to rely 

on unlicensed care because there are not enough licensed spots 

available. 

 

And we hear about . . . You know, as a parent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, one of the hardest things to do is to . . . I have no idea 

why they would be heckling right now, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

whenever I talk about being a parent, I feel somewhat 

diminished in my role as a mother and that is who I am in this 

place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have been heckled every time I 

talk about who I am. I feel incredibly diminished. 

 

So in my capacity or in my role both in this House and as a 

parent, I have the opportunity to talk to a lot of parents. I am in 

the throes of parenting a five-year-old and a 15-year-old. The 

15-year-old does not need child care anymore but the 

five-year-old does on occasion. I have the occasion to talk to 

many parents. There is nothing worse than dropping your child 

off in care when you have to go either to work or to school, and 

you don’t feel good about the care. It’s hard enough when you 

do feel good about the care. I come here, and my kids are in the 

best possible care — family members who I love and trust — 

and it still is heart-wrenching to drop your kids off in care that 

you really trust. There is nothing worse than dropping your kids 

off in a tenuous situation, but you have no choice because you 

have to earn a living, pay your bills or go to school, or risk 

being thrown out of your, being thrown out of your . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . They’re asking what the alternative 

is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The alternative is to figure out what the 

need is and meet it. 

 

It was quite interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In September 

2013, in September 2013 the former minister of Education had 

this to say: “We are going to go forward with assessment. You 

cannot improve what you don’t measure, and we intend to 

measure.” So that’s specific to standardized testing. 

 

I would say you can’t, you can’t improve what you can’t 

measure. And I had the opportunity in estimates last spring, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to ask the minister: so how have you come up 

with this number of 500 spaces this year or these 2,000 spaces 

over four years? How did you come up with that number? And 

you know, he couldn’t give me an answer. He actually said, 

well we’re being aggressive. And I said, well how do you know 

you’re being aggressive if you don’t know what the demand is? 

And he said to me that “At the present time, we don’t have a 

way of doing that exactly.” 

 

There are other jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who do 

know how to calculate demand. Manitoba actually about two 

years ago implemented an online child care registry, both to 

help parents to simplify the access process so you’re not putting 

your name on 20 different lists, but the other piece of that is 

they did it so they would be able to measure demand and meet 

demand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Prince Edward Island has an 

online child care registry. I haven’t talked to Prince Edward 

Island, but I suspect they probably get the very same data that 

Manitoba does. 

 

So there are ways to measure. And so we can do that with 

standardized testing — this government can — but they can’t 

do it for child care. So I find it quite laughable that you can talk 

about being aggressive, and you have no idea what the actual 

need is. 

 

In 2009, ’10, ’11, and ’12, there were approximately 60,000 

live births here in Saskatchewan, and we have less than 13,000 

spaces. I know in the Throne Speech, the government quoted a 

number of spaces it’s planning on building, but the bottom line 

is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I asked questions at the end of 

2013 in estimates . . . So I asked about the . . . At the end of 

’12-13, operational spaces were 12,772. So we have a long way 

to go. Sixty thousand live births in four years. That’s not 

accounting for these births in this year and not accounting for 

children who were over four years old who still need care. So 

the reality is, this government can talk a good game about child 

care, but they are not meeting the demands of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Child care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is about 

making sure, is about making sure that children have good care. 

It’s about education. 

 

It’s about making sure children have good care, but it is also 

about economic development, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 

approximately 70 per cent of women with children under five in 

the paid labour force — 70 per cent of women in the paid 

labour force who have children under five. That’s a lot of child 

care spaces or a lot of need that is not being covered, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The bottom line is, this government can talk a 

good game but they are not meeting the demand of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And with labour force shortages, we need to have as many 

people feel confident and comfortable about their child care, 

about their child care set-up as possible, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

As I said, there is nothing worse than leaving your children 

when you have to leave your children in less than comfortable 

care situations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also had the opportunity in recent months to become the new 

Health care critic. So it’s been a steep learning curve, 

obviously. There are a great number of . . . It’s a big file. It’s a 

big file, and there’s much to learn. But I do have some thoughts 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3833 

that I’d like to share on the Throne Speech on health care, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So one of the things that was highlighted is the mental health 

review which, from my family’s own experience, I lost a 

nephew this summer at the age of 23 to . . . He was bipolar and 

was not served well by the system, despite having incredible 

parents who are great advocates. My sister-in-law works in the 

Saskatoon Health Region. She knows how to advocate. My 

brother is a pretty fine advocate himself, and they were not able 

to get my nephew what they needed. 

 

I can tell you all, from my family’s own experience, all kinds of 

things that are wrong with this system. I can tell you about 

admitting. I can tell you about . . . I can tell you about taking 

someone who is delusional into the emergency room at RUH 

[Royal University Hospital] and having to spend five hours in 

the emergency room to get admitted to Dubé where there’s 

bright lights, lots of sounds, lots of stimulation — not what 

someone who is going through a psychotic episode needs. 

 

I can tell you about legislation that makes it very hard to have 

an adult child put under trusteeship or guardianship. I can tell 

you about the shortage of psychiatrists and not having the 

ability . . . a boy who, a brilliant, beautiful, amazing child, who 

had a bright future in front of him, who had no cognitive 

therapy in five years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, simply medication. I 

can tell you about a boy who, had he not had the loving parents 

that he had, like many people who have mental health issues 

would have been on the street. 

 

My brother and his wife, Greg and Lori, had Jordan continue to 

live with them, and it wasn’t easy. It’s not easy living with 

someone who is very ill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there are 

many people not dissimilar from Jordan who end up on the 

streets. So I’m very grateful for the mental health review. 

 

And the interesting thing that happened to me this summer, 

after Jordan died . . . My family is very public about it. My 

brother and his wife are determined that Jordan should be . . . 

there should be many lessons learned by my family’s very 

difficult lesson. They’re very public and open about this. And 

so my sister-in-law had written a really beautiful tribute to my 

nephew in the paper and was very clear that it was a family 

member. We were all mentioned in it. I had people coming out 

of the woodwork telling me stories about the mental health care 

system here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is not a rare experience 

that people have. One in five people are touched by mental 

health issues, and we have huge issues that we need to address. 

So I am very grateful for the mental health review. I am. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And I was at . . . I did have some concerns. I was at the launch 

of the online consultation process a couple of weeks ago. And I 

have to confess I had some reservations about the online 

consultation process, but Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder had put 

some of those to rest. Actually I’m optimistic, a big believer in 

consultation. That’s one of the things, I think, that I’ve gotten 

up and talked a great deal about. I really believe in real and 

meaningful consultation. So she did put to rest or ease some of 

my concerns that the review would keep some people out, and I 

will trust that the government is doing all it can to hear from 

some people who are a little bit more vulnerable, who might not 

normally feed into something like this. 

 

So we will continue watching this. But the one thing, the fact of 

the matter is I’m hearing from people that we shouldn’t just 

wait until the review is finished. I know that sounds 

counterintuitive here, but the government has had decision 

items before it. We know some of the things that we could do 

now which are life-saving. I am telling you from personal 

experience that some of these things we could do now could 

save someone’s life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it is I think a 

huge shame to wait for investment. So we have a report, a 

consultation process; the report will be done next summer. 

That’s two budgets that we have to wait for, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I think some of the things that we could think about is investing 

in Housing First. Housing First is ensuring that we keep a roof 

over people’s heads where they can deal with their mental 

health and addictions once they have a roof over their head. 

We’ve got provinces like Alberta who have committed to it, 

cities like Calgary. We’ve got Saskatoon on board. We’ve got a 

whole host of people who are in support of Housing First, and 

we don’t have a government who’s committed to doing this yet. 

 

We look at overcrowded emergency rooms and we talk . . . we 

hear about the government wanting to hot-spot, keeping people 

with mental health and addictions out of emergency rooms, 

which is great. But the services aren’t there yet, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So how can you keep people out of the emergency 

rooms if the services are not there yet? So we do know that 

there are things that the government could invest in today that 

would make a difference in people’s lives. I’m looking at a 

paper here called Charting a New Course for Mental Health’s 

Most Vulnerable: A Provincial Approach to Replace 

Saskatchewan Hospital and Address Complex Needs Care. And 

it is a paper by the Ministry of Health and the Prairie North 

Regional Health Authority. And they “. . . partnered to develop 

a provincial project that addresses the lack of adequate mental 

health facilities and community resources for persons with 

severe psychiatric illness and/or persons considered to have 

high complex needs.” 

 

Some of those things involve residential options like intensive 

residential support beds, which are “living arrangements that 

would provide duplex or small group home-type residences for 

clients and would provide 24-hour support.” Step-down beds 

are not dissimilar. They’re not, they’re “apartment-style 

accommodations or small group homes for clients” that still 

provide that daily support. 

 

And that’s what’s needed. I think about my nephew Jordan who 

did have that support because he had parents who were willing 

to put up with an awful lot. He was not an easy person to live 

with. He was a wonderful boy but the sickness completely 

robbed him of who he was, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So there are things that we could be investing in now and I 

think that that’s something that the government should look at. 

And I was disappointed. I know at the online consultation 

process kickoff, I talked to a mother who had been invited to 

the . . . She had been invited to attend that particular event. And 

she was so disappointed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She thought the 



3834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

government was going to announce some kind of support or 

services and was so incredibly disappointed. So I’m hearing 

from people that we can’t wait for two budget cycles. We need 

to do something now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I need to talk about what’s happening here in Saskatchewan 

with respect to seniors’ care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There have 

been raised very serious concerns of understaffing in long-term 

care by people like Carrie Klassen last spring in the legislature, 

and others that prompted a seniors’ care review. But it took a 

freedom of information request to dislodge that report from the 

government, and months after it had already been finished. 

 

So what did that report identify? It identified continent people 

being left to soil themselves, people being woken up far earlier 

in the morning than you or I would want to wake up, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, people not getting fed for hours. We’ve heard 

stories about families using all their vacation time and having to 

hire private care for their mother here in the hospital because 

she was not even getting the basics. We’ve heard Saskatchewan 

nurses sound the alarm about short-staffing. We’ve heard from 

a former nurse who found herself a patient in a dirty room in a 

hospital and had to have her family clean it. 

 

The underlying theme of both the report, the long-term care 

report, and some of these stories is a lack of staff, a staff 

shortage. And to top that off, about well a week ago we heard 

the government removed minimum care standards two years 

ago for long-term care. Instead of trying to raise the bar for 

care, they’ve taken the bar completely away, completely 

removed that bar. 

 

And of course I know the minister said, well this is about 

personalized or individualized care, and of course it needs to 

be. Care needs to be tailored to individuals. But this is about the 

bare minimum of what someone should get. Would this 

government advocate getting rid of the minimum wage because 

Tim Hortons happens to be paying 12.50 an hour? No. This is 

about minimum, the bare minimum, where the floor is, Mr. 

Speaker, and everything else over that should be tailored to 

people’s needs. 

 

We heard the CEO [chief executive officer] of the province’s 

largest health region say that the $2 million urgent action fund 

is a drop in the bucket and will do nothing to alleviate the real 

issue around the lack of staffing. I’ve heard from people in the 

Saskatoon Health Region who are very welcoming of the 

money that the minister has said will be spent in home care. But 

these people have told me it will do nothing to alleviate all 

those level 4 patients who are currently residing in acute care 

beds. Those people are not going home, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

As sad as that is, they need long-term care beds. 

 

We’ve got the Saskatoon Health Region at the same point was 

talking about this $10 million. She also, Maura Davies also 

mentioned infrastructure is part of the problem. The RUH, the 

Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon currently has netting on 

it to keep it from crumbling down on people. The same hospital 

had to power down the entire electrical system, I think on about 

October 9th from what I’ve been told, in order to change a 

switch in October. 

 

We heard today about the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

possibly joining others in transferring seniors up to 150 

kilometres away from their homes to be able to provide them 

with a bed. The minister said this is just keeping up with other 

health regions, but just because everybody else is doing it 

doesn’t mean it’s the right thing to do. Interestingly enough, 

though, Alberta Health Services — the government likes to 

look to Alberta for direction sometimes — this summer the 

Alberta Health Services withdrew a policy which would force 

continuing care residents to take the first available bed within 

100 kilometres of their home, meaning couples were separated. 

A quote from the Health minister, Fred Horne: 

 

We want our seniors to age alongside the ones they love. 

Decisions about continuing care placement must start with 

supporting seniors as close to home as possible, and doing 

all we can to keep couples together. 

 

That was from a Calgary Sun article this summer, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So the bottom line is these folks opposite happen to be the 

government. This government talks about spending more 

money on health care than has ever been spent, which is true. 

But they also have more money than a government in the 

history of this province has ever had. But seniors’ care is still a 

mess. They’re spending more money and things are not getting 

better, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan expect and deserve better. They 

deserve a strong vision for Saskatchewan. This government did 

not deliver with the Throne Speech. So I will be supporting the 

amendment and will not be supporting the main motion. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank 

you very much, and thank you to my colleagues. It’s a pleasure 

to enter into this debate with respect to the Throne Speech that 

was delivered here just a short time ago by Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

Prior to me getting into my remarks, Mr. Speaker, around the 

meat of the Throne Speech and some of the other issues 

surrounding that particular document, I just want to, as many of 

my colleagues have already done, I want to thank some people 

that are important in me being here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to thank first of all, obviously, the people of Regina 

Northeast. You know, for two years prior to the election in 

2011 I had the opportunity to go out and visit with these 

constituents at their doorstep. We door knocked for some two 

years prior to the actual election and got an opportunity to meet 

an awful lot of them many times at their doorstep and discuss 

the issues of concerns to them at that particular time. And we 

had the opportunity to go out again this summer, Mr. Speaker, 

two years into it, because interestingly enough, one of the 

things that was said to me when I was out door knocking and 

got elected was, that seat had been held by members opposite 

for some 26 years. The NDP [New Democratic Party] held that 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3835 

seat for some 26 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, prior to the 

election in November of 2011. 

 

And what was said to me quite often is, we don’t want you just 

coming around here during election time. We’ve had that far 

too often now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Why don’t you come and 

visit us during the non-election times? Next year, the year after, 

three years into it, but just don’t come around here every four 

years looking for our vote and we don’t see you any other time. 

So I made a promise to a number of them that brought that issue 

up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I would be back and visit with 

them every single year when I possibly could, at their doorstep 

besides community events, and go and chat with them in their 

living rooms about issues of concern to them. 

 

We had that opportunity in June of this year and again later in 

August over the summertime, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to go out 

and do some door knocking. I had some help and some 

wonderful volunteers came out with me but I got the 

opportunity to speak to an awful lot of people who were out 

doing yardwork or barbecuing or whatever the case may be on 

our beautiful summer evenings. And I haven’t been a politician 

for very long, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I do know this, that if 

issues of concern are on their minds and you’re at their 

doorstep, they let you know about it. They talk to you about it. 

They raise those concerns with you in the privacy of their 

homes, making sure that you as their representative can bring 

that back to the government caucus. 

 

I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I had a number of 

concerns raised to me, primarily about fixing the streets in front 

of their houses, primarily about fixing their sidewalks in front 

of their houses, primarily about getting the city to come over 

and cut down a tree that they thought was blocking something 

that they thought was a danger to their house or something of 

that nature, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I had very few issues raised 

with me of a provincial nature. And so I use that as a bit of a 

barometer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see what the mood is like 

out there with respect to the people in my particular 

constituency. And I can tell you that we had an awful lot of 

good conversations and some laughs, and really enjoyed the 

opportunity. And it takes you away, with all due respect to this 

wonderful institution we’re in here today, it takes you away 

from what I call dome-itis and gets you outside to speak to the 

real people to find out what’s on their minds out there and not 

what we’re so worried about in this Chamber on a day-to-day 

basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I want to thank the people of Regina Northeast for again 

allowing me the privilege of representing them and serving in 

this Legislative Assembly on the government side, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I want to thank some people in my ministerial office, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just over a year ago I had the privilege of 

being asked by the Premier to serve in Executive Council and 

the cabinet, and I was honoured by that request. And it’s been a 

steep learning curve for me and learning just the cabinet 

process and how all the decision-making process takes place 

and what has to go into items that you take on behalf of your 

ministry into the cabinet room and how all that works, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I’ve had lots of advice and assistance 

from my colleagues both in cabinet and in caucus, and I really 

appreciate that. 

 

I obviously want to thank the Premier for giving me that 

opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so with that, I want to 

thank my ministerial staff: Jason, Bob, Kirsten, Michelle, and 

our newest member is a young lady named Morgan who just 

joined us here recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to thank the ministry officials that I get the opportunity 

to work with. I think I have been well-served by ministry 

officials in the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport, the 

ministry that I’m responsible for, and the Provincial Capital 

Commission. I had a change in deputy earlier this summer 

where Ms. Wynne Young, a long-time serving civil servant, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, has moved over to the Johnson-Shoyama 

school of business and is teaching young people there as well as 

doing some research, and was replaced by Lin Gallagher, 

another long-time professional civil servant, as the new deputy 

minister in Parks, Culture and Sport. And I’ve been very ably 

served by, and our government, by both of those deputies, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I just wanted to thank them as well as all 

of the ministry officials. 

 

I want to thank a gentleman in my constituency offices. Many 

of us talk about our constituency assistants. And I have a retired 

civil servant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my constituency assistant, 

Mr. Ron Naidu, who has just been a godsend for me. He works 

long hours and he takes care of a lot of the casework in my 

constituency office. I’m fortunate enough to share a 

constituency office with the member for Regina Dewdney and 

the member for Regina Douglas Park, and they, with their CAs 

[constituency assistant] there as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

share in some of the casework and share in some of the problem 

solving and working together. And as well we’re able to find 

some efficiencies for the taxpayer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by 

sharing that particular office. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m also very appreciative of the political 

supporters around me. I am blessed by a constituency 

association president and members of the executive that serve 

not only me but our constituency very, very well, and I am very 

proud of the work that they have done. I can say that two weeks 

ago this evening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had our largest event 

ever in my particular constituency with respect to having some 

folks out and raising some money and talking about what the 

Throne Speech and what the government’s agenda for this fall 

was going to be. And I really appreciate that kind of support 

that I am getting, along with my colleagues in the city of 

Regina, with respect to the support we’re having in the city of 

Regina with 8 of 11 MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] now here in the Queen City, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about what the 

Throne Speech is about. And it’s interesting, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the Throne Speech title is “Meeting the 

Challenges of Growth.” And it follows on the heels of a year 

before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Premier outlined our 

plan for growth, vision 2020, in a speech he gave to the 

chamber of commerce in Saskatoon almost a year to the day 

prior to this Throne Speech being brought down. 

 

Now as I look at the priorities of this government, I think it 

speaks volumes about where this government’s priorities are 



3836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

when you just look at the different categories within the actual 

document, Mr. Deputy Speaker, called “Meeting the Challenges 

of Growth.” It is health care, education, post-secondary 

education, highways, investing in infrastructure, housing, 

competitiveness, international engagement, resource sector 

expansions, innovation, agriculture, fiscal responsibility, safe 

communities, parks and culture, social services, accountable 

government, and the environment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those 

are the headings that are contained in the actual meat of the 

Throne Speech that the members opposite claim has no vision, 

has no plan for what this government wants to do with respect 

to taking the province forward, Mr. Speaker.  

 

I would challenge the members opposite to bring out their list 

of where their priorities would be in a similar type of document 

if in fact they disagree with what we outlined in this particular 

Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because what we talked 

about a year ago was the plan for growth, the Saskatchewan 

plan for growth: vision 2020 and beyond. And the Premier has 

talked at length and, as members of this government have 

talked at length about, we don’t want to achieve growth just for 

growth’s sake. The purpose of growth is to provide a better 

quality of life for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I think if I look at my own Ministry of Parks, 

Culture and Sport, if you look across my Ministry of Parks, 

Culture and Sport, every single aspect of that ministry speaks 

exactly to quality of life here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When I look at what we’re doing with respect to meeting the 

challenges of this growth and investing in things across my 

ministry, I talk about the parks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 

35 provincial parks in this province now. There was 34. Last 

summer, as the result of a campaign promise that this 

government made back in 2007, this party made back in 2007 

to create additional provincial parks, we opened up the Great 

Blue Heron Provincial Park in August of this past summer, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, up in the Emma-Anglin Lake areas north of 

Prince Albert. It’s our 35th provincial park, maintaining a 

campaign promise again that was offered up in 2007. 

 

When I look at the record numbers, the record numbers of 

visitations to our provincial parks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 

the last three years in each successive year, we have had record 

visitations to our provincial parks. Our government made a 

commitment of investing at least thirteen and a half million 

dollars on an annual basis in capital infrastructure into our 

provincial parks. We’ve kept that promise, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and as a result I think it lends credence to the old 

adage that if you build it, they will come. And we saw this past 

year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some 3.7 million visitations to our 

provincial parks across the province. 

 

The number two destination for tourists who are coming from 

outside the borders of Saskatchewan into our province — 

whether it be from other provinces or from United States or 

indeed Europe — when they come into Saskatchewan the 

number two destination, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are our provincial 

parks. 

 

I look at the investment we made in our regional parks, in our 

regional parks. And I just had the delegation in from the 

Regional Parks Association just a couple of days ago, last 

week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who came in and talked about what 

they’d like to see in this coming budget in 2014-15. Well we 

had a great conversation about the investment this 

government’s made to date in regional parks. 

 

It was yet another issue, another thing in rural Saskatchewan 

the members opposite walked away from back when they were 

in government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We know they walked 

away from agriculture. We know they walked away from health 

care when they closed 51 rural hospitals. They also walked 

away from investing in regional parks, and regional parks 

provide a great service to people who want to do some 

camping, for tourism opportunities for the different areas of the 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These are regional parks formed 

by municipalities, obviously in rural Saskatchewan. They get 

together, they have these regional parks that form some basis of 

revenue for them. It also forms some basis of recreation for 

them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the members opposite walked 

away from investing in our regional parks, and we’ve turned 

that corner on that one. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s interesting with the 

increase in population in our province, it is not at all unusual if 

you were to go out to a provincial park like Pike Lake on a 

Sunday afternoon, just outside Saskatoon in the picnic area, the 

day use picnic area, you might hear 10 different languages if 

you walk through that day use picnic area on a Sunday 

afternoon in the summertime, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of 

the different nationalities that have come to our province from 

obviously outside the country, who are now living and residing 

here in the province of Saskatchewan, raising their families, 

starting up new businesses, working in different sectors of our 

economy. And they’re going out and enjoying the beauty of our 

provincial parks and really, really adding to our 

multiculturalism, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I look at arts and culture in our province, I look at the different 

things that we’ve invested in in arts and culture, and arts and 

culture speaks directly to quality of life here again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It speaks directly to people enjoying themselves in 

various festivals, whether it’s large festivals like the Craven 

Country Jamboree or the Junos that we had here earlier this 

year in Moose Jaw and Regina or small community festivals 

either during the summertime or the wintertime in the local 

hockey rink or the local hall. 

 

I look at the different museums across the province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I look at programs like artsVest. I look at programs 

like Main Street, Saskatchewan. I look at things like what the 

government has done with respect to funding from the lotteries 

program into things like Sask Sport, SaskCulture, and the 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I look at by this government’s actions, by 

reducing the lottery license fee in 2007 on a five-year 

agreement, it has resulted in some nine million additional 

dollars going into those organizations, those globals, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, who then distribute those funds out to these 

various organizations to add to our quality of life in the 

province here of Saskatchewan. 

 

And then I look at things like the sport activities in our 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I look at the different activities 

that Sask Sport supports in this province. I look at things like, 

albeit they may be small, the community rink affordability 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3837 

grant — some $2,500 out to community rinks whether they’re 

curling surfaces or hockey rink, figure skating surfaces out in 

rural Saskatchewan across the entire province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I look at things like the active families benefit that this 

government has put in place that supports families with a $150 

refundable tax credit if they’re involved in cultural or sport 

activities to get kids out of the house, get kids away from the 

computer screen, and get them out doing and engaging in 

activities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These are the kinds of things 

that I think our government is very proud of with respect to 

quality of life here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Speech from the 

Throne, as I talked about, it falls on the heels a year later after 

the plan for growth was announced. And the members opposite 

called it the Premier’s booklet. They scoff at it. They say 

there’s no meat to it, that there’s no goals set in it. It’s just a 

booklet that is really a road map that we’re never going to 

follow, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So this road map, I’ve gone through it again. And every 

member of our caucus has a copy of this, obviously. And when 

we’re in cabinet and we’re looking at decision making, we look 

to see if it meets with our growth plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

something that we can look at to help guide us in our 

decision-making process with respect to, does it meet our 

growth plan? And the Throne Speech puts more meat to that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In our plan for growth, there was six core growth activities that 

the Premier announced over a year ago. Within those six core 

growth activities, there are 20 key goals outlined, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Now we can debate this in this Legislative Assembly 

as to whether those are achievable goals or not, whether the 

opposition thinks that that’s something that we ought to be 

pursuing or not pursuing, whether the opposition thinks that we 

ought to be doing it faster or slower. 

 

And I look at some of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 1.2 million 

people living in Saskatchewan by 2020. One point two million 

people living in Saskatchewan by 2020. The opposition scoffs 

at that kind of goal. I look at things like $2.5 billion invested in 

infrastructure over the next three years. I look at things like 

cutting the provincial debt in half from its 2000 level by 2017. I 

look at things like reducing surgical wait times to no more than 

three months by 2014, and things like eliminating wait times in 

emergency rooms by 2017. These are some of the 20 goals 

outlined in this plan for growth. 

 

And then we go to the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and it continues with that theme. And Her Honour 

read the Speech from the Throne here and outlined exactly in 

those different categories how we’re going to continue to meet 

the challenges of growth. 

 

And so I thought, because I’ve heard from members opposite 

on a number of occasions, that this ought to be a place of 

exchanging ideas. This ought to be a place where we can debate 

our ideas versus their ideas. This ought to be a place where the 

government lays out its plan. And the opposition, every single 

day in question period they get up and oppose, but the 

opposition’s job is also to propose, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I 

thought, well I’ll go on their website and have a look at what 

their plan is. I’ll go on their website and have a look at what the 

member from Athabasca’s referred to as a smart growth plan. I 

couldn’t find anything on their website, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So in the absence of that, I went back and took a look at a 

document that they produced in 2011, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

called A Rooted and Growing Vision. The final report of the 

NDP policy review task force, March . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the members are chirping away over 

there, Mr. Deputy. I can send a copy over if they haven’t got a 

copy in their desk, if they’ve forgotten what it’s all about. This 

was the document that formed the basis of their campaign 

platform in 2011, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition was the Chair of this task 

force. The member for Saskatoon Massey Place was the Chair 

of this task force. His signature is right here; it says the Chair, 

policy review task force. And then he gets up and he says, well 

this document had nothing to do with their campaign platform. 

He had nothing to do with their campaign platform, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So I took a look at the message from the Chair, who is 

now the Leader of the Opposition, to the membership, the NDP 

membership, and here’s what it says: “It is the hope of the 

Policy Review Task Force that this report will assist the 

Provincial Executive, the Election Planning Committee, and the 

New Democratic Caucus in the lead-up to the 2011 election and 

beyond.” 

 

It couldn’t be more clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This formed the 

basis of their 2011 election platform. Every single one of their 

members over there campaigned on this document. They went 

door to door with their campaign platform and campaigned on 

it. Now they run away from it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You can’t 

find any of them over there who will even suggest they’ve even 

attended a meeting that formed this document, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that helped form their election platform. The Chair, 

whose name is right here, now the Leader of the Opposition, 

said he had nothing to do with it, nothing to do with it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Well if they are running away from this document, they won’t 

stand up and defend their election platform in 2011, they stand 

in this House every single day and denigrate what the plan is 

that the government put forward not only through our growth 

plan but through the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I thought, well now a new Leader of the Opposition, 

there must be a new document on their website. So I went there. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What happened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Nothing. Absolutely nothing. What we 

have there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is their smart growth plan. 

And here’s what the member from Athabasca said during his 

response to the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

“And what we’re not, what we’re not going to do, what we’re 

not going to do is start taking economic advice from the 

economic midgets across the way . . .” that being the 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

And I started thinking to myself, well isn’t that interesting. 

They’re not going to take any advice — and people could 



3838 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

decide for themselves whether they think that language is kind 

of offensive or not — but they’re not going to take any advice 

from the economic midgets across the way when we have the 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada, when we have 

manufacturing sales that are the envy of the nation with respect 

to where we’re at on record manufacturing shipments, when 

we’ve now exceeded the province of British Columbia on 

exports, when our unemployment is one of the lowest in 

Canada and our employment rate is one of the highest, when we 

have some of the most buoyant economic times in the history of 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And nobody on this side of the House is taking credit for that. I 

know the member from Athabasca continues to say, well the 

government takes credit for that. So then I started thinking to 

myself, well what if it was going the other way? What if 

out-migration was exceeding in-migration? What if 

manufacturing shipments were declining? What if agriculture 

production was declining, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Who do you 

suppose they would be pointing the finger at with respect to 

whose fault that is for all of those different things happening? 

They can’t have it both ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So then he goes on to say, the member from Athabasca who had 

the opportunity — he’s chirping away from his seat now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — he had the opportunity to engage in this 

debate, and he wouldn’t stand up and tell the people of this 

province what their smart growth plan. Here’s what he said: 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have an exciting plan that’s 

going to continue building over time. It’s going to be 

called smart growth. And at smart growth we will build a 

brave new Saskatchewan. 

 

A brave new Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Prophetic 

words. Prophetic words. So I would just say to the members 

opposite, if you aspire to be the government again some day, if 

the Leader of the Opposition aspires to be in that chair down 

there some day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you not only can . . . Not 

only is your job to oppose, but your job is to propose. 

 

When I go out and talk to constituents like I did this summer 

and we talk about our growth plan and we talk about what the 

province is trying to accomplish, quite often I hear back from 

this, well what is the NDP’s plan? What are they going to do? 

What are they proposing? And I have to look at them straight in 

the eye and say, I have no idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

continue to hear this thing about this smart growth plan, but 

we’ve yet to see any meat on the bones with respect to the 

smart growth plan. 

 

And when I hear them over there talking about the smart 

growth plan, they all look at each other like, do you know what 

he’s talking about? Do you know what he’s talking about? 

Anybody on this side of the House know what he’s talking 

about? Because every time the Leader of the Opposition or the 

Deputy Leader or the member from Athabasca talks about this 

smart growth plan, we can see all the other caucus members 

look at each other going, I have no idea what they’re talking 

about. They can’t even find it on their own website, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

So with respect to that, I would just offer a little bit of advice to 

them, that if you truly want this Chamber to be a place of 

exchanging ideas and debating ideas, you have to come forward 

with some ideas. You have to tell the people of this province 

what it is that you stand for and what it is you plan to do with 

respect to the province and where you’re going to take it as we 

put in vision 2020, to the year 2020. Let’s just talk about that if 

they don’t want to talk about anything else, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And because of those reasons, because of those reasons, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech and I 

will not be supporting the amendment as put forward by the 

opposition. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an honour 

to be able to speak to the Speech from the Throne that was 

delivered on this opening of the third session of the 

twenty-seventh legislature. Before I do that, I would like to 

recognize some very important people in the Cut 

Knife-Turtleford constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to recognize my office 

staff. Cheryl Hume is my constituency assistant and Maureen 

Paron is our casual assistant. These people are dedicated and 

very sincere in their everyday duties. They keep the office very 

organized and, more importantly, they keep me organized. I 

would like to thank all my colleagues and their staff that offered 

their condolences to Cheryl on the sudden passing of her 

husband, Shaun Hume, in July. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my wife, Valerie, for 

her support in keeping the home front intact. Without her 

commitment, I would not be able to do this job. She’s not only 

my wife but truly my best friend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a little time to talk about three 

major events in the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency this year. 

First I’d like to congratulate the RM [rural municipality] of 

Hillsdale on their 100th anniversary. Reeve Glenn Goodfellow 

and his council along with administrator Janet Black hosted a 

supper and annual meeting to celebrate 100 years as a 

municipality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second municipality to celebrate their 100th 

anniversary was the RM of Mervin. Reeve Tom Brown and his 

council along with administrator Ryan Domotor hosted a 

supper event that was attended by close to 300 people. It was 

well attended by past reeves and councillors. 

 

The third event, Mr. Speaker, was the 100th anniversary of the 

RM of Paynton. Reeve Kevin Garrett and his council along 

with administrator Jade Johnson hosted a full day of events and 

an evening supper with Brad Johner and sons as entertainment. 

Approximately 350 people attended. At the evening events I 

presented three Diamond Jubilee Medals to reeve Kevin 

Garrett, past reeve Don Ferguson, and long-time councillor 

Lloyd Holmes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention the village of Edam, 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3839 

along with the RM of Turtle River, Glencoe developers and 

several local residents of Edam on their coming together to 

build a 24-unit assisted living project. This project will allow 

seniors to stay in their community and to be with family and 

friends. A strong diverse economy fuelled by a positive attitude 

was what made this project happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The success of the constituency would not be possible without 

strong rural municipalities and co-operation between 

communities. And when I say that, Mr. Speaker, what I’m 

really talking about is the people — friendly, hard-working, and 

dedicated. Our constituents epitomize the calibre and character 

that Saskatchewan is known for. In fact our communities are a 

fine example of our provincial motto: “from many peoples, 

strength.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Premier outlined the provincial plan for 

growth last fall, he envisioned a province with one of the 

highest standards of living in the world. It’s a plan that reflects 

a new spirit of collaboration between communities and a new 

way of thinking that Saskatchewan is the best place to invest, to 

work, and raise a family. It is a plan that reflects the ingenuity 

of the people of this province and the commitment of those who 

lead the growth and development of our communities. Our 

government remains committed to its communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as mentioned in the Speech from the Throne was 

the announcement of the first collaborative emergency system 

in Maidstone in the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. This 

great accomplishment is a collaborative effort by many 

partners, the health region, the Ministry of Health, community 

stakeholders, health care providers, regulatory bodies, and 

STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society], to name a few. 

 

Our government recognizes that timely and consistent access to 

primary health care and emergency services is very important. 

This is why this first collaborative emergency system is an 

important milestone for our province. Maidstone now has 

around-the-clock care. The Maidstone Health Complex is a 

designated collaborative emergency centre or CEC, open 24 

hours a day, seven days a week. It uses a team of health 

providers to deliver around-the-clock, timely care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan CECs are based on the Nova Scotia 

model. Nova Scotia has introduced CECs in seven communities 

since July 2011. CECs have been well received by patients, 

communities, and providers in Nova Scotia. They have resulted 

in a 92 per cent emergency department decrease in disruptions 

at the CEC sites. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a primary health care team, including physicians 

and nurse practitioners, is available during the day. Overnight 

from 8 p.m. to 8 a.m., a registered nurse and paramedic can 

provide urgent care assessment in consultation with a physician. 

Physicians working with the STARS, the Shock Trauma Air 

Rescue Society organization, provide overnight consultation by 

telephone, an extension of the vital air medical health services 

STARS brought to Saskatchewan in 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you arrive at the CEC with serious or 

life-threatening injuries, you will be transported by ambulance 

to the closest, most appropriate medical facility. If your 

condition is less serious, you may be treated and released with 

advice on self-care. In some cases a follow-up appointment 

may be recommended at the clinic the next day or you may be 

stabilized and sent to a hospital. A collaborative emergency 

centre responds to the community’s unique health care needs 

with the right health provider available when people need them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health has worked closely with 

the health regions, providers, and interested communities to 

determine future potential sites. Additional CECs will be 

opening in the province in the coming months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government remains committed to improving 

access to health services and providing quality health care for 

Saskatchewan people. We’ll continue to support initiatives that 

provide better care, better value, better health to our province’s 

growing population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Throne Speech indicated, our government 

will focus on meeting the challenges of growth. Saskatchewan 

continues to grow — 1.1 million people, more jobs, more 

economic activity. Growth creates many new opportunities and 

it also creates many new challenges. Our government is 

working hard to meet those challenges and ensure that all 

Saskatchewan people share in the benefits of a growing 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention just a few initiatives in the 

Throne Speech. A new program to enable some seniors with 

complex issues to receive house calls from physicians, nurse 

practitioners, and other health care providers. New 

collaborative emergency centres like I just mentioned. New 

anti-bullying measures. Nine new joint-use schools to be built 

using an innovative P3 bundling approach. Improvement to the 

Internet access and speed in all schools throughout SaskTel’s 

CommunityNet program. New measures to improve traffic 

safety and reduce fatalities with particular focus on tougher 

penalties for drinking and driving. One thousand new training 

seats, including 300 new apprenticeship seats and 700 new 

adult basic education seats. A new manufacturing centre of 

excellence. A new Western Canadian livestock price insurance 

program for cattle and hog producers. A comprehensive public 

consultation on the province’s disability strategy. These are just 

a few of the actions our government will be taking to address 

the challenges of growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Premier has said that growth creates many 

challenges. But, Mr. Speaker, those challenges are sure 

preferable to the challenges of decline that Saskatchewan was 

facing just a few years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a quote from Wayne Mantyka: “This Throne 

Speech maintains the government’s focus on a growth plan as 

the province pushes forward with expanding the economy and 

dealing with the issue that growth brings.” And that was from 

Wayne Mantyka, CTV Regina, October 23rd, 2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition had this to say: “To 

me, this Throne Speech is disappointing; it’s looking 

backwards.” Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try and explain what 

backwards and progressive mean with a few ministry examples 

of Saskatchewan then and now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under health care, between 2001 to 2006, the 



3840 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

NDP’s last full five years in office, the province lost 1,160 total 

health care workers, 455 RNs [registered nurse] and RPNs 

[registered psychiatric nurse], 173 physicians, 155 pharmacists, 

and 95 physiotherapists. This is the same NDP that refused to 

set targets. 

 

Under the Saskatchewan Party now since 2007, there are 300 

more doctors practising in Saskatchewan. There are 1,000 more 

nurses working in Saskatchewan. Twenty per cent more nurses 

call Saskatchewan home. Our province has seen a 25 per cent 

increase in specialists, a 27 per cent increase in pediatricians, 

and 11 per cent more family practitioners working in 

Saskatchewan over the last six years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under long-term care, the NDP closed 1,200 

long-term care beds and closed 16 long-term care facilities and 

52 rural hospitals. “Ten years ago, it was not at all unusual for 

residents to be left in bed for the day at the Wascana Rehab 

Centre when we were short-staffed. As part of the cultural shift 

journey, this is no longer happens” — Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Authority official in an email to the Minister of Health. 

Under a Saskatchewan Party, we’re building 13 new long-term 

care facilities, replacing three aging facilities that had 198 beds 

in Swift Current with a new 225-bed facility. Our government 

have updated over 600 long-term care beds in communities 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under education, the NDP decline, between 1997 

and 2007 the number of students in Saskatchewan decreased by 

16 per cent. In their last six years of government, there was a 

9.2 per cent decrease in enrolment. Statistics Canada reports 

that between 1997 and 2007, the student population in 

Saskatchewan plunged from 194,000 to less than 164,000. In 

the NDPs last 10 years, we lost almost 30,000 students. The 

NDP left a $1.2 billion infrastructure deficit in our schools. 

And, Mr. Speaker, under the Saskatchewan Party, in our first 

six years of government, enrolment has increased 5.8 per cent. 

Our government has committed to building nine new joint-use 

schools in our province’s fastest growing communities. Our 

government has invested over 600 million since we formed 

government, a 264 per cent increase. This has gone into 43 

major school capital projects, 20 brand new schools and 23 

major renovations and additions, over 900 school repair and 

renovation projects. Over 65 per cent of schools have seen 

upgrades since 2007. Our government will continue to invest in 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit or just give you a few 

quotes on previous NDP MLAs. These quotes aren’t from 

Churchill or Kennedy. These are from these people. The first 

one would be, “The Saskatchewan Party plan to increase our 

population by 100,000 in 10 years is more wishful thinking 

than statistically attainable.” This was by NDP MLA Doreen 

Hamilton in the Whitewood Herald, February 11, 2003. 

 

Another one by Harry Van Mulligen: 

 

. . . they propose to increase the population of 

Saskatchewan by 100,000 [people] over . . . I forget what 

number of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well it is so over the top, it is so farcical, Mr. Speaker, that 

it flies in the face of reality. 

NDP MLA Harry Van Mulligen, Hansard, March 24th, 2003. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s another good one. U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] economist Eric Howe: 

 

. . . didn’t believe the Sask Party’s plan would provide the 

promised population growth of 100,000 people in 10 years. 

From his perspective, the province has hovered around a 

million people for 70 years and that well may be the 

natural population level. 

 

That was from CBC Saskatchewan Votes. The feature was 

“Economic policy, the historic hot button issue” October 31, 

2003. 

 

Another one from Eric Cline. 

 

Of course he says that he wants to increase the population 

of the province by 100,000 . . . Well who would disagree 

with that? That’s fine. But the question is: do you have a 

plan to achieve it, Mr. Speaker? And I say they do not 

have a plan and . . . or at least they do not have a plan that 

makes any sense. 

 

Eric Cline, March 25th, 2003, Hansard. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, but I’ll do one more. This is 

a good one. 

 

We’ve heard this, we’ve heard this so-called plan. It’s a 

plan that says all you’ve got to do is cut all the taxes — cut 

the taxes particularly for the corporate folks — cut all the 

taxes, you know, you sell off some of the Crowns, and I 

tell you what, you get rid of labour legislation that protects 

workers, and somehow this is magically going to turn into 

100,000 people. Well we know what the experts have said 

about it. 

 

Lorne Calvert, March 27th, Hansard, 2003. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s record is that 

Saskatchewan’s population is now over 1.1 million people. Our 

government has set some ambitious targets in our growth plan, 

such as 1.2 million people living in the province by 2020. Our 

government is prepared to meet the challenges that come with 

such unprecedented growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think if Webster’s dictionary was to print a new 

edition right now, today, under the definition of the word 

backward, you would see the letters NDP. And for the first time 

there would be a picture of the current opposition leader and 

other members opposite. And under the word progressive, Mr. 

Speaker, you would see the words Saskatchewan Party and a 

picture of this Premier and all my government colleagues on 

this side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again I say to the members opposite, listen to 

learn, not to respond. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 

motion and voting against the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3841 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As ever, I’m 

glad and proud to rise in my place on behalf of the good people 

of Regina Elphinstone-Centre who have been very good to me, 

very supportive over these years through a number of different 

elections, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and whose support in me I don’t 

take lightly, for which I’m very thankful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And when you’re sent to the legislature by people from a 

constituency, you’re sent there to try and give voice to the 

hopes and dreams and the concerns of the people in a given 

constituency. You’re there to try and work progressively, 

positively, productively on trying to make sure that their issues 

are being advanced. 

 

You’re also there to hold, if you’ve been tasked with the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, to hold the government of the day to 

account. And if they should be doing things that are of benefit 

to the people that you represent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

behooves you well to say, when that is the case, to say thank 

you, to offer up positive remarks if good things have been done. 

And it’s also part of your job, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to call 

things out when your people are being given short shrift by the 

government of the day. 

 

And that’s a job that I take very seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a job that, like I say, I feel very privileged and proud to be 

entrusted with it by the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

through one by-election through 2003 to 2007 and through 

2011, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That trust has been placed in me, 

and it’s something that again I’m very humbled by, and it’s 

something that I take very seriously. 

 

And it’s in that spirit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’ll be making 

my remarks tonight. In terms of this Throne Speech, in terms of 

the way that this Throne Speech either joins or is disjointed 

with the record of the government opposite, the way that it 

either resonates or offers up some disconnect in terms of the 

gap between rhetoric and deed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is 

what I’ll be attempting to offer up tonight in terms of offering 

some thoughts on the Throne Speech and the amendment that 

has been put forward by the opposition. 

 

I want to say thank you to my family, first among my particular 

thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As the member from Silver 

Springs was ending off his comments today, he talked about his 

mom passing on, and I had the privilege of meeting his mom at 

different times here through the years at the legislature. 

 

And I too lost my mother this summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

She had 82 years. She had a good, good, long span of years. 

She had a lot of joy and a lot of sadness in her life, but she gave 

so much. And I am so very thankful for all that she gave to me 

and to my brothers and to my sister and to the many people that 

she met along the path of life. 

 

And I think in particular of my father, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of people that are no small political influence on me, no 

small personal influence on me in terms of the way I try to live 

my life and the things that I try to live up to. And mom and dad 

were such a great team, and I know that my dad misses mom 

pretty terribly. And after 52 years of marriage, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you’d expect nothing less. But I also know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that they’ll meet again and that their love 

surpasses these hard horizons that come in our life and that their 

legacy certainly outstrips any measure of years, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But I’m so thankful to be their son. 

 

And also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a special word of 

thanks to Theresa, my partner. You know these things, they’re 

pretty tough on families, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think I 

know that in a few different ways maybe better than most, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But I’m very fortunate to have the love and 

the support of Theresa, and it makes me a better person. And 

like I say, I’m very thankful for it and of it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I’m thankful for the people that I work with. I work with a 

individual that I’ve known since I was in kindergarten with her 

brother, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just celebrated my 41st birthday, 

so you can only imagine how many years ago that was. But I 

work with Colleen Smith, and there’s an individual that grew 

up in North Central Regina and works very hard on behalf of 

the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, works very hard on 

behalf of people that come from all different walks of life and 

many different kind of circumstances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

puts up with me into the bargain. And again for that I’m also 

very thankful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

As I turn my attention squarely to the Throne Speech that is 

under consideration in this debate before us, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m reminded of an earlier pledge or promise that was 

put forward by the members opposite in the 2007 campaign. In 

the 2007 campaign the members opposite . . . You know, and 

there’s been some change in the cast of characters over there, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they ran on a platform that said, ready 

for growth, that pledged to be ready for growth. They framed 

up the NDP as being old and tired, and they were very 

successful in getting that message across to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I guess the thing that I want to say about the sort of setting 

out some of the historical markers in terms of how I’ve listened 

to various of the speeches that have come forward through this 

debate and various of the points that have been made in this 

debate, when Roy Romanow and the New Democratic Party 

took over in 1991 in another election from members opposite 

that served in various capacities in that regime, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the first budget that the NDP had to bring in, they had 

to spend more on servicing the debt than on the entire Ministry 

of Education. They had to spend the first years of that regime 

making some terrible decisions because the finances dictated 

the course of action that had to be taken. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one thing that I want to put 

on the record tonight is that when this, when the government 

that I was part of in 2007 was defeated by members opposite, 

by a Premier that was promising to be ready for growth, what I 

take some encouragement from, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact 

that instead of leaving the smoking hulk of an economy for 

members to try and sort their way through and to make any 

number of terrible decisions in relation to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

instead of having a situation where you were spending more on 

servicing the debt than on the entire Ministry of Education, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I was part of a government that left $2 billion 

cash on hand for the members opposite to avail themselves of. 



3842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

And in their more honest moments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of the Premier and different leading lights in that 

government, that is acknowledged. The Premier himself is on 

record saying that they had inherited a fairly good hand. And 

that was early on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s interesting to 

see the slide that has occurred over the years to the point where 

we are on a Throne Speech debate today where the litany of all 

the terrible things that went on that is recited by various of the 

members opposite is kind of hard to believe. And it’s kind of 

hard to square with the more public comments of the Premier in 

terms of the way that individual evinces humility and 

appreciation for good fortune and, you know, certainly brings a 

fair measure of planning to the table and brings a number of 

goals to the table. And that’s fine and good. 

 

But I guess it’s a signal to the strength of the Premier’s coattails 

that, in terms of some of the wild rhetoric that gets thrown 

around by members opposite in this debate, you know, when 

certain members . . . I hear the member from Regina South 

talking from his chair and, you know, between saying hello to 

his dogs and reciting the table of contents from the plan for 

growth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a pretty interesting speech 

that he brought to the Chamber. 

 

But in terms of individuals that have used words like disaster 

that they took over in 2007, or the different tough decisions that 

come with the lot of managing an economy and working in 

partnership with the people of Saskatchewan, it’s pretty 

interesting the kind of disconnect that goes between the Premier 

evincing this positive, humble, thankful persona in terms of the 

public debate and what’s passed for comment by some of the 

members opposite here. 

 

And even the member from Cut Knife, who’s given a fine 

speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then, you know, sees fit to 

bring into the debate a number of comments from members 

opposite. And the comments — unless I’m mistaken, and I 

stand to be corrected — but the comments that he was bringing 

forward had to deal with another iteration of the Sask Party, one 

which was led by Elwin Hermanson. And Elwin Hermanson 

came to the 2003 election with a particular platform and a 

particular prescription for what he saw as the hopes and dreams 

and how to meet that in the province of Saskatchewan. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, the goal of 100,000, I think that’s about all 

that that iteration of the Sask Party holds in common with what 

they took to the people in 2007. 

 

Shortly after the 2003 election, they couldn’t get rid of Elwin 

Hermanson fast enough, and they took the pledge on a number 

of key items such as standing up for the Crowns. They were no 

longer in favour of privatization despite, you know, decades of 

public comment and record going before them. They got 

alongside for bringing in the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program, which was interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they 

also, you know, again they turned the page. They had a positive 

new leader and, you know, Elwin Hermanson was stricken from 

the records. It was an interesting historical experience, Mr. 

Speaker, to see how it’s gone. 

 

And I guess I don’t say that to claim any perfection on this side 

of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or any perfection in terms of 

how . . . different things that I’ve been part of. But I think our 

batting average was to the good. I think we did more good than 

harm. And I think that the people of Saskatchewan in 2007 

looked to a new crew and said, you know, 16 years was enough. 

You’ve left the shop in fairly good order. The economy is on an 

upturn. We were a have province for a couple of good years by 

then, Mr. Speaker. The population numbers were up, and they 

wanted to give another party a chance. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, the one thing I remember in 

particular from that election is on election night when the now 

Premier was giving the speech in Swift Current — and 

obviously a very happy moment for the individuals in that party 

— and the way he was chanting his mantra of hope trumps fear; 

hope trumps fear. And again we’ve got some echo over there, 

Mr. Speaker, but hope trumps fear. Hope beats fear, trumps 

fear, you know. Pick your rendition, Mr. Speaker. And I guess 

the thing that’s interesting in, you know, thinking back to that 

night, it was an interesting pass and it was an interesting I think 

moment in the history of the electoral history of the province. 

 

And I think it’s sort of interesting watching the way that the 

party opposite has gotten away from that spirit, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And the Premier’s still there, and the Premier does a 

fine job of evincing a very positive, productive, humble way of 

talking about Saskatchewan, and he does it very well. He’s a 

very gifted communicator, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But you place 

that alongside again the various speeches that we’ve heard 

through the debate here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the hope 

trumps fear starts to ring a bit hollow. And one thing I want to 

talk about in particular in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

we can look to The StarPhoenix who ran an editorial 

commenting on the Throne Speech stating, “Detailed speech 

offers no vision.” That’s October 24th, The StarPhoenix. 

 

You can look at the way the different issues have been raised in 

the course of this debate, Mr. Speaker, in particular the one 

around long-term care homes and the seniors’ care question in 

this province. And again October 26th, Murray Mandryk, you 

know, seasoned political commentator in this province states, 

“Care homes mess a Sask. Party problem.” 

 

You can look at the editorial a bit before the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker, from Bruce Johnstone where he states, “Saskies’ 

growth plan adrift.” And one of the interesting things he says 

there, Mr. Speaker, he quotes Premier Wall from his speech to 

the Saskatchewan Forum in Regina in May 2012: 

 

Wall admitted the province’s “stunning turnaround” since 

2007 was “driven by commodity prices, driven by factors 

outside the control of government and you will never hear 

our government say, ‘Boy, because we got elected in ’07, 

look at how everything’s so much better economically.’ 

We know that there are external factors at play here. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the broader sort of 

public message, the Premier is rightfully approaching this in the 

spirit of humility and trying to I think steward the resources that 

he has at his disposal, but he’s not claiming parentage of this 

great fortune we have here in Saskatchewan.  

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d invite you to cast your 

minds to the speeches that have gone before here and the kind 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3843 

of puffing and bragging and boasting that has gone on and the 

kind of, you know, detachment from reality that passes from 

various of the members opposite when it comes to recounting 

the historical record in this province. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, on the one hand, you know, the further 

they get away from hope beats fear, the closer they will get to 

another very interesting stage in their electoral lives. So on the 

one hand you’d say, you know, keep it up. But on the other 

hand, Mr. Speaker, you see them making decisions like coming 

in with Enterprise Saskatchewan, the cornerstone of Wall’s 

2004 economic plan. And again it’s interesting, the member 

from Regina Northeast was offering up comment on, you know, 

where it’s not just to oppose but it’s to propose. And you know, 

it’s very similar to a quote from Jack Layton, who’s also been 

quoted in the proceedings here today, who liked to say it’s not 

just enough to be about opposition, but you’ve got to be about 

proposition. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we see a measure brought forward 

by my colleague the member from Regina Rosemont today in 

terms of casting some sunshine on the P3 privatization of 

school plans that members opposite are entertaining. And we’ll 

see, you know, we’ll see if they’re as good as their word. You 

know, that’s a proposition. Now we’ll see how it’s received by 

the members opposite, and I’ll be very interested to see if they 

recognize the merits of the legislation, or will they try to kill it 

out of hand because it comes from the other side of the aisle? 

 

There have been times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when in terms of 

the asbestos registry for public buildings, Howard’s law, we 

were very glad to see the government work together with the 

opposition to pass that legislation. Jimmy’s law was another 

case where it wasn’t just, you know . . . We were able to move 

beyond the divide of this Chamber and to see what was good 

for the people and to try and act on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There are different times when we’ve been able to come 

together in this House and to speak with a common voice. And 

so when we’re counselled by the member from Regina 

Northeast that it’s not just enough to oppose but to propose, 

well, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see how the proposition that came 

forward today fares. 

 

I’ll be very interested, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see how the 

debate goes on Wednesday when we consider the motion to . . . 

in favour of abolition of the Senate. I’ll be very interested to see 

how that goes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again, you know, I 

credit the Premier with taking on a position that is not where he 

started out, but looking over years at the facts and arriving at a 

position that is in favour of abolition of the Senate and bringing 

that institution to an end. 

 

So you know, there are opportunities for both sides to work 

together in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, opportunities that 

give the lie to the sort of litany, that recitation that goes on for 

various of the speeches we’ve heard in this debate. And I guess 

that gives me some hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the 

phony baloney that passes for some of the speeches here, I 

know enough that that’s not the whole of the equation. But you 

hear enough of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s enough to try your 

hope. But you know, my mom and dad raised a hopeful, 

positive person, and we’ll continue on in that as best we can. 

But the Enterprise Saskatchewan piece, again this is an 

interesting one because this is part of what the member from 

Regina Northeast was promoting as, you know, them in 

opposition and the way that they came forward with alternatives 

that the government was going to be putting forward. And so it 

was interesting to see within the last couple of years, Mr. 

Speaker, that flagship of the economic approach of the 

members opposite be chopped down to the ground. 

 

And you know, the way that it had built upon the regional 

economic development authorities and the good work that had 

been going on throughout this province, the way that the 

enterprise regions had subsumed them. And in the North you 

heard about one enterprise region, and then there was going to 

be two enterprise regions. And I think — you know what? — at 

the end of the day it was going to be three enterprise regions, 

involved people from business, from labour, from, you know, 

all corners of the economy in this grand exercise that came to 

naught, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and arguably into the bargain has 

done some damage to the efforts that were chugging along quite 

nicely in the regional economic development authorities to 

begin with. 

 

So again when it comes to the prescriptions from the members 

opposite for how we should conduct ourselves in the 

opposition, you know, it depends what day they’re offering up 

the advice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But there’s enough change 

there that, you know, we’ll keep our own counsel as regards 

bringing things forward, thank you very much. 

 

I think of the film employment tax credit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There’s one that nobody outside of the Sask Party cabal that 

runs the show over there really understands in terms of an 

economic measure that was positive for culture, was positive 

for the economy, was positive for telling the Saskatchewan 

story around this country of ours and the way that that was 

abjectly discarded. And the people are still leaving this 

province in the wake of that destructive decision, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I know this because a number of them have been 

my constituents over the years. I’ve had the privilege to 

represent them. And I’ve heard from them throughout this 

series of decisions by the government opposite. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to understand why they made 

that decision, because the numbers certainly don’t add up. They 

came rushing in with Creative Saskatchewan like that was some 

kind of a replacement. And do you know what, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Creative Saskatchewan can do some fine work in and 

of its own right, but it’s not compensation, and it’s not a 

replacement for the good work of the film employment tax 

credit. It should have worked, you know, ably alongside it. It 

could have worked. And we’ll see how this plays out over time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll see how it plays out alongside the 

Arts Board and whether or not the tendency on the part of the 

members opposite is to try and cannibalize one for the other. 

We’ll see how that works out. 

 

In terms of the details in the speech, there are good things in the 

speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll be particularly interested to 

see how the thousand training spaces works out, how the 300 

for apprenticeship and how the 700 for adult basic education 

works out, and again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how that works out 

alongside the wait-lists that are there. And the way that people 



3844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

who want to get that basic sort of credential you need to move 

ahead in the economy, that adult basic education, we’ll be very 

interested to see how that’s made good. 

 

And we’ll be very interested to see how this government works 

with the federal government on the Canada jobs grant, and 

whether or not the Canada jobs grant is brought in and if that is 

going to be cannibalizing certain efforts that are successes in 

and of themselves that should be bolstered, not cannibalized, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll see how that works out. And I think 

of one program in particular that is doing tremendous work in 

the city of Regina that will be very much affected by how the 

government makes the decision around the Canada jobs grant, 

and the way that it connects the learners to job opportunities to 

help literally build our economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll be 

very interested to see how that plays out. 

 

I’ll be very interested to see how the polytechnic announcement 

around advanced education plays out. We’re watching with 

great interest and concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the situation as 

it plays out on certain of our campuses in this province, in the 

role that our universities are playing, the role that the scarcity of 

capital dollars is playing in terms of some of the decisions that 

have to be made, the fact that in terms of our universities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — and you don’t have to take my word for it 

— but the fact that Statistics Canada rates Saskatchewan as 

having the second highest tuition in all of Canada, and what 

that means for accessibility and affordability, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And you know, you can hear about the Saskatchewan 

advantage grants and you can hear about the graduate retention 

tax credit. Again, Mr. Speaker, these are good measures, but if 

they’re being eroded on the very front end of the equation by 

increases to tuition, then government needs to pay a lot closer 

attention to what’s going on and how this either helps students, 

or is it more about having something that looks like help? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very interested to see again how the 

polytechnic announcement works out with SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. 

I’ll be interested to see how the different campuses throughout 

this province are able to either meet or continue to be 

challenged by growth, the way the different programs are 

oversubscribed and the wait-lists that are there in terms of 

valuable skills that we need to make our economy grow, and 

whether or not that is backed up by the actions of this 

government. 

 

[20:45] 

 

I’ll be very interested to see what happens with the regional 

colleges in this province. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of something that was good that happened in the Throne 

Speech, I was glad to see the announcement around Parkland, 

and I was glad to see the re-emphasis upon it in the Throne 

Speech. It’s again a good investment in our regional college 

system. 

 

There have been good things happen throughout the regional 

college system in general, but how are they going to fare in this 

budget to come, Mr. Deputy Speaker? These are the front lines 

of people doing the work to make sure that we’ve got the 

skilled labour to make this economy grow. And if the regional 

colleges and if SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies] and if our universities are going wanting in this 

equation, and if SIAST doesn’t have the tools to, you know, 

equip the people to get the job done, then that’s a problem, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So as good as some of the announcements 

were in the Throne Speech, I remain concerned about the way 

that this government is approaching the advanced education 

sector in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the education system in this province, 

we’re working on what . . . How many Education ministers 

have we had now? 

 

An Hon. Member: — At least four. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Four. We’re on our fourth, fourth Education 

minister in six years? Or is it five? And I don’t know if the 

thinking is, you know, maybe fourth times the charm or 

something like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I’ll recall that last 

year in the Throne Speech debate, I stood in this place and I 

expressed my hope for the member from Regina Douglas Park 

and the job that that individual would do in education. And you 

know, it’s not a year later and we’ve seen that individual 

replaced. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s such an incredible job to be 

done in terms of making sure that, you know, the classrooms 

are focused on students, to make sure that our teachers are 

respected, to make sure that they’ve got the tools to get the job 

done, to make sure that our education system is supported, not 

run off into some kind of privatization scheme. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen over the past year the 

debacle with the portables. You know, they’ve bungled the 

bundles of portables, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So how are we 

supposed to look at, with any kind of confidence or, you know, 

free from fear about how they’re going to bundle up school 

purchases and, you know, P3 school purchases into the bargain 

and do a good job there? We’ll see how that works out, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But it’s interesting. In question period today I had, you know, 

the petition that I’ve been raising for Sacred Heart raised as 

well — if you want a new gym for Sacred Heart, well then 

you’d better be in favour of P3s; you’d better be in favour of 

privatizing schools. And it’s sort of funny, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because as it stands right now, the temporary gym at Sacred 

Heart is sort of a P3 in terms of they had to go in and buy the 

sanctuary and they’re now sharing the space with other groups, 

including a church, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I guess how this works where, you know, you’ve got a 

school that is doing exactly what it should be doing, where 

they’re making literacy gains, where the attendance is a going 

concern, where students are engaged, where the population has 

grown almost by half in the past four years, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where 75 per cent of the students are First Nations and 

Métis students, where it’s the largest school in North Central 

and serves as an anchor for our community in so many ways — 

how the government in the last budget wasn’t falling all over 

themselves to help them out in this important work, I don’t 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3845 

And I’m told that the Regina Catholic School Board met, I 

believe, five separate times with the minister or the minister’s 

office to discuss the need for the gymnasium to be replaced at 

Sacred Heart. And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not like this was the 

first year where they’ve been having the conversation with the 

government. This has gone back to the early days of the Sask 

Party government where this conversation and this request has 

been coming forward. 

 

And you know, so we remain hopeful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

I think that the teachers and the administrators and the students 

that are doing that important work at Sacred Heart Community 

School, this government should be getting their back, and that’s 

not the case right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we’ll see how 

the budget works out and, you know, it would surpass 

understanding why that gymnasium would not be replaced with 

a permanent, decent solution like any other school in the 

system. 

 

And you know, Sacred Heart is kitty-corner from Scott 

Collegiate, where Scott Collegiate was no. 2 on the 

province-wide K to 12 capital list in the summer of 2007, in 

response in some ways to the planning dollars that had been put 

forward for what was then being championed out of the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region and the Regina Public School 

Board, the proposal for a North Central Shared Facility, at the 

heart of which would be a renewed Scott Collegiate, a 

revitalized Scott Collegiate. And I was very happy and went on 

record saying as such when that were mentioned in the first 

Sask Party budget in 2008 and then, you know, was repeated 

again in 2009, but no action. 

 

And then we had 2010. And then we had 2011, and the minister 

of Education at the time, the member from Humboldt, came to 

Albert to make an announcement. And again it was a 

scaled-back announcement, and by that time the involvement of 

the health region was more of an open question, but we were 

glad to see the announcement and the furthering of the 

commitment in any event. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the youngest neighbourhood in 

the city of Regina. It’s got a tremendous job in front of it, and 

we’ve still to see a shovel in the ground for the North Central 

Shared Facility. We’ve seen the city put up their money. We’ve 

seen the Regina Public Library board put up their money with a 

plan to move Albert library — which has, I might add 

parenthetically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, celebrated its 100th 

anniversary this fall — as part of that partnership that still 

remains around the shared facility. That facility is needed, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and the waiting has gone on and on. 

 

So in terms of the days to come, we’ll be again watching very 

closely. We’ll be seeing if, you know, the then minister of 

Education was as good as his word in 2008 and if the then 

Education minister was as good as her word in 2011. We’ll be 

continuing to watch. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, how I’ve tried to conduct myself in 

these opposition benches is to, where credit is due, to extend 

that credit, and to see where problems are arising, to try and 

focus attention on those problems. And you know, I’ll be very 

happy to extend credit where it is due on Scott Collegiate, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But this summer it will be seven years since it 

was no. 2 on the province-wide K to 12 capital list. And again, 

you know, maybe things have changed in that regard too. But 

once was the time that the province-wide K to 12 capital list 

meant something and was respected and was where the rubber 

hit the road in the partnership between school boards and the 

province. So we wait and hope to see how that works out, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

In the meantime we’ve seen different sort of things in the 

neighbourhood around, for one example, the Pasqua Hospital 

where, you know, again in contrast to the goal announced as 

part of the growth plan of eliminating emergency room wait 

times where we’ve seen members opposite, you know, crow 

about that, at the Pasqua — which is, you know, such an 

important hospital, not just for the constituency I represent, not 

just for Regina but for southern Saskatchewan — we’ve seen 

the emergency room placed on emergency status, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of being able to muster the requisite 

complement of ER [emergency room] docs. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, you point these 

things out and apparently, you know, the members opposite 

aren’t interested in getting a report from I think the real world 

sometimes. I think they just want more people joining the 

hallelujah chorus over there. And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it’s no small wonder, if that’s the way that various of the 

members are conducting themselves in caucus as they would 

seem to be in their speeches here tonight, you know, it’s no 

small wonder that we’ve got the problems we have in 

education, in health care, and, you know, pick your situation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

One other thing I want to say something about here tonight, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the situation we have around working for 

safer neighbourhoods. And inner-city Regina has got, continues 

to have some challenges in terms of whether or not we’ve got 

the adequate complement of law enforcement being deployed, 

whether or not we’ve got the sort of focus from the decision 

makers around anti-gang work, around making sure that the 

safer communities and neighbourhoods investigators are being 

backed up, and whether or not, you know . . . Again in the city 

of Regina, we had a very successful inner-city community 

partnership between the federal, the provincial, and the 

municipal. And the kind of gains that were made in housing and 

in community safety and in community development, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the way that we’ve seen those gains in some 

cases not progressing like they should or in some cases being 

walked backwards. 

 

And there’s no more vivid reminder than over the past few 

days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the tragedies that have 

taken place not far from where I live in the middle of North 

Central, where I know neighbours on that block and the kind of 

fear that that raises for them and the kind of questions it raises 

for them about, you know, how is this allowed to go on? And 

again, Mr. Speaker, I come back to, you know, there’s a very 

old saying about you’ve got to be tough on crime, and you’ve 

got to be tough on the causes of crime. 

 

And if you see crime evidencing like that, and the response 

from the government is saying, you know, we’re going to bring 

the community hub to bear eventually in Regina or the 

community mobilization efforts, you know, great. Great. But 



3846 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2013 

you had something that accomplished very similar objectives in 

the inner-city community partnership, and how that was let to 

slide, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. And how the different sort of 

work that is there around anti-gang strategies and exit strategies 

for the gangs that are preying on our young people, it’s not 

where it needs to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I guess if we’re 

going to bring people together, and if we’re going to have a 

fighting chance through education and proper housing so that 

the gangs aren’t this great attraction for young people, you 

don’t hear about it in the Throne Speech the way that you 

should, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Again there are some good things in the Throne Speech, you 

know, in terms of the income disability, in terms of some of the 

work on housing. Again, the way that various of these things 

have been announced again and again, some of them are having 

a real impact; some of them I know for a fact are not. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, you know, to hear the members opposite, 

you know, carry on with the hallelujah chorus, it sort of makes 

you wonder, you know, where the heck they’re coming from in 

terms of what passes in their neighbourhoods. 

 

The last thing I want to say, the last topic that I’d like to 

discuss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what I think is one of the big 

sort of problems that we have in this province, and that’s the 

way that First Nations and non-First Nations people either get 

along or don’t get along. And in recent days, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we’ve seen an advertising campaign from members 

opposite about resource revenue sharing and “no special deals” 

for First Nations on resource revenue sharing. 

 

[21:00] 

 

And I think one of the more incisive comments about that came 

in The StarPhoenix on October 7th, 2013 where the title of the 

editorial was, “Wall can use history lesson.” And it talks about 

the work that has gone on — October the 7th being the 250th 

anniversary of the royal proclamation — about the different sort 

of work that has gone on, reference to some of the things that 

Ken Coates of the Johnson-Shoyama school is doing. 

 

And when I see Ken Coates, I think about someone like Dr. Jim 

Miller who this very evening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is being 

awarded the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. And Dr. Jim Miller 

is in many ways the scholar when it comes to newcomer-native 

relations in this province, and indeed holds the Canadian 

Research Council Chair in those studies. And I think about his 

book Shingwauk’s Vision and its recounting in extensive and 

compelling detail what happened in Canada around the 

residential schools. I think about the work that he’s done around 

better understanding, promoting the better understanding of 

treaties in this province and his work with Bounty and 

Benevolence. I think about his work around Skyscrapers Hide 

the Heavens. 

 

And there’s an individual who we would do well to listen to 

what he has to say as to how we’d get along better in this 

province between First Nations and non-First Nations. And you 

know, early on in the Sask Party’s day they had a big 

conference on the duty to consult and accommodate when they 

were coming up with the policy that they ultimately announced 

as an interim policy, you know, the week before Christmas I 

think in 2009 or ’10. But one of the speakers at that time at the 

conference was Dr. Jim Miller. And you know, at the time I 

thought, well good. That’s a voice that we should be listening 

to in this debate. Another person that spoke at length at that 

conference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was Tom Molloy, you know, 

past chancellor of the University of Saskatchewan and an 

individual who’s written a very interesting and compelling 

book about his own experience of being on the front line of 

negotiating modern treaties. 

 

And I think about the way that both Dr. Jim Miller and Tom 

Malloy in the 2011 election said that resource revenue sharing 

is a valid question, and it deserves serious consideration, and it 

should be negotiated between the sides. And I think about the 

way that it was then used as a wedge issue by that party in that 

election and the way that it exploited division in this province, 

as opposed to seeking to bring us all together. 

 

I’ve heard many times the Premier say that we are all treaty 

people. And that brings me back around to this, this editorial 

from The StarPhoenix, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where it says, 

“Wall can use history lesson.” And I want to finish off by 

quoting at greater length from the conclusion of that editorial: 

 

Achieving what Quebec did on its side of the bay [James 

Bay, Mr. Deputy Speaker] requires not just strong 

leadership from aboriginal and provincial governments, 

but a broad-based understanding of the importance to all 

concerned of sharing revenues, honouring traditions, 

respecting the spirit of treaties and recognizing rights. 

 

That can’t be achieved when the governing party is 

running cynical political ads that warn of its political 

opponents wanting to sharing resource revenues with First 

Nations, as is the case in Saskatchewan. 

 

Continuing the quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Premier Brad Wall has much to be proud of when it comes 

to First Nations relations, not the least of which was 

accepting the treaty commissioner’s recommendations to 

teach the treaties in Saskatchewan schools. 

 

Perhaps he should sit in on a class. And then he should 

speak up to distance his government from this hateful ad 

campaign. Today would be a good day to do it in honour 

of Canada’s history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that challenge stands. If we’re going to have some 

kind of relationship to the cheer of hope beats fear, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I can’t think of something that’s further away from 

that than how it is characterized here as a hateful ad campaign, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So have we come that far from hope beats fear? I think in some 

ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the record speaks for itself. But 

again, I’m a hopeful person. I hope that this can be listened to 

and acted upon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But again if the best 

indicator of future behaviour is past behaviour, well we’ll see 

how that works out. But that hateful ad campaigns should be 

run and such divisive games should be played with one of the 

most important issues of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

think speaks for itself. 

 



November 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3847 

So in conclusion, I will not be supporting the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will be supporting the amendment 

preferred by the official opposition. And with that I would 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:07.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3829 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3834 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3838 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3841 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


