




















































Hansard: April 18, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 49A  THURSDAY, APRIL 18, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3283 

 April 18, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to table the annual 

report for The Advocate for Children and Youth Act. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would seek leave for an extended introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to my colleagues for leave. Mr. Speaker, to you and through 

you to the rest of the Assembly, in honour of Juno Week I 

would like to introduce some special musical guests in the 

legislature here today. 

 

Seated in the government gallery, Mr. Speaker — and I’m 

going to ask them to give a wave when I introduce them — is 

Juno Award-winning singer, songwriter, and producer, Jason 

Plumb. Where is Jason sitting? Right there. Jason won a Juno 

for the best new group with the band the Waltons in 1994, and 

has built a solid 25-year career in the music business, most 

recently with his band The Willing. 

 

Jason has written some great music over the years, including 

one titled “Here and Now” which is featured on an inspiring 

Tourism Saskatchewan video showcasing Saskatchewan 

musical talent and our stellar tourist attractions. Jason is 

currently working with the Regina-based Fly Points, producing 

their first studio album with the help from friend and fellow 

musician, Mike Thompson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also with us today from the band Fly Points . . . 

Where are the Fly Points? Sitting right there are Danny Goertz, 

lead vocal and guitar; Billy Vancise, lead guitar; Julien 

Johnson, keyboards. And I understand Graeme Watson, bass, 

and Robby Vancise who is the drummer were unable to be with 

us this morning, Mr. Speaker, because they’re writing exams at 

university. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to hear Fly Points play just 

last month when we announced the lineup of public events 

happening in Regina and Moose Jaw as part of the 2013 Juno 

Week celebrations. According to their bios, I understand the 

five long-time friends will be graduating university this year, 

with three of them completing engineering programs at the 

same time they’re playing in this musical band, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s quite an accomplishment. 

 

Also joining us today from another rising Regina group are the 

members of The Dead South. We have them sitting here. We 

have Nate Hilts, guitar and lead vocals; Colton Crawford on the 

banjo; Scott Pringle, bass and backing vocals. And my 

understanding is Danny Kenyon on cello is not able to be here 

this morning. Mr. Speaker, they will be playing at the Regina 

International Airport today, greeting visitors as they arrive for 

the Juno Weekend. Their unique folk and bluegrass sound will 

be the first of many Saskatchewan bands heard by the hundreds 

of out-of-town guests. 

 

Accompanying the musicians this morning, Mr. Speaker, is J.P. 

Ellson, the executive director of SaskMusic. J.P. was a driving 

force behind the winning bid to host the Junos as well as 

organizing the week-long festival. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Juno Week runs through this weekend with scores 

of live music performances at venues around Regina and Moose 

Jaw, many showcasing talented Saskatchewan performers such 

as these folks joining us in the gallery today. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

that all members please join me in welcoming these talented 

guests to their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege on 

behalf of the official opposition to welcome the folks from Fly 

Points and The Dead South, and J.P. Ellson here today, and 

Jason Plumb. 

 

I know on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] this 

morning . . . I tried my darnedest to get down to the Good Earth 

Cafe, and sure enjoyed listening from my apartment on my way 

to work before our caucus meeting, listening to you perform on 

CBC. You sure could feel the excitement. It’s already . . . Well 

all week long, but this morning it seemed to be at a . . . It’s 

building for this weekend. So it was great to hear you this 

morning and great to have you all here today. 

 

I just want to say, Jason, too, I know your comments in The 

StarPhoenix today . . . This week is about music, but I know the 

film workers really appreciated your comments. So with that 

. . . And J.P., I think I welcomed you, but J.P.’s done a ton of 

work on Creative Saskatchewan and has done huge things for 

music here in Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the official 

opposition, welcome to your legislature and have tons of fun 

this weekend. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you 32 grade 12 

students from the Winston Knoll school. They are accompanied 

by Scott McKillop, their teacher, and Tabitha Booth. Scott 

brings his grade 12 classes every year to the Legislative 

Assembly. So thank you again for making the time. 



3284 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

I was sitting here looking up seeing 32 students, and then I 

didn’t realize that the musicians at first were sitting in front. I 

thought we have got some very mature-looking grade 12 

students. So hopefully in fact the students will have an 

opportunity to maybe mix and mingle a little bit with the 

musical artists. So thank you very much for coming out today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, I’d 

like to introduce some individuals who have joined us today to 

see third reading of Howard’s Law later on this morning. 

Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Brenda Baergen, 

Howard Willems’s wife; Jesse Todd, Howard’s stepson, Chair 

of the Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization 

and also an employee with the Canadian Food Inspection 

Agency; Marianne Hladun, the regional executive 

vice-president for Public Service Alliance of Canada, prairie 

region; Dan Demers who is the national director for public 

issues with the Canadian Cancer Society; and here in 

Saskatchewan, Donna Ziegler, the director of cancer control, as 

well as Donna Pasiechnik, the manager of media and 

government relations here in the province as well for the 

Cancer Society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals have been working very hard 

over a long period of time to improve awareness and safety 

measures as it relates to cancer. And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

all members to welcome them here today, and ask all members 

to thank them for the work that they have been doing and thank 

them in advance for the work they will continue to do in the 

months and years ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

just like to take the opportunity to join with the Leader of the 

Opposition in welcoming our special guests here this morning. I 

think it’s an important day for the province, and we’re so very 

fortunate that they could be here with us to really witness 

something historic in our legislature and something that will set 

the standard for the rest of the country. And so I just want to 

join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming our guests 

that are joining us here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and ask for an introduction to you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, an individual 

seated in your gallery. I’m speaking of Jenna Orban. Jenna has 

been working with me in the Saskatchewan legislative 

internship program. If I’ve been sounding especially intelligent 

or eloquent, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you’ll figure that out. And if 

I go back to my normal sort of status, Mr. Speaker, you’ll know 

that tomorrow is the last day of Jenna working with me. 

 

So she did what she could, Mr. Speaker. But it’s been a real 

pleasure working with Jenna. I should point out for the students 

in the gallery as well that Jenna is a Winston Knoll grad, class 

of 2009. So Winston Knoll students, please keep the legislative 

internship program in mind. 

Going to the University of Regina and will finish a degree in 

2014. Jenna’s been a real pleasure to work with and I welcome 

the opportunity to very publicly state the great work that she 

has done in this and the work she’ll, I’m sure, do with the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview on the other side of the 

internship. But please join with me, Mr. Speaker, and all 

members in welcoming Jenna Orban to her Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s in 

a similar vein that I rise today and ask all members to join me 

in welcoming Michelle Neufeld to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

Michelle is a University of Saskatchewan student. She has a 

major in sociology, a minor in political studies and, over the 

course of the last number of weeks, she’s been working with 

me. She’s done very, very solid research. She offers important 

insights, especially into key areas of First Nations and Métis 

peoples within Saskatchewan and well beyond. And I’m 

delighted to see that she’s going to be joining the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. It will be an environment that will continue 

to improve her skills and tap into her expertise. 

 

And so on behalf of the people of Saskatoon Greystone where 

she’s had an opportunity to come and spend a little bit of time, 

we want to say a special thanks to Michelle for her service. And 

we wish her all the best as she continues not just in the 

internship program but into her studies and hopefully into a 

career in the public service. So, Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you, I ask all members to join me in offering Michelle 

our sincere thanks for her service. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, to all members of the legislature, I too would like to 

introduce my intern with the Saskatchewan legislative 

internship program, Ms. Paula Steckler. 

 

Paula’s been with me since January and we’ve had lots of fun 

tackling all kinds of things. She’s written a member’s statement 

for me. I think one of the biggest things she has done for me is 

researching traffic safety laws across Canada — which I think 

will better improve the outcomes for the committee that’s in 

place right now — and to touring and learning a little bit more 

about Saskatoon Riversdale, the community that I’m so proud 

to represent. Paula has been eager and excited about what I 

think sometimes are the most mundane tasks. This is an 

enthusiastic young woman. She’s been eager to learn and 

willing to tackle any project and I will miss Paula, but I know 

she’ll have a great learning experience on the other side of the 

House. So I’d ask all my colleagues to join with me in saying 

thank you to Paula and wishing her well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Request leave for an extended 

introduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3285 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce a number of producers and agriculture 

industry stakeholders and leaders seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’d ask them to give us a wave as I introduce 

them: Morgan Nunweiler, Chair of Sask Pulse Growers; Lee 

Moats, director with Sask Pulse Growers; Brett Halstead, past 

Chair and current director of SaskCanola; Levi Wood, new 

president of the Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association; 

Reed Andrew, new president of the Western Canadian 

Agribition, Canadian Western Agribition; Marty Seymour, 

CEO [chief executive officer] of Agribition; Bryce Thompson, 

director of Agribition; Rob O’Connor, show manager with 

Canada’s Farm Progress Show; Mark Elford, Chair of 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association; Chad MacPherson, 

general manager, Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had some very good Stats Canada 

export numbers come out. They indicated that 2012 was a 

record year for Saskatchewan exports and we have now 

surpassed BC [British Columbia] as the fourth largest exporting 

province. Agriculture products are a large part of these 

numbers, accounting for over 30 per cent of our total provincial 

exports. And with $11.2 billion in ag exports in 2012, we are 

the largest agriculture exporting province in Canada again this 

year. 

 

These strong numbers are thanks to the hard work of industry 

and people seated in the gallery today. I’d ask all members to 

welcome these important guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I too would like to rise and welcome 

the who’s who of the agriculture and cattle industry in 

Saskatchewan here to our Legislative Assembly this morning, 

and I hope you’ve had fruitful discussions with the minister. I 

certainly have enjoyed the opportunity to work with some of 

you already in my role as critic for Agriculture, and look 

forward to working with the rest of you in that role. 

 

So on behalf on the official opposition, welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly and I wish you the best with your 

meetings with the minister. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was going to ask for 

leave for a short introduction, but I don’t think I need that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through you and to all members of the legislature, 

I’d like to introduce another band that’s here from Regina, from 

south Regina, and that’s Indigo Joseph, sitting up in the east 

gallery. Indigo Joseph is Etienne Fletcher, Eric Tessier, Byrun 

Boutin-Maloney, and Sean McCanell, and they’re accompanied 

by Connie Yakimchuk. 

 

Indigo Joseph will be playing in JunoFest and be part of the 

celebration. But this is a local Regina band like Fly Points and 

the others. On this side of the House, I think all of us are 

excited about the music that’s here. We want to thank J.P. 

Ellson for all the work that he has done with all of his various 

committees. But we especially want to welcome a young, new 

band, Indigo Joseph. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t 

take the chance to join with the members in welcoming the 

musicians that have joined us today, specifically the bands. 

 

And we should probably take the opportunity, as well as 

introducing them, to ask through them that we extend a warm 

welcome on behalf of this legislature to all of the musicians 

from across the country that’ll be coming to the Queen City to 

enjoy the Junos here. Mr. Speaker, it’s obviously going to be a 

very, very important event for this in the life of our capital city 

and the province, and we’re going to be proud to showcase it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I particularly want to thank Fly Points for their 

example. We have a son who’s had a band, is determined to 

make music his career, and we’re encouraging that. We also 

encourage him to have a plan B, and now I have an example to 

go back with when I see him later this day. Mr. Speaker, 

welcome to our guests here to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 

like to welcome 21 master’s and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 

students from the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public 

Policy. They’re seated at the back of the west gallery. 

 

Here today are Monica Brar, Matt Dow, Nicole Callihoo, 

Nancy Carlson, Jaime Leonard, Lokpriy Sharma, Kathy 

Johnson Jo Anne Relf-Eckstein, Darcy Overland, Daniel Dodd, 

Gulnaz M., Yuzhu Lui, Hongsen Zow, Mohammad Adel 

Panihi, Giovanny Bastidas, Ana Moldonado, Max Poelzer, Tom 

Lynch, Phillip Lashley, Heemel Dutta, and Shokoufa Toukhi. 

 

They are in Regina today as part of the activities for the annual 

Johnson-Shoyama Tansley Lecture. I will have the opportunity 

to meet with them shortly after question period, so I look 

forward to hearing about their experiences in graduate school. 

And I also look forward to hearing their commentary on how 

badly mispronounced I have done with their names. In any 

event, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming 

this group of students to their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was going to ask 

for leave to make an extended critique of the minister’s 



3286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

pronunciation of the names from Johnson-Shoyama, but I think 

he did a fine job, so we’ll proceed as planned. 

 

I just want to join with the minister in welcoming the graduate 

students from the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public 

Policy to their Legislative Assembly. Certainly the Tansley 

Lecture is a pretty serious high point in the year of 

Johnson-Shoyama. And I look forward to joining them, with 

the minister, at the dinner later today. But welcome these 

individuals to their Legislative Assembly, please. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 

you and through you, I’d like to introduce my legislative intern, 

Simon Hutton. Similar to my colleague from Saskatoon 

Greystone and my colleagues from Saskatoon Riversdale and 

Regina Elphinstone, I want to thank the students for coming out 

and helping us. 

 

Simon and I have had some very interesting experiences. We 

got to go to Balgonie to watch the Scotties Tournament of 

Hearts in some interesting highway conditions. And we also 

joined the chamber event, the chamber address by John 

Hopkins, and it was a very interesting speech. And Simon 

always has some great feedback when we go to events. And he 

got to go to the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] event also. 

 

And we’ve learned a lot from each other, and I appreciate his 

help. And I appreciate him helping with member statements, 

and helping go to the constituency office and seeing how Walsh 

Acres is doing. And we had a great tour of Regina Walsh Acres 

one of our first days, and it was interesting to see his feedback 

and having some good conversation with him. And I thank him 

very much for all the help he gave me. And I know that you’re 

going to help the person on the other side of the hall here in the 

next couple of months as well. So he’s a great young man and I 

just want to say thank you for all your help. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s my privilege to inform the House of an 

important event that occurred three score and five years ago. 

Our Sergeant-at-Arms, Mr. Patrick “Scooter” Shaw, was born. 

 

As well I would like to inform the House that our Page, 

Breanna Goertzen, this is her last day as she is moving on to the 

Ministry of Environment to keep an eye on any potential forest 

fires in the Cypress Hills. So I’d ask the members to thank her 

for her service to the Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand today to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, 

and the neighbouring communities of Michel Village and 

St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known 

as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nation along with the community of Turnor 

Lake, including the all neighbouring communities in area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 

impressively are from all throughout Saskatchewan. But on this 

particular page, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from the Canoe Lake area, which includes Canoe 

Lake, Cole Bay, and Jans Bay. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. We know 

the employment Act was introduced in December 2012 as a 

sweeping rewrite of our labour laws, including but not limited 

to The Labour Standards Act, The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act, and The Trade Union Act. 

 

And we know that since it was introduced, literally hundreds of 

hours of study and comparison have been carried out in the 

interests of due diligence. And if it does become the new labour 

law of our province, working people — particularly young 

workers, immigrant workers, and other vulnerable workers — 

will suffer from a hasty watering down of our current labour 

standards which set the mandatory minimums for all 

Saskatchewan workers: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May, and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from 

Pleasantdale, Saskatoon, Vanscoy, Regina, Regina Beach. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Local Band Performs at JunoFest 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as some of you may know, I have 

many eclectic interests including the independent music scene 

in Regina. And I’m proud to have Indigo Joseph, a local 

Regina-based band, present with us here in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Indigo Joseph is a four-piece band consisting of 

Etienne Fletcher, Eric Tessier, Byrun Boutin-Maloney, and 

Sean McCanell. This is a talented group of people, Mr. 

Speaker, as they each play multiple instruments ranging from 

the standard guitar, bass, and drums to the harmonica, various 

bongos, and non-traditional instruments like industrial tubing. 

 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3287 

They describe their music as a high-energy blend of Prairie 

rock and roll with engaging lyrics that are delivered in both 

English and French. They have a passion for storytelling and 

entertaining their audience with a dynamic live show. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’ll be plenty of opportunity to see Indigo 

Joseph this weekend as they will be taking part in JunoFest. 

They’ll be playing tonight at the main stage showcase at 6:15 

and tomorrow at The Owl with Rococode, Hannah Georgas, 

and Yukon Blonde. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the House to join me 

in congratulating the members of Indigo Joseph on their 

success. I wish them the best of luck this weekend and I look 

forward to following their success as they grow as a band. And 

I encourage all members to celebrate our Saskatchewan and 

Canadian artists as we all party with the Juno Awards this 

weekend. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Juno Week 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

mentioned during the introduction of guests, this is Juno Week. 

In a recent blog, Andrea Warner, a music writer from 

Vancouver, writes, and I quote: 

 

Several weeks ago, I was tasked with vetting Regina’s 

submission for round one of CBC Music’s Searchlight to 

discover Canada’s best new artist. My ears almost fell off 

in surprise at how much undiscovered talent there is in 

Regina’s burgeoning music scene. It’s time to declare 

Regina as the next music capital of Canada. 

 

She also says these bands owe some of their success to the 

province’s commitment to putting money into its music scenes. 

In her interview with Derek Bachman of SaskMusic, he says 

investment dollars help bands tour, market, and perfect their 

craft, all of which ultimately puts Regina on the map and 

attracts big business to the city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud our government has invested $1.5 

million in this prominent event that will generate economic 

activity and showcase this great province. 

 

Some of the events that people can attend this week include: 

Juno Cup, Juno Fan Fare, Juno Songwriters’ Circle, JunoFest, 

and finally, the 2013 Juno Awards show, Sunday evening, 

which will be broadcast live across Canada on CTV [Canadian 

Television Network Ltd.]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Junos are here, and let me tell you, it’s going 

to get loud. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Chamber 

of Commerce celebrated the success of the local entrepreneurs 

last night with their 12th annual Moose Jaw Business 

Excellence Awards. The award categories ranged from 

community involvement to business innovation to job creation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the strengths of our communities is the 

creativity and innovation of our entrepreneurs. This innovation 

takes many forms, and Yvette Moore’s contribution to the 

community in Moose Jaw is one example of that with her 

gallery and café showcasing the creativity of local artists. At 

last night’s gala, Yvette was awarded Business Leader of the 

Year. 

 

Other awards went out to the Moose Jaw Co-op Association for 

community involvement, Alison Anderson for Young 

Entrepreneur for her consulting enterprise, Masyndic 

Consulting Ltd. Wow Factor Media won the Marketing Award, 

and Yoga Loft took home the award for new business venture. 

W.J. Jones & Son Funeral Home was recognized for their 

outstanding work by receiving both the Customer Service and 

the Business of the Year Awards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, local businesses are vital to our communities, and 

I am thankful for the opportunity to recognize their 

contributions in Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of 

this Assembly to join with me in congratulating the recipients 

of the Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards and to thank the 

Moose Jaw Chamber of Commerce for hosting these important 

awards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I along 

with the Minister of Environment and the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] for Moose Jaw North actually had the 

honour of attending the 2013 Moose Jaw Business Excellence 

Awards presented by the chamber of commerce and Mosaic. 

The 12th annual banquet honoured businesses in 10 different 

categories and also singled out a local business leader. 

 

It was fascinating to see so many great business leaders in 

attendance to be recognized for the hard work that they have 

put into their enterprises. That hard work is the foundation upon 

which Moose Jaw people are creating a growing city and 

contributing to our growing province that is leading the country 

in so many economic categories. 

 

W.J. Jones & Son Funeral Home was presented with both the 

Customer Service Award and the Business of the Year Award. 

Saskatchewan artist Yvette Moore was honoured for her 

long-time promotion of her city and her dedication to the city 

with the 2013 Business Leader of the Year Award. People are 

coming to Moose Jaw to live and to work because they see the 

opportunity and success in our great city. This success is in a 

great part thanks to the hard work of the businesses and 

entrepreneurs in Moose Jaw. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

all of the winners and nominees for their diligent work in 

building a positive business climate in Moose Jaw. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 



3288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Agricultural Market Development Program 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today our 

Agriculture minister, along with the federal government, 

announced $9 million in funding over the next five years for a 

new market development program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the market development program builds on the 

previous Saskatchewan international market development 

program. This program will help businesses, organizations, and 

producer groups to develop and expand their international and 

domestic markets for their agricultural products. It is designed 

to increase Saskatchewan’s market presence, increase the 

number and value of incoming trade missions, and open and 

protect and expand market access for Saskatchewan products, 

and build capacity in the industry to help broaden 

Saskatchewan's marketing reach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program is very important to Saskatchewan, 

as we are an exporting province. In 2012 Saskatchewan 

exported a record high $11.2 billion worth of agri-food 

products and remains Canada's top agri-food exporter for the 

second year in a row. Our government has set some ambitious 

goals for agriculture in the Saskatchewan plan for growth. This 

includes increasing our agricultural exports by 50 per cent to 

$15 billion by the year 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with programming such as the market 

development program, the hard work of our Saskatchewan 

producers, and by working with our industry partners, we are 

well on our way to achieving this goal. Thank you Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

20th Annual Parkinson’s Curling Classic 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. I rise in the House today to 

recognize an event I had the honour of attending last weekend 

in Regina. April is Parkinson's month, and last Saturday the 

annual Parkinson's Curling Classic was held once again at the 

Callie Curling Club, with silent and live auctions taking place 

the evening prior at the Victoria Club. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $54,000 was raised this year, with a 20-year 

running total of $874,000. All the money raised goes directly to 

Parkinson’s research in our province. Doctors Ali and Alex 

Rajput are world-leading researchers who do their work right 

here in Saskatchewan and are able to continue their work with 

the help of this event. 

 

The event was started by founding members Hank Dorsch, 

Harry Duke, Sally Cross and Jim Brass, who were recognized 

at the auction for their 20 years of dedication. This group 

wanted to do something to help Parkinson's research when their 

dear friends, Bill Clarke and Howard Spence, were diagnosed 

with this terrible disease. Once again in attendance was Mrs. 

Phyllis Fox, mother of actor Michael J Fox, who has been 

attending the classic for years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the committee Chair Debra Dorsch-Poitras, her team of 

volunteers, and all the participants who took part in another 

successful Parkinson's Curling Classic. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Congratulations to Melfort Collegiate Cheer Team 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to stand today to 

offer congratulations to the Melfort Collegiate Cheer Team, 

who captured first place in the Scholastic Senior Small 

category, and they were also named overall grand champions in 

the Scholastic category at the Saskatchewan Cheerleading 

Association provincials. This is the second title win for the 

team since the program began. The title of grand champion 

goes to the squad with the highest overall score out of all the 

school senior teams in every level. The Melfort squad was also 

chosen the Spirit Award winners for demonstrating the highest 

energy, spirit, and encouragement on the competition floor. 

 

Members of the team are Holi Kurtenbach, Courtney Durell, 

Emily Neigel, Kyra McLellan, Shea Fidyk, Teagan Kulyk, 

Mack Kerr, Alex Fecke, Kristin Puetz, Patience Whitelaw, 

Kayla Puetz, Kara Brown, Lauryn Martin, Taylor Barnett, 

Danielle Simms, Jasmin Ogren, Danielle Letain, Akura 

Wallington, Megan Ogren, and coaches Lindsay Meyer, Raime 

Eggerman, and Leah Taylor. 

 

I think part of the excitement is the teams they have to cheer 

for, but I’ll leave that for another day. So please join me in 

congratulating these young ladies on their accomplishments. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Long-Term Care and Home Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the last few weeks, 

we’ve heard many stories, Mr. Speaker, of seniors’ care that 

just hasn’t been up to the standards we expect for our parents, 

we expect for our grandparents. 

 

Last week Carrie Klassen came to the legislature to demand 

better seniors’ care. Carrie’s mother lives in a care facility here 

in Regina and, because of chronic understaffing, Carrie has 

seen seniors left unattended on toilets for hours, Mr. Speaker, 

has seen calls not answered for help, Mr. Speaker, as well, 

seniors missing their baths for a number of weeks. The facility 

was so short-staffed, Mr. Speaker, that at one point there was 

one staff person responsible for 19 residents. 

 

The sad reality is that Carrie’s experience with her mother’s 

care is not isolated. My question to the Premier: does he agree 

that staffing levels in care facilities are a major problem, and 

what is he doing to address that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for the question. The government has believed for 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3289 

some time since it was first elected that having an increased 

complement of front-line health care workers is absolutely the 

priority that should guide our provincial health system. And 

more than that, we’ve acted on it, Mr. Speaker, with the 

recruitment efforts around nurses: 1,000 more nurses practising 

in the province today, more doctors now than when we were 

first elected to government, with more work to be done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I know that the minister has met with Ms. Klassen with respect 

to this specific case that he referenced. He’s also provided some 

clear direction to the regions. Some of the homes have 

residents’ councils. He wants the regions, he’s asked the 

regions to be in constant contact with those councils to ensure 

that we’re monitoring, we’re watching for situations like this, 

we’re preventing situations like this. 

 

For those that don’t have the councils, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister has directed that the CEOs of the regions get on the 

floor of those facilities — help facilitate those councils, frankly 

— and also just be very much more hands-on in terms of 

quality of care in those long-term facilities. 

 

So in addition to the government’s long-term plan of having the 

right complement, an increased complement of health care 

workers, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work very hard through 

the minister’s efforts, through the regions, through the CEOs 

and the front-line staff to be vigilant and to be very, very 

diligent about the care that our seniors are getting either at 

home or through home care or in institutions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following the sharing 

of Carrie’s story about her mother’s care, CBC program, Blue 

Sky, had a call-in show where many other people called in with 

their concerns about chronic understaffing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just family members who have called in. 

It’s also front-line workers. One woman called in to say her job 

at the care home in Saskatoon was the hardest of her career 

because they were always short of staff, and she felt she didn’t 

have the time to care for the residents, the seniors as she wanted 

to. A recent nursing grad said that her classmates avoided 

placements in care facilities, Mr. Speaker, because of the stress 

that they were placed under and because they were unable to 

care for residents in the way that they truly wanted to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

These kinds of reviews, Mr. Speaker, are not what we want for 

our health care system, not what we want for our grandparents 

who are living in care facilities. My question to the Premier: 

what is the Sask Party’s plan to improve seniors’ care so that 

families do not have these stories of neglect for their loved 

ones? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to be very clear. 

More than just talking about the issue of human resources in the 

health care system — which frankly is what we did get from the 

previous administration who were even hesitant to even set any 

goals around recruiting the proper number of nurses for the 

province, never mind the number that we could have deployed 

and have working in long-term care facilities in the province — 

so, Mr. Speaker, more than talking about that, as the opposition 

used to do in government, we’ve been acting on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know there’s more work to be done with respect to 

long-term care institutions in the province. The minister has 

undertaken the directions to the regions that I’ve already 

answered in the first question, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

with respect to a very vigorous assessment of the level of care 

and the complement of staff, I think the process is ongoing. It’s 

going to continue under the leadership of this government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do think the best indicator of future 

behaviour is past behaviour for both sides of this House. From 

that side of the House when they were in government, we got 

talk and no action. 

 

From this side of the House over the last five years, it has been 

markedly different, whether it’s wait times for surgery, whether 

it’s recruiting more nurses, whether it’s more doctors practising 

in the province, whether it’s STARS [Shock Trauma Air 

Rescue Society] providing better care for rural Saskatchewan 

that have emergencies, Mr. Speaker, this is the record of the 

government. Work will continue on into the future to ensure 

better care for seniors either at home or in institutions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, physicians and RNs [registered 

nurses] are hugely important to our health care system and in 

delivering care. So too are LPNs [licensed practical nurses] and 

care aids in delivering care to seniors who are living in 

long-term care facilities. 

 

It’s not only care facilities where we see concerns, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s also with home care. Yesterday the member from Lakeview 

raised the case of Michael Lilley, a senior in Regina who has 

had his home care cut off by the health region only to 

eventually be told to find private help and to submit the bills to 

Social Services. It’s a case of red tape, Mr. Speaker. It’s a case 

of added bureaucracy. And it’s a case of adding additional 

burdens onto a senior who frankly deserves so much better. 

 

I was happy to hear the minister say that the health region 

should have been more caring for this man, Mr. Speaker. But 

again this is not an isolated incident. It is systemic, as home 

care services are being scaled back because of the Sask Party 

government’s budget decisions, Mr. Speaker. Home care is a 

vital component to our health care system. It’s preventative. It’s 

affordable, Mr. Speaker, and it allows individuals to have 

healthier lives and stay in their homes longer. It’s simply the 

common sense thing to do. 

 

My question to the Premier: why has the Sask Party 

government let the quality and the scope of home care slide in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able 

to stand and correct the errors made in the Leader of the 

Opposition’s preamble, Mr. Speaker. In fact while he does 



3290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

acknowledge that physician numbers are up in this province and 

nursing numbers are up, all health care provider numbers are up 

in this province. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the complement that are 

represented by the health sciences, up 21 per cent in this 

province in only six years, Mr. Speaker. When you look in 

general at regional health authority and affiliate staffing 

numbers, up 12 per cent. Over 3,300 new employees working in 

the health care system, Mr. Speaker. And in fact the budget, as I 

was able to indicate yesterday, up to health regions in six years 

of $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, up nearly 50 per cent than just six 

years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are adding new programs to complement 

the work that is already provided within the system, Mr. 

Speaker, including a pilot program that I was able to discuss 

yesterday in this very House, Mr. Speaker. We hope to be able 

to demonstrate and pilot the success of that program in this city 

and expand it to other regions in the short term. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we see in Saskatchewan by 

the Sask Party government is a pattern of neglect when it comes 

to seniors’ care here in the province. Mr. Speaker, I will take 

the word of Michael Lilley who had his home care cut off. I 

will take the word of Carrie Klassen who has been dealing with 

her mother’s care, Mr. Speaker. I will take the word of people 

calling into shows talking about the concerns that they have for 

their loved ones. And, Mr. Speaker, I will take the word of the 

Provincial Auditor who issued a report last December 

highlighting concerns in care facilities, one being, Mr. Speaker, 

the lack of proper sanitation and access to soap in some 

instances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see is the Sask Party government 

stubbornly ignoring these issues. My question to the Premier: 

seniors in this province deserve so much better. Why is the 

Sask Party government not making seniors’ care a top priority? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, under this government, 

seniors are getting better care than the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. We are replacing long-term care facilities that were 

long neglected by the NDP [New Democratic Party], Mr. 

Speaker. They closed facilities across this province, Mr. 

Speaker — 16 facilities, 1,200 beds that were closed by the 

NDP when they were in government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have increased benefits to seniors in this 

province, including a seniors’ income plan, which I don’t 

believe was increased in 16 years of NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker. We have increased that each and every year that this 

government has been in office, Mr. Speaker. And we have a 

personal care home benefit for those seniors that are living in 

private personal care homes, Mr. Speaker, to subsidize their 

care. Mr. Speaker, I will gladly stand and defend this 

government’s record on seniors’ care compared to the members 

opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Children in Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today’s Children’s 

Advocate report shows there’s a lack of staff in Social Services 

to ensure children are safe and protected. To support children 

and their caregivers in group homes, extended family care, and 

foster families, the Children’s Advocate points out there needs 

to be appropriate levels of ministry staffing to prevent 

problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a clear problem with a common sense 

solution. When a caseworker is overloaded, they just don’t have 

the time and the resources to do everything that’s asked of them 

for the children. When will this minister take the 

recommendations of the Children’s Advocate seriously? When 

will she put in place the resources so that children are safe, 

supported, and protected from all forms of harm? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And first of all, 

I’d like to thank the advocate for the report that was put out this 

morning because I know that he constantly has a vision of 

having children safe in mind, as do we. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had the opportunity to tell the public 

we were changing the name from the child and youth agenda to 

the child and family agenda to ensure that we’re talking about 

not just the child by themselves, but with the family. 

 

And the results of the work that we’ve been doing in this last 

six years means that children living in low-income homes is 

down by 35 per cent. Child caseload numbers are down by 19 

per cent, and the number of front-line staff is up by 90 workers, 

Mr. Speaker. There are more workers and there are fewer 

children. The contact between the various caseloads and the 

workers is improving all the time. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know there’s always more work to do. 

We know there is. But at the same time, our goal is to make 

sure we support the families, and the apprehension of children 

is not our goal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Is the minister meeting the recommended 

standards for children in care in contact, is a big question here. 

This is not the first time the Children’s Advocate has raised 

how the staffing levels are not meeting the needs of children 

and their caregivers. The report says the habitual overloading of 

child protection and family services caseworkers is making 

problems worse. But the report also says reducing the caseloads 

would help prevent problems. It says, “The return on 

investment of giving caseworkers simply more time to spend 

with children and youth in care would be significant and could 

prevent many of the concerns referred to our office.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does the minister justify reducing her staff 

when the Children’s Advocate clearly states reducing the 

caseloads is the way to prevent problems for children and youth 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3291 

in care? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, maybe I just have to say 

more clearly to the member opposite, the number of children in 

care is down. It’s down 19 per cent. The number of front-line 

workers that we have in this province is up. That gives us the 

opportunity to make sure that the children are being contacted 

more often, that their families are being supported, and that 

there are work within the communities and the 

community-based organizations like 601 Outreach and SIGN 

[The Society for the Involvement of Good Neighbours] in 

Yorkton and CUMFI [Central Urban Métis Federation Inc.] in 

Saskatoon, FoxValley here in Regina. They’re all groups that 

are helping us and support us with our families and our 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our goal as government is to ensure that we 

support the family to ensure that they all have the opportunity 

to be part of our beautiful province. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

think that that would be what the member opposite would want 

too. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not me saying 

it’s the problem; it’s the Children’s Advocate. The Children’s 

Advocate has said it to me, to the ministers, and in his report. 

Children and families need regular contact and the necessary 

supports from their caseworkers. This would prevent problems 

and keep kids from falling through the cracks. 

 

The staff on the front lines do the best they can with the 

resources that they have. But the minister has chosen to cut 145 

positions in her ministry in the last two years. She had those 

resources in her budget, but she chose to cut them. The 

Children’s Advocate clearly states lowering the caseloads for 

front-line staff is the best way to connect with families and 

children, provide the right resources, and prevent problems. 

 

Why would the minister cut her staff when the Children’s 

Advocate recommends exactly the opposite? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If I 

may, I would like to try to answer the hon. member’s question 

because I want to add something that you will not hear the 

minister say in the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we recognize more 

work needs to be done. We accept the report of the child 

advocate. We know we’re going to focus on the 

recommendations that are in the report. Mr. Speaker, what the 

child advocate also said this very morning when he presented 

his report, while acknowledging that more work needs to be 

done, is that, and I’m quoting now, “June Draude’s leadership 

should be commended,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why would he say this, Mr. Speaker? He might say it because 

there’s 53 million more dollars invested precisely in these 

issues because the minister raises them at cabinet. The cabinet 

supports it, the government supports it. He might say that 

because there are 90 more workers on the front line helping 

kids in need in this province because of the efforts of this 

minister. He might say it, Mr. Speaker, because children living 

in low-income families is down by 35 per cent, child welfare 

caseloads down by 19 per cent, and a 60 per cent reduction of 

children in foster homes, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record of the 

minister and the government. 

 

We know there is more work to do, but it stacks up very 

favourably from anything we got when members opposite were 

in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Monitoring Forests for Fires 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government doesn’t seem to be taking fighting fires seriously. 

The Sask Party’s budget will cut the staff who work in the 

towers that monitor Saskatchewan’s forests for fires. 

 

At the end of this fire season, these employees will no longer be 

on the front lines watching out for forest fires. They’ll be 

replaced, Mr. Speaker, by video cameras. The new plan 

involves replacing real people with years of experience of 

alerting officials of forest fires, with a video camera that will 

still need to be operated, maintained, and constantly watched. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask Party government replace the 

employees who watch for forest fires with video cameras? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Thanks to the member opposite. It is an important 

question. It’s something of great concern to this government. 

There have been concerns raised by occupational health and 

safety as far as the wildfire detection towers for quite some 

time. 

 

As we examine what’s happening across North America, when 

we look at places like Oregon and others and try to examine 

best practices, we understand that there is technology available, 

there is automation that can actually improve the detection, and 

that is what is we are looking at. We’re consulting with those 

that work in the industry. 

 

The 42-tower network will be upgraded to infrared camera 

technology with centralized oversights which will provide 

safety, improve detection, reliability, and efficiency, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, replacing front-line staff with 

video cameras just isn’t common sense. A video camera will 

require a technician to install it and then continuously maintain 

it on the tower. It also requires that there be a signal sent and 

received from the camera to some station to monitor the video 



3292 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

which requires a fail-safe communication system. It simply 

cannot break down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these fire towers are in the forest for a common 

sense reason. The staff who are on alert for fires have training 

and equipment to monitor the forest and when they’re replaced, 

their expertise will be lost. Why would the Sask Party 

government put the safety of northern forest communities at 

risk and rely on video cameras instead of experts at forest 

suppression to monitor the forest fire conditions of this 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much again for 

the question. The safety of those individuals is of prime concern 

to members of this government and to the Ministry of 

Environment. Those operations are single individuals operating 

in a very dangerous situation. This has been documented by 

occupational health and safety. This again is where the industry 

is going across North America. I know SGEU [Saskatchewan 

Government and General Employees’ Union] and others are 

asking for two people to be put in the towers at each time, but 

again, when we look at the situations, even that does not relay 

the concerns of occupational health and safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this House, members opposite and on 

this side can be rest assured, we will do what is in the utmost 

importance of safety for those individuals and the efficiency of 

the operation as well. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to look 

outside the boundaries of Canada to find good reasons why this 

is not a good idea. Australia tried these automated cameras and 

found the results to be disastrous. After a horrendous bushfire 

season in 2009, the Australian government commissioned a 

study of the cameras, using real field tests of their accuracy and 

ability compared to real staff. In this study the Australians 

concluded: 

 

Detection by the camera systems was slower and less 

reliable than by a trained human observer. At present it’s 

not possible to rely on cameras as a sole primary detection 

method, and they are not a suitable replacement for trained 

fire observers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if early fire detection by people in the forest is 

superior in all ways to video cameras, the province should use 

real staff. Why would the Sask Party use an inferior technology 

proven in a scientific study to not work to replace real forest 

fire suppression staff with video cameras? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you for the question, although once again the 

member opposite has her facts wrong. The technology has been 

operationally proven in North America and can provide more 

extensive and reliable information to the wildlife management 

program. The cameras of course can operate 24 hours a day, 

seven days a week, operate night and day, Mr. Speaker. This 

will enable the program to improve its responses to new 

wildfires. Improved response will allow for better control of 

wildfires to be controlled: smaller sizes, less costly. 

 

And staff that work alone, Mr. Speaker, are a concern for us — 

travel to isolated locations, and they climb 80 to 90 feet up in a 

tower numerous times. Indeed it is, and I’m sure members 

opposite will agree, a very high, risky situation. Automation 

will reduce the risk in order to prevent unnecessary workplace 

accidents. And as we know in this House, there’s too many 

accidents happening in this province. This is an action that 

we’re doing that we believe is in the best interests of those in 

the employ of the Ministry of Environment and the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Funding for Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday evening the 

president of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] sent out an email to the institution staff about 

SIAST’s 2013-14 operating and capital plan. From that email, I 

quote: 

 

The 2012-13 SIAST operating and capital plan noted that 

a gap between revenue and expense this year would be 

covered by accumulated surpluses. At the end of this fiscal 

year, those surpluses will have been depleted. SIAST 

received a 3.1 per cent provincial general grant increase in 

fiscal year 2013-14. However, if SIAST were to maintain 

status quo operations, we would continue to face a revenue 

shortfall of $5.4 million. This situation is not acceptable 

nor sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain how this unacceptable, 

unsustainable situation will impact the students and staff at 

SIAST? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, I can advise the House that we have provided record 

funding for SIAST, Mr. Speaker. And we have increased 

funding since ’07-08 by 23 per cent, by $147 million. We are 

fully supportive of SIAST in their efforts to maximize funding 

dollars and to ensure stability. 

 

I have a quote from Dr. Rosia, who said on budget day, “We’re 

getting more money, which is great news for us. For us, it’s all 

about creating jobs.” Mr. Speaker, we know that our various 

post-secondary institutions are going through either a 

transforming process or internal review. Those are healthy 

processes to go through. If there is extended workers that are 

affected or impacted by that, we’ll work with them to try and 

find alternate employment. Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

members opposite, we are fully supportive of the efforts of 

SIAST. 

 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3293 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, SIAST is yet another example of 

a post-secondary institution in Saskatchewan that is confronted 

with tough budget decisions to be made in the days and weeks 

ahead. This is a hard reality that is very much at odds with Sask 

Party spin. And worse, it doesn’t line up with the huge 

expectations the province has for SIAST, and it doesn’t support 

the role that SIAST plays in giving Saskatchewan people the 

tools to get the job done to make the economy go and grow. 

 

Last year, the budget shortfall for SIAST was made up by 

spending the reserves. Can the minister explain how the budget 

shortfall will be made up at SIAST this year? Will students be 

forced to pay more? Will programs be cut? Will staff be laid 

off? How will this work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d indicated in my first 

answer that there was a 23 per cent operating increase since 

’07-08. Since ’07-08, we have provided for SIAST an 

additional $31.1 million in capital funding. Over the last five 

years, Mr. Speaker, there has been a 73 per cent increase in the 

number of Saskatchewan apprentices receiving technical 

training. 

 

Mr. Speaker, between 1994 and the year 2007, the NDP 

allowed tuition at SIAST to increase by 263 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the record of the members opposite. 

 

We’re going through a rebuilding and a rehabilitation process at 

all of our universities, all of our post-secondary institutions and, 

Mr. Speaker, the process is going very well. And, Mr. Speaker, 

under the members opposite, it did not go particularly well. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are committed to our institutions and to 

the students that go there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the budget shortfall at SIAST last 

year forced the institution to make it up by spending reserves. 

And to quote the president of SIAST again, he has said that “If 

SIAST were to maintain status quo operations, we would 

continue to face a revenue shortfall of $5.4 million. This 

situation is not acceptable nor sustainable.” 

 

The SIAST budget shortfall this year will demand a 

contingency planning exercise. Again to the minister: can he 

explain to the people of Saskatchewan how this unsustainable, 

unacceptable budgetary situation will impact the ability of 

SIAST to respond to industry to get the job done? And how will 

it impact students and staff as they seek to get the tools to get 

the job done in the Saskatchewan economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, our institutions, such as 

SIAST and the regional colleges, are graduating more students 

than ever before. Mr. Speaker, those students are performing a 

valuable service in our economy. And, Mr. Speaker, I can 

advise you, we on this side of the House take a great deal of 

pride in U of S [University of Saskatchewan], U of R 

[University of Regina], SIAST, SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies]. Those people are preparing the next 

generation and they’re doing a very good job. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we are providing them amazing amounts of resources, 

far better than what happened when the members opposite were 

in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another example in our regional colleges. We’ve 

increased operating funding by $55 million this year; $51 

million for capital funding since ’07-08. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a very good record with regard to our Aboriginal First 

Nations students: 4,681 students enrolled in ’11-12 with over 

50 per cent of those students being First Nations and Métis. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m a proud graduate of SIAST. We do a good job 

there, and the people there are to be commended. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that this bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 

No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 and that 

the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 



3294 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that Bill No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment 

Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

71, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 71, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 and that 

the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des 

jeux de hasard 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 

Investments that Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

77, The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 

of Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 77, The 

Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 and that the 

bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 77, The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3295 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill 604 with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 604 and that the bill and its amendments be now read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. When shall the amendments 

be read the first time? I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) 

Amendment Act 
 

Mr. Broten: — I move that the amendments be now read a first 

and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 

Opposition that the amendments now be read a first and second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . The Leader of the Opposition 

may proceed to move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Howard’s Law) 

Amendment Act 
 

Mr. Broten: — I move that Bill No. 604, The Public Health 

(Howard’s Law) Amendment Act be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 

Opposition that Bill No. 604, The Public Health (Howard’s 

Law) Amendment Act be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Should I do it 

now, or wait? 

 

The Speaker: — This is orders of the day, so you do it now. I 

recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday during 

statements by members the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley made a statement about access to physician services. 

And I quote her comment, which is not correct, and I would ask 

that it be corrected by the member. On page 3261 there’s a 

statement she makes: 

 

Since 2007-2008, medical education seats at the college 

have increased from 40 to 100 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the actual number is 68 to 100, and in 2008 the 

number was 84. Now, Mr. Speaker, when there are errors on the 

record, I think they should be corrected. And I make this point 

today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is 

clearly an issue of facts under dispute, Mr. Speaker, and the 

point of order should not be well taken. 

 

The Speaker: — Matters of facts are left up to the members to 

debate. This point of order is not well taken. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. And that includes the Minister of 



3296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

Parks. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table 

the answers to questions 364 through 419. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Deputy Whip has tabled 

answers for questions 364 to 419 inclusive. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Importance of Entrepreneurs to Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 

great pleasure to rise today and talk about the importance of 

entrepreneurs to our province. Mr. Speaker, prior to my being 

elected as the MLA for The Battlefords . . . And I’d like to take 

this opportunity to thank all of those in The Battlefords that 

have shown confidence in me and let them know that I certainly 

respect their confidence in me and I’m pleased to represent 

them every day in this Assembly. 

 

Prior to that election, Mr. Speaker, I spent 38 years as a real 

estate professional, both as a broker/owner and as a salesperson. 

And over that 38-year span, Mr. Speaker, of course we’ve seen 

a lot of different trends and a lot of different market conditions. 

 

And I look back to several years ago. I had spent three different 

terms as president of that association. At one time in The 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, we had 13 real estate offices in The 

Battlefords and approximately 83 salespeople. In the mid-’90s 

when people were leaving this province in drastic numbers, the 

economy was kind of in a skid. We were down to two offices 

and less than 20 salespeople at that time. It was definitely a 

time of great belt-tightening in our industry and it was 

definitely a kind of testament to Darwin’s theory of . . . It was 

survival of the fittest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m happy to report that now we’re back up to four offices in 

The Battlefords and approximately 25 salespeople, and I’d like 

to take this opportunity to wish all my former colleagues great 

success in their careers in real estate. 

 

But during those years, Mr. Speaker, you know, in the 

mid-’90s, our best customers were the banks with repossessed 

houses, relocation companies with people that had left our 

province and, you know, couldn’t sell their houses because of 

the market. It definitely led to a spiral, a downturn in our 

market, hardship on the people who were trying to sell their 

homes moving into other homes. It also led to, you know, an 

attitude in our area where people said, you know, we’re not 

going to spend any money in, you know, improving our houses. 

 

You know, a lot of homes I think about on our west side of our 

city that were built in the, you know, mid-’50s or early ’60s, 

they were in need of renovation. But people said to me . . . I 

would go out and do a market evaluation for somebody 

thinking of selling their house, and they would say to me, you 

know, we haven’t done any upgrades on this house because we 

don’t know whether we’re going to lose our job next year or the 

company I’m working for may close up. I’m not going to spend 

any money on this house. I can’t get it back. And again, that 

just led to more of a downturn, more of a spiral down. 

 

But I’m happy to report that since that time, starting in about 

2008, our market started to turn around. People started to 

realize that there was value in their home and they could 

improve the value. And you know, they started to replace their 

kitchen cabinets, put in new carpets, put in low-E 

[low-emissivity] windows, energy-efficient furnace, all kinds of 

things. And what that did, Mr. Speaker, that opened up 

opportunities for many of our entrepreneurs and small 

businesses. Whether they were plumbers, whether they were 

carpenters, electricians, floor covering people, that created jobs 

for everyone. And I think that, you know, shows the sign of 

what was happening in this province starting in about 2008. 

 

You know, and fast forward to today. You know, there’s more 

agents in The Battlefords, there’s more jobs being created, and I 

think that’s again a testament to our entrepreneurs in this 

province. 

 

Last week I had an opportunity to attend a trade show put on by 

a local business, Anderson Pump House and at that trade show 

they also made a presentation to the owner, Howard Kirby, for 

30 years in business in The Battlefords. Anderson Pump House 

is a business that, obviously by their name, provides water 

pumps to the area. They do business with the towns, villages, 

RMs [rural municipality], farms, and also individuals. They sell 

things like water softeners, pressure systems, RO [reverse 

osmosis] systems, those kinds of things. 

 

And I’ve been a customer of Anderson Pump House for many 

years and I’ve come to know Howard very well. So at his trade 

fair and his 30th anniversary celebration, I went over and talked 

to Howard for a few minutes. And you know, one of the first 

things that Howard mentioned to me, in our conversation . . . I 

asked him how things were going and what he had lined up for 

the summer, and he said, you know what, Herb, he said, I’ve 

got a lot of contracts on the table, a lot of opportunities for 

business this summer. But you know, my greatest fear is that 

I’m not going to be able to fill the jobs. I can’t find employees. 

And that’s a message we hear quite often, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, the Anderson Pump House story is not the only 

success story in The Battlefords. We’ve got three of our major 

main implement dealers in the province: Norsask equipment, 

which is our Case IH dealer, they’re just in their new building; 

JayDee AgTech, the John Deere dealer’s in their new building. 

And I’ve had the opportunity to tour both of those buildings 

and they are state of the art buildings. They’re great facilities 

for customers. They’re great facilities for their employees to 

work in. And you know, when I toured those buildings, I talked 

to the owners there as well, and the managers, and their greatest 

concern was trying to find employees, a situation that seems to 

be right across The Battlefords, perhaps right across this 

province. We know that from our statistics. 

 

And I kind of think this reinforces what our Minister of the 

Economy said last week in this House when he gave the 

statistics that on saskjobs.ca there’s 337 jobs posted in The 

Battlefords. And I think probably these dealers and this 

business are probably some of those jobs that are being posted 

on there. And again this is also reinforced by a Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business survey that notes that, of 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3297 

the businesses they surveyed, 46 per cent, that concerns over 

hiring staff was one of their first concerns. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear a lot of talk lately about climate 

change. And of course I guess some people call it global 

warming, but you look outside and it’s pretty hard to grasp that 

concept. But there’s one climate change in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, that I think is a good thing, and that’s the change in 

the business climate, the change in the business climate that has 

been created in the last five years in small part by this Sask 

Party government. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And that climate change, you know, has in turn increased the 

business activity in this province. And I think that’s our job as a 

government is to create that atmosphere, that climate that’s 

conducive to a good business atmosphere because when those 

businesses prosper, and as I mentioned, hire more employees, 

that increases the number of employees in this province. And 

that in turn creates a demand for workers, which of course — 

demand and supply — that increases the wages that are going to 

be paid for those employees. 

 

That in turn, Mr. Speaker, increases our tax base, and I think 

that’s important. We can increase our tax base, and it lowers the 

burden on all of us. And that’s driven up our weekly wage 

earnings. I think in the StatsCan figures come out here lately, 

our weekly wage rate in Saskatchewan is now third in the 

nation at $918.85 a week. That’s the highest that it has ever 

been in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And along with 

that, we also have more people working in this province than 

we’ve ever had before — 547,700 people working here. Again 

as I mentioned, that helps us lower taxes for all. 

 

Since we have come into government, we’ve lowered the taxes 

in this province by $473 million. That’s $473 million more 

that’s in the pockets of the residents of The Battlefords. But 

even with that tremendous decrease in our taxes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we still had $360 million more in our tax revenues last 

year. Again that’s a definite result of having more people 

working here and having each person earning more per week. 

That allows us to continue with our growth plan. It allows us to 

put dollars back into our communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to again speak of The 

Battlefords because of course that’s the constituency that I 

know the most about. We’re very proud that we’ve now 

completed our new CUplex in The Battlefords, and we certainly 

appreciate the $7 million that this government contributed to 

that project. 

 

And you know, in my real estate career, when we had people 

moving into The Battlefords, we would tell them what we had 

to offer, the amenities in our cities. And of course when 

somebody comes, they always want to know what’s in their city 

if they want to move there. And these days of course in the 

high-tech days, before they ever take to the asphalt highway, I 

think they take to the information highway. They check out 

what’s in the city. If they decide that they’re going to move to 

Saskatchewan or Manitoba or Alberta or British Columbia, they 

want to know what’s there. 

 

Now they can look in The Battlefords and they can see that we 

have a great indoor soccer field if their children are into playing 

soccer. We have a state-of-the-art swimming pool if their kids 

are in the swim club or they want recreational swimming. We 

have a great centre for the arts, Mr. Speaker. Those are the 

kinds of things people look at, and it’s been great. 

 

We’ve also seen the $6 million contribution from this province 

to our urban connector program in The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker, through Highway 4 through the town of Battleford. 

That was an improvement that was greatly needed. We’ve seen 

a great improvement in traffic in our area. Our oil and gas 

sector is booming. We’re seeing more truck traffic. And as 

somebody who travels that road mostly every day, back and 

forth from my office, the flow of that traffic is tremendous in 

there, not only for convenience but for safety for the residents 

of The Battlefords. And that’s something that they appreciate 

greatly. 

 

Not only those major projects — and there’s more of them that 

I won’t go into today — but I’d like to talk about our revenue 

sharing for The Battlefords. In ’07 the revenue sharing for the 

city of North Battleford, $1.1 million. In this budget, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s $2.95 million. That’s 155 per cent increase 

for the city of North Battleford. The town of Battleford, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, same sort of figures. In ’07 they received 

$407,000 from the budget at that time. This year in this current 

budget, $909,000 — 123 per cent increase. 

 

We know that our government is concerned about The 

Battlefords, and they’re working towards The Battlefords. And 

because of our businesses, the appreciation we have for our 

entrepreneurs allow us to do that. 

 

But both in The Battlefords and province-wide we’ve made 

commitments. In ’07, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we committed to 

hire 800 more nurses in this province. We knew we had the 

longest wait times in the nation, the greatest problems in our 

health care system. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve not hired 

800 nurses. We’ve hired over 1,000 more nurses, and there’s 

200 more doctors working in this province. 

 

And speaking of health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just 

highlight one thing here again from my constituency in The 

Battlefords. A CBC survey has just been completed, and 

they’ve rated our Battlefords Union Hospital with an A rating 

in the province, the highest rating among what they call 

“medium-sized hospitals.” And we’re second only to the City 

Hospital in Saskatoon provincially. And I’d like to commend 

and congratulate and thank the doctors, the nurses, the staff in 

our Battlefords Union Hospital on receiving that recognition. It 

was very well done. 

 

Another success story that I’d like to highlight, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, about entrepreneurs in this province, I had an occasion 

some time ago to attend I think it was a United Way dinner. 

And the guest speaker at that dinner was a young First Nations 

person, Kendal Netmaker. And Kendal told his story about 

being a First Nations person growing up in Saskatchewan, 

going to a non-First Nations school. A very athletic young 

fellow, ended up being captain of his volleyball team at the 

school, went on with a volleyball scholarship to college, and he 

had a dream. He had a dream about making athletic gear.  



3298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

And Kendal has now fulfilled that dream. He now owns a 

company called Neechie Gear. And he’s won several awards, 

and one of the awards that he won was a spot in a mall in 

Saskatoon. He’s opened a store there, and we’re happy to say 

that now Kendal has also opened his line of Neechie Gear in 

our FF2 store in the Co-op mall in The Battlefords. And I’d like 

to take this opportunity to congratulate Kendal and wish him all 

the best with his business in the future. 

 

We have created a very positive, stable, and progressive growth 

plan for this province. And that’s helped our businesses, who in 

turn as I mentioned have helped our growth plan and allowed us 

to do things for this province. 

 

I think it was back in 2006 or ’07 I think, prior to being elected 

as government in this province, our leader at that time and our 

current Premier had made a prediction and set a goal that this 

province would have a population of 1.1 million. I think it was 

by 2015 he set that goal at. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re 

presently at 1,089,807 people. That’s a 95,000 people increase 

in six years alone. And at 21,000 in the last 12 months, I think 

we’re easily going to attain that goal. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do set goals. We set ambitious goals, 

but they’re achievable goals. And we have a plan to reach those 

goals. Okay? And this is the efforts of businesses that have 

allowed us to do this. They’ve allowed us with the opportunity 

to plan for the future. We appreciate what small business has 

done, but in turn we’ve created that climate for small 

businesses. 

 

In 2011 we reduced the small-business tax from four and a half 

per cent to 2 per cent, allowing those small-business people to 

have more money in their pockets, more money to do the 

expansion they needed. In 2009 we reduced the educational 

property tax — the largest decrease in our province — reduced 

it by $165.7 million. In 2008 we further reduced personal 

income tax, allowing again more people in Saskatchewan to 

keep more money in their pockets. 

 

You know, we can contrast that to some of the spending that’s 

taken place, you know, in the previous NDP government, when 

they embarked on several enterprises that they thought they 

wanted to get into. And that’s certainly not the policy of our 

government. You know, that amounted to between 300 and 

$400 million of wasteful spending. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly commend and support the hard work 

of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, which has helped move 

Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for The Battlefords has 

moved: 

 

That this Assembly commend and support the hard work 

of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, which has helped move 

Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into discussion here this afternoon as it relates 

to a motion that I’m actually fond of speaking to here today, as 

it relates to commending the hard work and role of 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs in building a stronger 

Saskatchewan. This is something that I’m proud to speak to. 

Certainly I’m proud to be very supportive of a motion that 

sheds a positive light on the hard-working entrepreneurs of our 

province. 

 

So it’s a pleasure to rise in the Assembly here today and place 

some recognition onto those entrepreneurs that add such 

vibrancy to local communities and that add such a quality of 

life to our province. So I appreciate the motion that’s been put 

forward by the member opposite and my pleasure to speak to it 

here today. 

 

And in doing so we need to make clear just how vital the role of 

a Saskatchewan entrepreneur and local business are in, as I say, 

the vibrancy and life of communities across Saskatchewan. Not 

just that, they’re also so important in the lives of so many 

through their role in providing employment and making sure 

that opportunities are extended and provided to build strong 

communities, strong families, making sure that workers are in 

profitable enterprises, able to do well and be able to make sure 

they’re sharing in the opportunity of our province. 

 

Now when I speak about Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, I may 

take a little bit of a different approach than members opposite. 

And you know, often we hear a lot of celebration and 

back-patting of themselves on this front, Mr. Speaker. I believe 

we should be giving credit where credit’s due, and that’s to the 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, the local businesses that have 

worked so hard in this province to build their businesses, to put 

forward plans that are sound and responsible and that look to 

the future and that have taken on risk and placed that 

investment to certainly further their operations but also further 

our economy. 

 

And it does bother me, Mr. Speaker, at times when I hear 

members opposite and certainly our Premier repeatedly focus 

on their own partisan role or their party’s focus as opposed to 

putting credit where credit’s due, and that’s the hard-working 

entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan. Whether it’s in North 

Battleford, whether it’s in Nipawin, whether it’s up in Melfort, 

whether it’s down in Estevan, Mr. Speaker, we have such 

vibrant and strong communities, made stronger by our 

entrepreneurs. And this is something we need to support. 

 

Now my view of a strong Saskatchewan, one that’s building a 

brighter future, is one that has strong, profitable private sector 

businesses and the vital role those entrepreneurs play. It also 

has a very strong focus on making sure we’ve got strong, 

healthy Crown corporations and a co-operative sector. And on 

the front of the Crown sector, certainly we see undermining 

under this government, but that’s not going to be the focus of 

my debate here today. I want to keep my focus and attention on 

that of the motion to commend and support the hard work of 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs. 

 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3299 

I believe that building out that profitable environment for our 

entrepreneurs is also built on a thriving, strong middle class. 

And that’s why it’s so important from my perspective, our 

perspective, to make sure that we’re building out conditions for 

strong families, that we’re respecting workers, that we’re 

making sure there’s a dollar in the pocket of households to put 

back into those local businesses and to support the activity 

within those local economies. 

 

When we’re looking at so many of the strengths of these 

businesses and these entrepreneurs, we also have to look at how 

can we support their efforts. And I think of the skilled labour 

shortage and the fact that we need to do a much better job by 

way of education, by way of extending that opportunity, 

whether it be from the pre-K [pre-kindergarten] through grade 

12 system right through to apprenticeship and training and 

certainly university and making sure that we’re making sure 

that that’s as accessible as it can be and as robust a program as 

we can by way of the trades and by way of those apprenticeship 

opportunities. These are opportunities that then are extended to 

all. 

 

And when I look at the phenomenal opportunity we’re 

presented as a province, this is where we can make sure that 

that manifests itself in the lives of Saskatchewan people and in 

the communities of Saskatchewan for generations forward. And 

this is an area quite simply we need to do a better job of. 

 

And when I’m speaking of these supports, I’m speaking of 

course of making sure we’re addressing those challenges and 

pressures of child care and early learning right through to the 

opportunity to connect with post-secondary training and studies 

and apprenticeship and skill training opportunities. And this is 

something we need to do a better job of as a province. 

 

I also recognize that for those businesses, we need to make sure 

that we’re creating an environment that provides some cost 

protection. And that’s why I’m such a strong believer in the 

health of our Crown corporations to provide power and energy 

back to the operations all across Saskatchewan at the most 

affordable rate that we can. And they play such an important 

role for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So certainly those costs are important when the Crowns play a 

role that’s important there. And that’s something that we will 

certainly continue to focus on. 

 

[11:30] 

 

We need to focus as well and have an attention towards the 

small business tax rate. It seems the current government is 

focused on the tax rate of the large corporate rate right now. We 

think our attention is better dedicated to making sure that we’re 

addressing the challenges and pressures of the small businesses 

across Saskatchewan which, you know, certainly account for 

the largest majority of businesses here in this province. 

 

And I know that all across Saskatchewan, with the tremendous 

growth that many communities are witnessing, housing is also 

something we need to have our attention to. And I hear it from 

our chambers of commerce, our board of trade, from our 

business leaders across Saskatchewan. We need to make sure 

we’re doing a better job of making sure that communities can 

address the needs of their residents, that families can build out 

their lives, that workers can find safe and affordable places to 

live. And that’s really about building stronger communities for 

tomorrow. 

 

And of course we need to make sure we’re addressing the 

network of transportation — our highways system across 

Saskatchewan — giving it the attention it requires, listening to 

an entire province in doing so. Not dismissing the North as we 

see right now, not dismissing the voices from southeast 

Saskatchewan with Highway 6 and 39, but making sure that 

we’re addressing that network and understanding of course that 

that system plays such an important role in the lives of 

Saskatchewan people but also in the commerce of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think of certainly Prince Albert as a prime example as 

well, and understanding the importance of those transportation 

arteries and of the bridge proposal that’s been on the table and 

that’s been not supported by the current government. We need 

to understand what that means, not just for that community and 

region but for the economic life of our province. 

 

But when I think of the hardworking entrepreneurs across 

Saskatchewan, I recognize the role they play in placing 

investment back into our province. I recognize the role they 

play in employment. I think of, in many ways, they as well 

create an identity and a pride for communities and they do so 

all across our proud province. I see the current government 

undermining some of these opportunities and we need to do a 

better job there. This is as it relates to the middle class losing 

ground. We need to make sure that we have circumstances 

where households are in a position to put that dollar back in to 

those businesses and be consumers within their communities, 

and that’s important. 

 

We need to make sure that we’re supporting Aboriginal 

development by way of economic opportunities and 

employment opportunities, educational opportunities. This 

government’s really dropped the ball on this front when we’ve 

been presented a tremendous opportunity. We see the very 

harmful cuts to the film employment tax credit that have driven 

away investment, driven away jobs. We’ve seen the takeover of 

Tourism Saskatchewan that has taken away the local decisions 

made by those entrepreneurs who have made those investments, 

who have some skin in the game, now having that all taken over 

by government with government’s control. 

 

We see the Enterprise Saskatchewan boondoggle, which was 

once touted as the Premier’s premier economic platform item, 

and now we see the entire dismantling of that, and in many 

ways lost ground by way of capacity in the role of local 

economic development and lost ground by way of giving voice 

to those that are in communities, that understand communities, 

that have a care for those communities, and certainly 

understand the life of that community, but as well those 

economies. 

 

We see, as well, cuts and reductions and tinkering around with 

important programs like the labour-sponsored venture funds 

here recently, where we have over $500 million of capital that’s 

been placed into the economy of Saskatchewan, and as well the 

investments of over 55,000 Saskatchewan people that are now 



3300 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

being denied by this Premier, this government, the fair return, 

the full return that they should deserve. 

 

So those are some of the unhelpful pieces. But I’m so proud to 

speak with pride of the role of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs in 

our province. Certainly we need to all work towards improving 

the conditions that will allow those entrepreneurs to thrive, but 

it’s those entrepreneurs who deserve the credit, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure to enter debate here today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 

talk today about being an entrepreneur in the province of 

Saskatchewan, when the NDP were in power and now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for several months I’ve heard the opposition talk 

about their seeming experience in business and what they 

would do, and asking questions of the government to what we 

do for small business and whatever. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say that there is limited, at the 

best, business experience on that side of the House. Mr. 

Speaker, Deputy Speaker, sorry, my colleague from The 

Battlefords and myself, I think combined we have a total of 70 

years experience in business in this corner. Now I don’t know if 

that makes us old or knowledgeable, but I think it’s 

knowledgeable. 

 

My last 15 years during this dark time in business, it was hard 

to grow your business because your main focus was to stay in 

business. Mr. Deputy Speaker, during this time our population 

was declining. Our young grads were leaving the province. 

Apprentice program was weak, and anyone who graduated from 

the program moved on. Provincial attitude was poor, to say the 

least. The only positive during this time was business people 

learned to do more with less. Saskatchewan entrepreneurs were 

and are part of the backbone of the province. They persevered 

through PST [provincial sales tax] being raised three times. 

They persevered through income taxes being raised twice. They 

persevered through business taxes being raised four times. They 

persevered through fuel taxes being raised twice. This is quite a 

plan to raise funds for their ill-founded budgets — less services 

and higher taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a business operator some 

80 miles from the Alberta border, it was an everyday challenge 

to keep people shopping at home. With no sales tax, lower fuel 

prices, and major box stores opening in Alberta, the NDP not 

only drove people out of the province, they also drove our 

shoppers away. A very clever plan for growth, don’t you think? 

 

Mr. Speaker, entrepreneurs stayed solid in their support for 

community projects and programs with donations to health, 

sport, and cultural programs and putting their names forward 

for committees and councils. 

 

As a past city councillor during the dark time, it was hard to 

budget. You never knew what was coming from the 

government for support. I remember one time our economic 

development officer came to council and he wanted to do an ad 

in Alberta and BC. He wanted to invite people to move to 

Saskatchewan and in particular to our community. I asked him 

what he was going to say at this time. Under the NDP 

government we had the longest surgical wait times in all of 

Canada. We were short 800 nurses, short doctors. They closed 

52 rural hospitals. We boasted the highest crime rates in 

Canada, and we were short 200 police officers. Our roads were 

falling apart and there was no plan for anything. Now I ask you, 

would you move here? We didn’t do the ad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you owned a house or property of any kind and 

you wanted to sell it, you wondered first of all if it would sell, 

and if it did, you’d just have to worry about how much money 

you were going to lose. Property taxes were at an all-time high 

and education mill rates climbed. In my own municipality it got 

to 22.5 mills. Mr. Speaker, that was then. Now let’s talk about 

now. 

 

On the topic of real estate, we have seen assessment reach an 

all-time high and education property tax mill rates at an all-time 

low. Then NDP talked about lowering EPT [education property 

tax] but that’s all it did. This government has fulfilled its 

promise to lower EPT to an all-time low — 2.67 mills for ag 

land, 5.03 mills for residential, and 8.28 mills on commercial. 

This shows a positive environment for homeowners and 

business. 

 

Contractors are now spec’ing homes, condos, and commercial 

space, creating jobs for carpenters, electricians, plumbers, 

cement finishers, and so on. These people in turn shop and buy 

products from our business people, whether it be grocers, car 

dealers, clothing stores, etc. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like talk about the Cut 

Knife-Turtleford constituency. This constituency is located 

entirely between The Battlefords and Lloydminster. Many of 

our constituents work in Lloydminster or The Battlefords. We 

are also considered to be the trading area for The Battlefords to 

the west and Lloydminster to the east. In the last five years, we 

have major growth in both communities — big box stores, new 

office building for Husky Energy in Lloyd, along with 

supporting businesses needed in the booming oil and gas 

industry. 

 

In The Battlefords, as my colleague clarified this week, from 

The Battlefords, there are expansions in all farm implement 

dealerships, three of which are in new buildings. All the car 

dealerships have expanded or been remodelled. New 

restaurants, box stores, and a new multi-purpose facility. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, throughout the Cut Knife-Turtleford 

constituency, there is growth — new businesses in Edam, 

Turtleford, Maidstone, Lashburn, Cut Knife, Neilburg, and so 

on. There is a positive attitude in rural Saskatchewan and for 

sure in Cut Knife-Turtleford. Homes are being built. People are 

moving back to have that small-town feeling. Farming, 

ranching, and resource businesses are as strong as they’ve ever 

been. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the past six years our population has 

grown by 95,000 people, the fastest and most sustained period 

of population growth in decades. There was 24,400 new jobs 

created last year, and we now boast 3.8 per cent unemployment, 

the lowest in Canada. “Anyone who wants to work in 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3301 

Saskatchewan is working,” said Don Henry, chief operating 

officer of Morris Industries in Saskatoon, a maker of farm 

equipment. 

 

“Another boost in optimism allowed Saskatchewan to regain its 

number one ranking as home to the most optimistic small 

business owners in Canada in March,” said Marilyn 

Braun-Pollon, CFIB’s [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Businesses] vice-president, prairie and Agri-Business. “We’re 

pleased the recent Saskatchewan and federal budgets both 

contained a number of measures that will keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward.” 

 

Fifty-seven per cent of business in Saskatchewan say that the 

overall state of business is good. Thirty-six per cent of 

Saskatchewan businesses plan to increase full-time employment 

in the next three to four months. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year’s highways budget represents a 9 

per cent increase since our first budget in 2008 and puts us 

halfway to meeting our campaign commitment to invest 2.2 

billion into our highways and roads over four years. We’ve 

invested more than half a billion dollars per year in 

transportation each year since coming into office — a total of 

$3.4 billion. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, municipalities will receive record revenue 

sharing for the third straight year, helping to foster economic 

growth and enhance the quality of life for Saskatchewan 

people. In 2013-14, 264.4 million in municipal revenue sharing 

will be provided — an 11.4 per cent increase from the previous 

year and 108 per cent increase over the 2007-08 budget overall. 

Funding to municipalities in 2013-14 will be $362 million. 

 

Apprenticeship programs have increased 1.544 million to 

purchase an additional 300 training seats over those provided in 

the 2012-13 budget. This employer-demand driven program 

ensures there is a skilled workforce to meet existing and future 

labour market demands and meets the plan for growth 

commitment to add 300 training seats in the 2013-14 budget. 

There’s $119,000 increase for the apprenticeship training 

allowance which provides income support to increase numbers 

of individuals who are taking training, and 900,000 increase to 

support increases in living allowance. 

 

The health budget is the biggest ever at $4.8 billion. This 

supports rural doctor program and the new collaborate 

emergency system initiative which . . . one will be in 

Maidstone. Over 1,000 new nurses have been hired since 2007. 

Surgical initiative plan will receive 70.5 million in the 2013-14 

budget. There are 61 per cent fewer people waiting more than 

six months for surgery and 46 per cent waiting more than three 

months for surgery since 2007. 

 

Having a good plan for growth and six balanced budgets is 

what entrepreneurs want along with programming I have just 

mentioned. Entrepreneurs will keep us moving forward now. I 

second this motion by the member from The Battlefords. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very proud to stand today to join in the debate and certainly in 

talking about the opportunity when it comes to the business 

community of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I want to be able to 

spend some of my time that I have here in relation to the motion 

that, quite frankly, commends and supports the hard work of the 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs that have helped Saskatchewan 

move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s no question that as we look throughout southern 

Saskatchewan that there’s been many vibrant opportunities to 

commend the business folks that have created a lot of 

employment, paid their taxes, and provided services, 

much-needed services, to the people of the province. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is that we also 

point out that in northern Saskatchewan, that the people of 

northern Saskatchewan are indeed a very integral part of our 

province. And many of the small entrepreneurs in our northern 

communities, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great opportunity to 

recognize some of the entrepreneurs that I’ve had experience 

with. And certainly as you travel throughout my constituency, 

there are many — La Loche and Patuanak and Canoe Lake, the 

list goes on, Green Lake — as to the amount of folks that have 

contributed a great amount of their own investment, their own 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, to create jobs for local people. And it is an 

incredible risk that many of these entrepreneurs undertake on 

their own to create that opportunity, to provide that service, and 

hopefully at the end of their years of work that they do have a 

vibrant, thriving business. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important . . . I just 

want to make one very small comment in relation to the 

member from the North Battleford area when he spoke about 

the dire consequences that the province was under in the 1990s. 

And again he alludes to the fact that because the NDP were in 

power, that all these problems were existent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s really important to note — and the 

member would know this, from The Battlefords, as well — that 

quite frankly in the 1990s the Saskatchewan NDP were in 

power. They were in power in 1991. And the first few years 

that . . . quite frankly the debt that we had to sustain, the 

amount of payments we had to make on the interest were 

something like $100,000 per hour, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

something that a lot of people don’t know. And what happened 

there was the Conservatives left the provincial government 

deeply in debt, fifteen and a half billion dollars in debt at that 

year. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, quite frankly the people of many parts of our 

province were suffering, and the NDP certainly come along to 

clean up the mess. And it took us 12 to 14 years to clean up that 

mess. And when the economy started chugging along, which 

everybody expected, Mr. Speaker — this obviously is important 

to note — that of course the Saskatchewan Party government 

tries to take credit for that. Absolutely everybody and their dog 

in the province of Saskatchewan knew that the economy was 

going to move forward. They absolutely knew that 

Saskatchewan was on the rise, Mr. Speaker. And certainly what 

I want to make sure people understand, is the history of the 



3302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

province is really important to look at and to judge as to where 

we’re at and which government’s led as they should have, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But that being said, I want to point out that some of the 

communities that I want to pay tribute to in terms of developing 

their business community, Mr. Speaker, are places like Buffalo 

Narrows. As I mentioned at the outset, Buffalo Narrows is a 

very strong, vibrant community, and I always commend them 

as the MLA. I’ve always made reference to Buffalo Narrows as 

a community that had a lot of business leadership in the 

community. And as you travel throughout the community of 

Buffalo Narrows, on the main street, absolutely almost every 

business in the community is owned by local people, many of 

them Aboriginal, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a tribute to the fact that 

the entrepreneurial spirit of the community of Buffalo Narrows 

is very, very strong. And I’ll always make the comment as the 

MLA for the area that I’m very, very proud of the work that the 

community of Buffalo Narrows has done in developing their 

own economy and strengthening their business community 

overall. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are tons of examples that I could use in 

Buffalo Narrows, but other than to say that they have done an 

incredible job over the years. Because you look at some of the 

challenges that they face, Mr. Speaker. It takes a lot of 

commitment, a lot of dedication to make things happen. 

 

The other community that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that 

I want to pay tribute to is Beauval. The community of Beauval, 

as many people know, it’s a very strong community. It’s a 

population of 1,000-plus. And, Mr. Speaker, there are tons of 

examples of how the community of Beauval has done very well 

on its own. As you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, that they have a 

lot of challenges ahead of them, whether it’s housing, whether 

it’s employment, and kind of the list goes on, that the 

community itself turned to the business community. And now 

we’re seeing great examples of how the entrepreneurs locally 

have made a significant difference to the community of 

Beauval. 

 

We have new businesses popping up at the Beauval Forks, 

places like the Blueberry Hills Water store. I don’t know if I 

have the name exactly right, but Gilbert Daigneault set that up. 

And now we have a water store at the junction, and many, 

many people will take advantage of the Blueberry Hills Water 

store. 

 

And most recently last year, March of last year, 2012, the 

English River band, also known as the Patuanak band, they 

opened up the English River Travel Centre and general store. 

And they found an excellent manager and manageress, the 

couple known as Don and Linda Tegenkamp. They have done 

an incredible job, Mr. Speaker, of getting the store started. They 

employ about 35 people, and both Don and Linda work very, 

very closely with the community. And I want to commend them 

for their effort and thank them for their service to the Beauval 

area. But more importantly is to recognize that the parent 

company, the English River band, has certainly done their work 

to invest in a very, very important service. And, Mr. Speaker, 

you will see that the store itself will do remarkably well 

because of the good management, sound investment, and 

certainly turning as much of the benefits to the region as 

possible, all the while running a business. We understand that 

that is how it’s got to work. But they certainly have reinvested 

their communities admirably.  

 

They have other employers, Mr. Speaker, that have for many, 

many years — and I’m talking about the new businesses in the 

Beauval area — but they have employers that have been there 

for many, many years. People like Don and Leda Corrigal who 

have operated a construction business for years and years. They 

have people like Phillip Kyplain who runs a paint contracting 

business. They have created opportunity and employment for 

many people as well. Maggie and Darryl Natomagan who own 

MDeez Confectionery and Gas Bar. These folks have employed 

people for many, many years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the people that I want to 

spend a bit of time with. Also the Sandy Beach service that’s 

operated by Bruce and Judy Roy. And I think the Sandy Beach 

overnight stay, you can go there, and you can enjoy yourself, 

and they put up with many, many guests. It’s a great location. 

It’s a great facility, Mr. Speaker. You look at Polar Oils. You 

look at Walter Hood and some of the work that he’s done with 

his trucking company, Cipi. And the list goes on of some of the 

companies in the Beauval area that have done a tremendous 

amount of work for the community. 

 

So for me to stand up today and talk to them about their effort 

and to thank them as entrepreneurs for making a significant 

difference to communities like Buffalo Narrows, like Beauval, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important. 

 

My final few minutes I want to spend, Mr. Speaker, is to also 

commend a high school friend of mine. The guy’s name is 

Emile Burnouf. And Emile Burnouf is from Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Assembly that certainly as 

the MLA for the area, I’m very proud of some of the 

contributions that Mr. Burnouf has made to creating not only a 

number of businesses but a number of employment positions 

for many, many, people in my home community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. We don’t do that enough, to thank people like 

Mr. Emile Burnouf for all the countless hours that he puts in, in 

not only making sure that he provides a good service as an 

entrepreneur but to make sure that he creates jobs. 

 

And I can remember fresh out of school, Mr. Speaker, that 

Emile began the work of building his business expertise. He 

created a store. He’s had a construction company, Mr. Speaker. 

He’s had an outfitting camp. And pretty much every other 

business that you can imagine happening in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Burnouf has really tried to become very, 

very active in that business. And when he gets involved with 

this particular business, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that he 

creates employment opportunities for others and for families. 

 

So I want to say as the MLA for Athabasca, that I want to say 

very clearly and very openly that I’m very proud of Mr. 

Burnouf’s accomplishment, his contribution to our local 

economy, and that the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse should be 

very proud of him and that we should do all we can to help him 

because of his past service and his past effort to build a strong 

business community in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I want to commend 

him 100 per cent on some of that work, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3303 

So on that note, I think it’s important . . . I’ve got tons of other 

businesses that I want to speak about, Mr. Speaker. And 

overall, overall, the examples of Beauval, the examples of 

Buffalo Narrows, the examples of Mr. Burnouf just shows that 

there is a vibrant entrepreneurial spirit in northwestern 

Saskatchewan. And as your MLA, I say thank you, and I’m 

very proud of your work. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to go into this debate on this motion which I certainly 

support, Mr. Speaker. I guess part of it is we have to explain to 

the other side what an entrepreneur actually is. Because to tell 

the truth, I don’t think any of them over there — and I could be 

wrong — but I don’t think any of them have been 

entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker. Like you just talk to us . . . The last 

two speakers on this side of the House before and myself are 

entrepreneurs or have been entrepreneurs. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a big difference between an entrepreneur and a person 

who’s just out there working. I know that those people on the 

other side don’t realize this, but entrepreneurs, they’re the ones 

that write out T4s; they just don’t receive them, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s a big difference. That’s a big difference. 

 

Now I have been on both sides. I’ve been out working for 

wages. I’ve been an entrepreneur. And there’s good and bad 

with both sides. But the entrepreneurship is something that you 

can definitely be proud of. And you know something, Mr. 

Speaker? It is not an eight-hour workday. When you are an 

entrepreneur, you are out there going hard way more than eight 

hours. I’d like to say . . . [inaudible] . . . I’d like to say, but 

unfortunately it’s unparliamentary language. But honestly, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s times when entrepreneurs are going out there 

and they’re working 80 hours a week just to make things work. 

That’s why we have to support them. And this government 

certainly believes in supporting entrepreneurs because, like I 

said, the vast majority on this side are entrepreneurs. So 

consequently we want to support them. 

 

A very good example of the entrepreneurial spirit that shows 

through on what could happen from this side . . . Now my 

friend from Melfort has Bourgault Industries in his 

constituency. And for years — for years — Bourgault industry 

couldn’t move product. And they sell product all over the 

world. But they couldn’t move product out. Why? Because the 

NDP would never redo the highway. And they were having a 

terrible time, making it an added cost to get their raw 

equipment in, the raw steel in to build stuff and to build that 

product and move it back out. 

 

This government actually went back and finally redid Highway 

368. And it’s kind of funny. I look at today’s paper and it says, 

“Opposition wants more highways spending.” Mr. Speaker, this 

government has spent way more on the highways. We’re still 

fighting a deficit that that NDP government left us on 

highways. And it’s going to be a long time, but we’re going to 

get those highways fixed so the people in Saskatchewan are 

proud to drive on them. And it helps our entrepreneurs in rural 

Saskatchewan move their businesses forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that, you know, they tried to 

be entrepreneurs in the sense as a government, but government 

can’t be entrepreneurs. You know, the previous CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] government, well 

they had shoebox factories, and they had . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, they tried make shoes, everything. Of 

course then when they became the NDP, they tried to make 

potatoes, but that didn’t work out that well either. You have to 

let the entrepreneurs do that end of the business. And I know 

that they can’t figure it out. 

 

But what they should do, what they should actually do is take a 

look, Mr. Speaker, at what some of those other countries have 

tried to do in the past. Like you take the former Soviet Union. 

The former Soviet Union, now they tried to run everything 

through the government. Well that worked out well, didn’t it, 

Mr. Speaker? And you look at every country that’s down in the 

bottom of the totem pole, and all of them, they had the 

government who thought they could do better than the 

entrepreneurs — totally wrong, Mr. Speaker. The entrepreneurs 

will move it through every time, but the entrepreneurs work 

very hard at doing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can still remember some of . . . And you know, I 

would question why the other side wouldn’t just go right along 

with this. But I can still remember the member from Ituna on 

her maiden speech actually talked about the evils of capitalism, 

Mr. Speaker. Now you know, I kind of thought that that 

mentality would be gone, but obviously it’s still out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s other things that we have done also. We’ve 

lowered the taxes for these small businesses. We’ve lowered 

the education portion of property taxes on land, on buildings 

which the other side always said they were going to do but, 

needless to say, never did it. You know, it’s strange as many of 

us stuck around here to be entrepreneurs as we did because 

during that NDP period of time, there was a terrible 

out-migration of people. And some of us actually were 

bullheaded enough to be able to stick around here, stick it out, 

become entrepreneurs, and move the province forward. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Now the member from Athabasca would like to claim that, you 

know, they were all to do with this, to move Saskatchewan 

forward. But he was there all that time that the people were 

moving out. You know what it was, Mr. Speaker? In the end, 

everybody knew that the NDP was on their way out. And 

people, yes they did start coming in before the 2007 election 

but they knew that the NDP was toast; the NDP was going to be 

gone. 

 

And with this government, with this Premier, I think the NDP’s 

going to be gone for a long time. Like I mean they’re down to 

nine members. They’ll be lucky if they have that many next 

time, and I doubt very much that they will, Mr. Speaker, 

because the people of Saskatchewan know. 

 

And it’s not just the people of Saskatchewan. Our Premier has 

been out there touting our province all over the world. That is 

how come Saskatchewan has this phenomenal growth, just a 

phenomenal growth coming in, way more than it has ever seen 

before because people are looking to Saskatchewan. They’re 

saying, this Saskatchewan Party is a party that knows how 



3304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

business should work. This is a party that will help out — not 

hinder — entrepreneurs. This is a party that will supply roads to 

us, supply health care to us, supply education to us, move this 

province forward. And of course, that’s what our growth plan 

is. 

 

Now the other side never could figure out a growth plan 

because they actually, they actually had a plan for decline, Mr. 

Speaker. They were actually bragging, I think it was in 2006, 

about the out-migration was going down; it wasn’t as bad as 

what it used to be. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know when you take a look at this 

province and when you go into the States, when you go . . . I 

haven’t travelled that much, but I go into the States. People 

never even knew, they couldn’t even pronounce Saskatchewan, 

let alone know where it was. Now, Mr. Speaker, now they 

know where Saskatchewan is. And I found it quite amazing. I 

was down in Mobile, Alabama, and you know something? They 

knew where Saskatchewan was. They had heard of 

Saskatchewan, the good things that were going on in this 

province. A far, far cry different than when the NDP was in 

power. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have to give credit to our 

entrepreneurs, to the ones that stayed through the terror years of 

the NDP and the ones that are moving into this province now, 

setting up businesses, moving forward, and seeing this great 

province for what it is, this great province for what it is when 

we have the resources that we have. And speaking of resources, 

we’ve actually moved past British Columbia now, and I think 

we’re number four in Canada on export markets, Mr. Speaker. 

This, this is because of the entrepreneurship that we have in 

Saskatchewan and the good people who will work very hard to 

move this province forward and to move Canada forward as a 

whole. 

 

So obviously, Mr. Speaker, I certainly, I certainly support this 

motion from my good friend from North Battleford, Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and it’s my pleasure today to rise in this 75-minute debate to 

debate the motion that we support, the “Assembly commend 

and support the hard work of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, 

which has helped move Saskatchewan forward.” And I have to 

say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I couldn’t agree more with the 

motion. 

 

I certainly come from a long line of entrepreneurs, and I’ve 

been one myself and understand the particular challenges that’s 

faced by people who want to start out fresh with a new idea or 

with an innovative new approach to whatever area they’re 

interested in. We’ve seen lots of amazing young entrepreneurs 

here in this Assembly in the last few months, people that have a 

passion in their heart and that are willing to do the work that’s 

required to get that passion developed into an idea and then, 

with the proper planning and financing and support, then they 

can actually roll it out and start business. And there’s nothing 

more exciting than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I just want to talk a little bit about my models for 

entrepreneurial leadership, and that’s certainly in the farming 

community that I come from. And I come from a long line of 

farmers. And farmers are, I think, the backbone of 

entrepreneurialism in Saskatchewan and have been for many 

decades from the years when my grandfather came out from 

Nova Scotia looking for a new life with a passion for being on 

the land. And he found his quarter section. He was given his 

quarter section and proved up his patent and was able to get the 

grant to that quarter section down near Lafleche — 10 miles 

south of Lafleche right north of the correction line. And we had, 

you know, we had . . . He raised a family of 10, and my father 

took over the farm from him in the 1950s, and he raised a 

family of six on the farm and, you know, struggling through all 

the farming issues of those years. And now my two brothers are 

continuing to farm and have a really nice mixed operation there. 

So we received our 100-year farm certificate from the 

Information Services Corporation in 2009, and we had a great 

celebration out at the farm to celebrate that. 

 

And certainly the work that our farming community does, not 

just, you know, in the traditional forms of farming where you 

seed your crop and then you grow your cows and you feed the 

chickens and all that kind of thing and, you know, grow a big 

garden, which my brothers both do, it’s also the innovation that 

our farming community has brought to all aspects of farming. 

And certainly when you drive around the countryside these 

days, I’m always amazed at the type of industry that’s sprung 

up in the last few decades that is a result I think of the hard 

work of the farming community and the innovative and 

entrepreneurial souls that all these farmers have brought to our 

economy and to our province. 

 

And certainly you will see that not only in the farms of course, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the entrepreneurial spirit is also 

evident in the North when you look at the development of 

tourism. It’s incredibly evident in the cities where you see 

people starting up businesses all the time. And I know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s not easy to start a business. I was able to 

participate in some programming that helped me out immensely 

when I was starting out our business in the North. And one of 

the things I was able to take advantage of was a program 

through Women Entrepreneurs. So we know that with good 

government supports for people who have that song in their 

heart and people who have a passion for a new idea, there are 

ways and supports out there. 

 

And in my business planning class that I took, one of the things 

that stuck with me for a long, long time was that, you know, in 

order to be successful in business, only 5 per cent of businesses 

succeed and only 5 per cent of businesses have a fully prepared 

business plan. So obviously planning and having the supports 

for figuring out where you want to get to and how you’re going 

to get there are things that I think, as a government, we’ve been 

very successful in helping people with those plans. 

 

One of the things my grandfather was very keenly involved in 

was farmers working together, and you can certainly see that in 

his history with a group called the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 

which was one of the largest farmer co-operatives ever formed. 

And it was a group of farmers that were facing great adversity 

in the marketing of their wheat. 

 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3305 

And he was fully committed to his entrepreneurial enterprise as 

an individual building a life for his family on the land, but saw 

the negative effects of large corporate entities being able to 

manipulate these independent farmers and take advantage of 

their need to have access to rails and their need for transport of 

their product. And so in that case he was firmly committed not 

only to being independent on his own farm but also to work 

with other farmers who had similar circumstances to ensure that 

they weren’t defeated by the corporate interests of larger 

companies and railways. And he worked very hard in the 1920s 

and ’30s to gather 50,000 signatures of farmers in order to form 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

 

And we certainly know the history of that farmers’ enterprise 

throughout the history of our province. And it introduced things 

like Co-operators insurance. They were very involved in 

ensuring these entrepreneurial farmers had access to proper 

insurance, life insurance. And they were very supportive of 

other social enterprises which gave farmers the security and the 

network they needed to raise their families, to live in 

Saskatchewan, to grow a crop or raise a herd, and also impart 

on their children the values of community, the values of 

sharing, and the values of spiritual support and community 

building in that sense as well. 

 

So it’s something I’m very proud of and certainly I think my 

work as an entrepreneur, despite the member’s opposite 

concern that there is no experience on this side of the House . . . 

I hate to correct him but certainly many of us do have 

entrepreneurial experience. And I know I’ve had significant 

experience with a tourism operation in northern Saskatchewan 

and if he wanted to check that out he could probably just look at 

our disclosure statements through the Privacy Commissioner, if 

he’s interested in knowing more about that. 

 

One of the things I noted last year when I attended the top 100 

businesses in Saskatchewan dinner in Saskatoon was the 

number of these organizations that actually are entrepreneurial 

organizations but they’re built on a foundation of people 

working together. And I think one of the most significant 

examples of that in Saskatchewan, of which we have a proud 

history, is the success of the co-operative movement in 

Saskatchewan, and it permeates throughout our culture. It’s part 

of who we are as Saskatchewan people, where groups of people 

have taken that entrepreneurial spirit one step further and 

they’ve built impressive and very successful businesses in 

banking through the credit union movement and also in retail 

through the co-operative movement, and even in areas such as 

insurance, with the Co-operators insurance. And there’s a 

whole host of institutions, entrepreneurial, co-operative 

institutions in Saskatchewan that have been key players in the 

development of many, many communities and continue to be 

key players in many, many communities in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I need look no further than Affinity Credit Union in 

Saskatoon which has, through its entrepreneurial enterprises, 

has been able to support countless, countless community 

organizations in start-ups for non-profits and all kinds of 

projects that I think the Affinity Credit Union has a proud 

history of. And I know other credit union organizations in 

Saskatchewan also have been able to support community 

initiatives. And indeed, when you look at the co-operative 

principles — which is not something we hear a lot of reference 

to on the other side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the 

underpinning of co-operatives, of course, is enterprise, it’s 

business. But it’s built on seven principles which include 

looking out after your community and making sure that your 

community is enriched as well. 

 

So other corporations that you can see that are in the top list, 

Co-operators Life Insurance Company was number 9. And 

that’s an entrepreneurial company built upon the co-operative 

spirit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that’s something that 

Saskatchewan people can be proud of. There are corporations, 

many Crown corporations that are very successful — SGI 

Canada, built upon the notion of co-operative service; Farm 

Credit Canada is a federal organization that’s on the list. 

 

We have the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board at 

21. So this is a socially owned entrepreneurial business that’s 

helping out workers. SaskCentral for the credit unions — I’m 

only on page 2 — Conexus, Concentra Financial. There’s a 

whole number of companies here I think that are amply 

reflecting the importance of co-operative entrepreneurialism 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so as I indicated earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been an 

honour to get up and speak to this motion today. I can’t support 

it more, and I think we need to recognize the hard work of 

entrepreneurs here in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. I 

recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a 

pleasure to speak about the important role of entrepreneurs all 

across Saskatchewan here today. Important to that as well and 

important to supporting that is the next generation of skilled 

workers and entrepreneurs, supported by our early learning, 

child care through to post-secondary and trades supports. 

 

And I guess my question to the member from North Battlefords 

would be, recognizing the importance of supporting these 

young people and these students becoming those skilled 

workers for tomorrow and those entrepreneurs for tomorrow, 

how does it make sense to be making cuts to his local school 

division at the same time as they’re pushing forward an agenda, 

an expensive agenda that has no evidence behind it, on 

standardized testing across Saskatchewan? 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to be able to speak and answer some questions from 

the opposition here today. 

 

But before I do that, I’d just like to talk about a little bit of the 

growth. And we’ve talked about the growth of the 

entrepreneurs in this province, the Conference Board of Canada 

estimate that our economy grew by 2.9 per cent in 2012 and by 

3 per cent in 2013. These are the some of the things that our 

growth is doing. 

 



3306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

We’re doing a lot of other things too with our growth 

initiatives. In 2012 the Aboriginal employment in this province 

was the highest level ever — 39,700 people employed. In 2013, 

the off-reserve employment rose by 2,200 people, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That’s a 5.6 per cent increase. Our unemployment is 

down by 3.6 per cent. I think that these are the things that the 

entrepreneurs have helped us do and allowed our government to 

proceed with. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 

government is committed to making Saskatchewan one of the 

best places in the country to live, work, and raise a family. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, Marilyn Braun-Pollon with the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business said: 

 

Another boost in optimism allowed Saskatchewan to gain 

its number one ranking as home to the most optimistic 

small business owners in Canada in March . . . We’re 

pleased the recent Saskatchewan and federal budgets both 

contained a number of measures that will keep 

Saskatchewan moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Nutana: why is it that you can 

stand up and talk about the evils of capitalism in one speech, 

and then in the next speech stand up and talk about how great 

the entrepreneurial spirit is in Canada? How do those two make 

sense, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

think the point here is that entrepreneurialism is something 

that’s important in Saskatchewan and it’s something that comes 

from individuals. And we want to have supports. 

 

My concern with this government is that they do not support 

the establishment . . . I don’t see anything from this government 

for getting young people established in farming these days. And 

this is one of the concerns I hear about a lot from young farmers 

is, how are we supposed to get into this, into farming? And 

there’s no support from the start-up for that kind of business, 

and that’s one thing I think this government has failed 

miserably on is looking after that kind of thing. 

 

As I said, my grandfather was able as an entrepreneur, my 

grandfather was able as an entrepreneur to successfully 

establish his farm business, but he had to join with other 

farmers — 50,000 other farmers — in order to find proper 

markets and fair markets for his grain. And those contributions 

from people like my . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to ask the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, in relation to the 

fifteen and a half billion dollar debt that we’re saddled under 

from Grant Devine’s Conservatives in 1991 when the NDP 

took over, does he think paying $100,000 an hour in interest 

payments, does he think that the effects of that in Cut Knife and 

The Battlefords area paying $100,000 an hour in interest 

payments, does he think that might be a little deterrent for the 

business community to invest in that particular area? Is that a 

factor when businesses look at investing and coming to create 

opportunity in the province of Saskatchewan? What does he 

think, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And to the 

question from the hon. member, I’d be curious to know if that 

debt increased under their watch. I’m sure it did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from 2001 to 2007 our province lost more than 

35,000 people to net out-migration. We now have a population 

that is growing and diverse, an economy that is the envy of the 

nation, and a business community that is most optimistic in 

Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — In the last year alone, Saskatchewan’s 

population has grown to an all-time high of 1,089,807 people. 

Unemployment rate has dropped to the lowest in Canada, and 

the province’s average weekly earnings have continued to rise 

to record levels, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these are just the 

few of the indications of a growing economy. 

 

There are thousands of workers in Saskatchewan that are in the 

upstream oil and gas sector and with the Keystone XL will only 

increase the benefits to our province. Can the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana tell us if she has advocated for the Keystone 

XL with their federal leader, Thomas Mulcair? And if not, why 

not? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’ve had the pleasure of speaking with the federal NDP critic 

for Energy, And we’ve had a team set up across Canada; we’re 

in constant contact with the federal party on these issues. And 

we certainly agree that this government’s done nothing in terms 

of looking at value-added for jobs that are being shipped down 

those pipes and also shipping it away from Canada when it 

could be used through a trans-Canada pipeline project. So we 

don’t see any support from this government on that area. 

 

What we should see from this government is more initiatives 

for people that are wanting to get into small businesses. And 

that’s the topic that’s at discussion today, is entrepreneurial 

support for smaller businesses. And that’s where this 

government should pay attention and not worry so much about 

things that are being well looked after. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, we all agree that entrepreneurs are a very important part 

of our economy, and we should do all we can to support them 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3307 

in all areas of making sure our economy goes forward. And one 

important part of that is safety. Last week we had at least four 

deaths of owner-operators of businesses that were part of the 60 

deaths. 

 

To the member from Nipawin: exactly how much more work is 

left to reach the Mission: Zero for everyone, including 

entrepreneurs? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government, 

this government is working hard on doing this, as the Premier 

well alluded to last week. Mr. Speaker, this government is 

working hard to also get more jobs within Saskatchewan, to 

move Saskatchewan forward, supporting our entrepreneurs and 

moving this province in a forward manner — that’s where our 

growth 2020 comes in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we won’t take anything from the NDP. When they 

shipped everybody out of this province, including probably a 

bunch of their own kids left this province because . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I was reminded, I was 

reminded by some of my other members that yes, a person, 

Eldon Lautermilch, said, well when more leave, there will be 

more left . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the 

member from Carrot River would relate to the cut of his 

government to the film employment tax credit and the film 

industry in Saskatchewan — driving away investment, driving 

away jobs, driving away entrepreneurs. Does he support that 

wrong-headed decision, or would he have chosen a different 

approach of admitting a mistake and working to rebuild that 

important film industry? That question is to the member from 

Carrot River. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll tell 

you what, this government supports all the jobs within this 

province. We especially, especially support jobs where we 

have, like the XL pipeline where we have, contrary to the 

member from Nutana who said, who said that we wouldn’t get 

any jobs out of it, we have a pile of jobs, Mr. Speaker, going 

through the oil industry. That’s people that supply the small oil 

rigs, people that supply stuff to the trucking companies. We’re 

fixing up the highways for them also, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 3 — Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise today and introduce a motion, and I’ll be 

reading the motion at the end of my remarks. But really what it 

is is what we’re calling for the minister to take some time, take 

some time and listen to the advisory committee on Bill 85 that 

says, what is the rush? What is the rush? Why are we in such a 

panic to get Bill 85 done? 

 

And I do think it’s an interesting day, I do think it’s an 

interesting day in that we have seen some really good progress, 

particularly around the asbestos file. And I do want to recognize 

the contributions of the ministers, the members of the Human 

Services Committee, and all the members of this legislature in 

moving that forward. You know, when we get fired up and we 

say we won’t take advice from either side, but we do actually 

listen to each other and we do think about common sense 

solutions. 

 

And I want to say that was a really good piece of work, and it’s 

really made possible by the co-operation of this House, and it 

was really a common sense thing to do. So I do want to thank 

all members, and particularly the government side, because it is 

something when we break out of our old habits that we all have 

and say what’s the best thing for people of Saskatchewan? 

 

And so in that spirit, I do think that we should do more along 

that way if possible. And in that spirit, I’m thinking that in 

terms of Bill 85, which is a consolidation of some 12 bills, 

we’re not disputing the fact that the government has the right 

and the mandate to do this kind of thing. We’re just saying, 

let’s take the time to get it right. Let’s make sure that people 

have the confidence that they will be protected. And not only 

from the employees’ side, and clearly we are worried because 

many of us and there are many people out in the public who 

thinks that the balance of power has shifted dramatically in 

favour of one side of the equation. 

 

And what we want to see, we want to make sure the balance of 

power is, there is a balance between the employee and the 

employer, respecting the rights of the employer, the 

entrepreneur to be able to make a profit, to be able to do the 

kind of work that they feel that drives them forward. And that’s 

really important that we recognize that and we honour that, but 

at the same time that we recognize the other side of the 

equation that we will not tolerate exploitation, that people 

should be paid a fair wage, and that safety is paramount, that 

we want to make sure that that is respected. So that’s the 

balance that we want to see happen. 

 

And as societies mature and evolve we see that balance moving 

forward, neither side getting an advantage, but actually that 

they both can do much better in their own spheres. And in some 

ways sometimes those spheres overlap, and that’s a good thing 

too. But we would like to see entrepreneurs, owners, and the 

Crowns flourish as much as possible that they can make a 

return on their investment, but so can workers have better 

wages, more secure tenure, and more safety in their workplace. 

 

So we move this forward and it’s very important that we 

recognize . . . And we’ve just been debating about the role of 

entrepreneurs and how well they’ve been doing in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s important that we think about that. 

But we know that a lot of what’s happened in Saskatchewan 

over the last several years has been in a climate of labour laws 

that are in existence right now. And if we mess with that, if we 



3308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

take those certainties away, then we might be causing, might be 

causing problems. 

 

And one of the things that people look for in investments is 

some predictability, what will happen in the area that you’re 

going to invest. Is it predictable? What will happen with the 

elections?  

 

In Canada we are very fortunate that we have a predictable 

democracy and we can know what happens with that. We have 

an ability to change parties without huge ramifications, 

generally speaking. Some of us will say that there are 

significant changes, but when you see around the world 

sometimes with the elections, you wonder why people would 

invest in that country. And in Saskatchewan it’s relatively 

stable, relatively predictable, and that’s really important. And 

so we think that it’s important to move forward with this in a 

way where all sides understand what’s happening, what’s at 

stake, and how can we do the best that we could possibly do. 

 

Now I do want to . . . And you know, I have talked about this 

before, so in many ways somebody will say, it sounds like the 

same speech and is it going to be the same speech? It won’t be 

the same speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there’s two 

areas that I do want to talk about. I want to talk about 

workplace safety, and I will get into that in a minute because 

particularly over the release of the WCB [Workers’ 

Compensation Board] report last week, it really was a wake-up 

call and we have a real crisis when it comes to workplace 

safety. And we have a real opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

make a real difference when it comes to making Saskatchewan 

a place where workers want to come because they feel that it’s 

safe, but as well, employers want to be because the regulations 

are fair, but secure and rigorous. 

 

[12:30] 

 

So they know that it’s not an unlevel playing field between 

companies, that we all have to be . . . We’re all being inspected. 

We all know what the rules are. And that’s really important, 

because some employers feel that others get an unfair 

advantage because they are taking advantage of the regulations, 

not following them. And that’s just not on. So I want to talk a 

little bit about that in a few minutes. 

 

I also want to talk about the freedom of information or 

Saskatchewan information Privacy Commissioner, his response 

to and concerns around Bill 85, and how he cautions us to move 

or be more reflective on the process and how we can improve 

the bill. And again no one is saying, you can’t do it; don’t do it 

— just saying, take the time to do it right. Do it right, because 

the stakes are way too high. And we’re talking about 

livelihoods and you’re talking about safety, and that’s an issue. 

 

But my motion talks about how the minister is failing to take 

the advice of the members of the Minister of Labour’s advisory 

committee. And I think that’s unfortunate because when we do 

set up advisory committees and they give us advice, we have 

the choice to either follow it or not to follow it. But these folks 

that belong to the minister’s advisory committee feel very 

strongly, and to the point that they issued a press release. 

They’ve had media on it. And it’s not just a low-key suggestion 

that he go slower, but that they really are deeply worried about 

the ramifications of rushing this forward too fast. 

 

And so I would like to, though, read into the record and reflect 

on some of the parts that Hugh Wagner . . . He’s on the 

minister’s advisory committee, but also is from the Grain 

Services Union, and he wrote a commentary in the Leader-Post 

just over a month ago, March 6th, 2013. And I’m going to read 

big parts of it because I do think it’s important to have on the 

record and for us to be thinking about. Because as we’re 

finishing up the bills and we’re moving into committee now in 

the House, that it’s really time for us to think, is there really a 

necessity? Is there really a necessity for us to move as quickly 

on this as we need to? 

 

And we do see the government saying, you know, we need 

more time. The lobbyist registry is a perfect example of where 

the minister said, for us to get this right we need to take more 

time. There you go. That seems like a straightforward, 

reasonable thing — get it right. Because, you know, the 

unfortunate thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we do not want to see 

a repeat of history. And we would hope the government would 

learn from history, where we’ve seen the Central Services bill 

end up in court. And now it’s been some five years of that in 

development. 

 

And ironically for Bill 85, there’s a placeholder for essential 

services. But I think it’s much more logical, much more 

common sense to invest in the front end, get it right, and not be 

thinking about how we’re going to end up in court when this is 

all said and done. If we can keep it out of court as much as 

possible, that’s the best thing. That’s the best thing. And so if 

we can do that, let’s aim for that, because . . . And people have 

taken, and I have said, literally hundreds of hours of due 

diligence trying to understand this bill, all the ramifications. 

 

And we still have people asking significant questions about, 

what does it mean? And it’s more than we agree or we disagree. 

It’s what do you mean, and the big questions around the idea of 

what’s going to happen in regulations. Are regulations going to 

be just transferred over? How is the bill going to come into 

force? Is it going to be section by section, part by part? We 

have some real concerns about that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Hugh Wagner writes, and the title of 

the commentary is “New Saskatchewan labour law: why the 

rush?” And he starts out by saying: 

 

As labour leaders, business leaders and government we 

have a responsibility to work together to maintain a stable, 

balanced and fair work environment for all people in 

Saskatchewan. We have been charged to preserve the 

rights and freedoms of choice we all enjoy resulting from 

the solid foundation of labour legislation we have built 

together over the past 70 years. 

 

And so he’s talking about, all political stripes have all added 

something or taken away something from the evolution of our 

labour law. And interestingly, and I did talk about this about a 

week ago, about the idea of Walter Scott and what his 

contribution to labour law was, and it was pretty amazing. He 

was pretty committed to the idea that we had to make sure we 

paid a fair wage in Saskatchewan and we had to protect 

vulnerable workers. And that was at a time when we were 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3309 

building the building we’re in today. It’s 100 years . . . It was 

100 years old; we celebrated that last year. But it was the major 

project at the time here in Saskatchewan, and we had to have 

safe and fair working environments. 

 

Now the project before that was the CPR [Canadian Pacific 

Railway] and that brought the railroad unions into 

Saskatchewan in the local labour council. But Walter Scott, as a 

Premier, saw his responsibility in terms of labour law as a 

significant one. And he thought and he believed that unions 

could play a significant . . . or organized labour play a 

significant part in the development of Saskatchewan as we 

know. So it’s very interesting when we’ve talked about how 

labour law has developed. 

 

We challenge ourselves to be thorough in our review of any 

major legislative challenges so we may reduce the risk of 

unexpected or unintended outcomes that could harm the 

livelihoods of people we serve in the community we seek to 

enhance. And we are all . . . I mean, I just want to stop there 

and just reflect on that for a minute, because we are all deeply, 

deeply committed to the growth and prosperity of this province. 

There’s absolutely no question about that. We are all deeply 

committed to that. And I think that that sometimes is the 

problem, is how do we articulate that? So we need to take the 

time to get that right. 

 

But Mr. Wagner goes on and says: 

 

Saskatchewan stands at the precipice of labour instability 

with the introduction of a sweeping and rushed overhaul 

of the province’s labour laws in Bill 85 — the new 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

And he talks about that the history of that, the forced . . . The 

minister talked of 14 pieces of legislation, 15 pieces of 

legislation being rolled into one. But actually, only 12 made 

that cut into that and what that all means. And then he talks 

about: 

 

An advisory committee, comprising both business and 

organized labour representatives, was established by 

Labour Relations Minister Don Morgan to provide input 

on the changes being contemplated. What may come as a 

surprise to many was that this committee reached relative 

consensus on most issues relating to the changes. It is 

therefore even more surprising this consensus is not 

reflected in Bill 85. 

 

It raises a question: what is driving the government’s rushed 

efforts to pass Bill 85 in the spring sitting of the legislature? 

There’s always a danger that far-reaching legislative changes, 

when driven by undue haste, can create unplanned 

consequences, as seems to be the case in this instance. 

 

What is of equal concern is if the people of Saskatchewan 

understand how these changes will impact them, their 

families and their businesses. 

 

For individual workers, the balance of current legislation 

will shift dramatically in favour of employers. 

 

So that’s the concern, the shift of power. Now, the minister may 

not see it that way. He may see it as the balance. But we’re 

saying, we don’t understand that. We don’t see that. Take the 

time to demonstrate. Take the time to illustrate that, because if 

you don’t, then the consequences will be instability in the 

workplace, and it could end up in court. And so we have some 

real concerns about it. 

 

And, you know, and we do see some of the basic changes, 

whether it’s the end of the eight-hour day to the 10-hour day, or 

whether it’s minimum wage or really means . . . What’s going 

to happen with that? We have not seen the regulations that the 

minister said would be forthcoming in terms of indexing it to 

the cost of living. All these are questions that we have, but we 

need to understand this better. And I think the minister should 

take the time to make sure that we’re all under the same 

understanding. 

 

He goes on and he writes: 

 

Under Bill 85, employers will have the discretionary 

power to limit whether employees are able to access the 

traditional two consecutive days off in a work week. 

Scheduled lunch and rest breaks may no longer be the 

common standard as employers will be able to unilaterally 

deem breaks to be unreasonable, and eight-hour work days 

could potentially be extended to 10 hours, raising the 

overtime threshold without employee consent. This 

amounts to an unwarranted erosion of individual rights in 

the workplace. 

 

For unions, businesses and government alike, costs could 

soar as all are forced into negotiating and administering 

multiple contracts as a result of changes to employee and 

supervisor definitions. The same would apply for health 

care, provincial institutions and the civil service, with 

taxpayers footing the bill. 

 

There are clearly many unknowns and much work still to 

be done to get Bill 85 to a place where it works for 

everyone. 

 

And I think that’s really key. That’s really key. We want it to 

work for everyone. It’s really important that at the end of the 

day that everybody can say, hey, this makes sense. It seems to 

work. It’s one big code. I still have some questions about that, 

because in the day of technology, it’s pretty easy to put things 

together. That’s not such a necessity. And we see, we see 

actually within the bill, there’s at least four different definitions 

of employee and a couple of different definitions of employer. 

And this kind of instability, when you thought this was going to 

be much easier to understand but yet you have multiple 

definitions of a concept in one bill, that adds, that adds 

instability, I believe. 

 

Mr. Wagner goes on, saying: 

 

We are all part of the “Saskatchewan advantage” and the 

biggest economic boom in our province’s history. We 

have the lowest unemployment rate in the country and 

more people are moving to our province than ever before. 

 

All of this has been . . . [done] under our current labour 

legislation — there clearly is no crisis requiring a hasty 



3310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

fix. 

 

He goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Modernization of laws is a good thing, but it requires 

thoughtful and inclusive review and that will take time. 

There is no harm in taking time, but there is a worrying 

potential for real damage if passage of this . . . legislation 

is rushed. 

 

And that is what Hugh Wagner, general secretary of the Grain 

Services Union, writes. And I think there’s a lot of wisdom in 

that column. I think it’s one that we have raised a lot of 

concerns about where we see the government in many times 

saying we want to take some time and get it right, and it’s 

demonstrated that on several issues. In fact we even talked 

about bullying and we talked about putting information about 

gay-straight alliances up on websites. And they say, can’t do 

that right away, because we want to get it right. 

 

We think that’s relatively straightforward, but we don’t know 

what the timeline is on that piece. But we know the timeline on 

this piece. And we don’t know, as I said earlier, we don’t know 

how it’s going to come into force because we are anxious to get 

the bill passed, but what does it mean in terms of regulations? 

When will it come into force? So we have some real, real 

concerns. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the piece that’s . . . There’s two I said. But 

one piece I really do want to speak about is the idea around 

what are our priorities in Saskatchewan workplaces. And I 

believe the number one workplace issue today is workplace 

safety. And it was only reinforced unfortunately, tragically, by 

the numbers that WCB released last week. And if you add in 

the farm workplace deaths, it would actually be up to 75 — I 

think there were about 15 deaths. 

 

And so this is really clearly becoming a crisis. And you know, 

the minister quoted me in my agreement with him that this 

needs to be a priority, and it should be. It should be the priority 

for this House and for this government. 

 

If it was to make one commitment, one contribution to 

Saskatchewan workplaces that I believe is important, it’s to 

tackle the issue around workplace safety. It was a wake-up call, 

it really, truly was a wake-up call last week when we were all 

shocked by the numbers from WCB. And we could see that the 

folks from WCB even were horrified by the information 

because they just, they think they’re doing the right thing. And I 

think in many ways they are, but it’s something that really 

needs to take full attention of this government and not be 

distracted by Bill 85 in its rush to get it done, you know. And I 

think this is really important. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And I think that, and I want to quote, and we often quote 

Murray Mandryk, but his column from Wednesday, April 2013. 

And he talks about “Job safety should bridge labour divide.” 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we saw that today with 

the asbestos registry. And last night in committee we heard it 

over and over again, that that legislation will save lives. Simply 

it will save lives. And so we need to do more of that. 

And we’d be very interested on this side to talk more about that 

issue. That’s the kind of thing that we need to see happen. But 

Murray Mandryk says, and I quote: 

 

Lost in the politically charged debate over Saskatchewan 

labour law, where battle lines are always drawn between 

union and non-union, is the reality that labour laws 

impacts us in ways that go well beyond just our 

workplaces. 

 

And he talks about how we have to really tackle the issues 

around that really affect us and our families. And actually 

interestingly last night, some folks talked about how asbestos 

not only affects the person who’s got it, who is going to pass 

away from the illnesses related to asbestos, but also their 

families, their children, their spouses. But he goes on to say: 

 

But if there is one labour issue that should bridge the 

interests of both workers and employers, it is clearly 

workplace safety. This takes us to Tuesday’s release of the 

2012 Workers’ Compensation Board (WCB) annual 

report, which unveiled an alarming 60 job-related deaths 

in 2012 — the worst fatality rate in 30 years. 

 

“Every category that the WCB maintains for the cause of 

death and every age group saw an increase in the number 

of fatalities compared with 2011,” the WCB reported in its 

2012 summation that compares last year’s 60 deaths with 

36, 31, 32, 44 and 36 deaths from 2007 to 2011 . . .  

 

And it talks about 14 construction deaths and 43 fatalities 

resulting from injuries in 2012 and the increased cancer deaths 

from past exposure to asbestos. 

 

And interestingly, just even as we were debating entrepreneurs, 

at least four that I could tell from the list were owners of the 

business in which they died. So this is not just a remote thing, 

and it’s not just in Saskatoon or Regina or Moose Jaw or Prince 

Albert. It’s right across this province, right across this province. 

 

So it’s an issue that we have known about and that we have 

tackled with many initiatives, but it needs even more, more 

attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So clearly we think this is the 

time to get it right. 

 

Now we are talking about another bill in front of us, the 

Workers’ Compensation Board bill, and we need to talk about 

that. What are the implications of that? And there’s lots of 

interesting questions we’ll have about that in committee. So 

there’s lots of work to be done in the area of labour. 

 

And the other one that we need to talk about was temporary 

foreign workers, and there is a bill before the House on that 

issue. And clearly we’ve seen the implications of what can go 

horribly wrong if we don’t have the legislative laws in place to 

deal with that issue. We can look at the RBC [Royal Bank of 

Canada] fiasco that happened just a couple of weeks ago, when 

that’s not done well. So, Mr. Speaker, I just think that we’ve 

got to take a good, long look at that issue. 

 

Lori Johb. I want to read the letter that Lori Johb wrote on April 

16th, or April 13th I believe it was. And she writes: 

 



April 18, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3311 

I find it extremely alarming that in 2012, Saskatchewan 

recorded its largest number of workplace fatalities in more 

than 30 years. Over the past couple of years, it actually 

seemed like we were making positive progress in the area 

of occupational health and safety. 

 

In 2012, in fact, considerable increases were made to the 

fines that are levied for failure to comply with safety 

legislation. Last week, however, in response to the 

devastating number of workplace deaths last year, the 

minister of workplace safety boasted about a new omnibus 

. . . 85, that will rewrite labour legislation in our province. 

The minister claimed that Bill 85 will somehow address 

the dramatic increase in workplace deaths that we saw in 

2012. 

 

She writes: 

 

Make no mistake, the government’s omnibus Bill . . . will 

do absolutely nothing to improve safety for working 

people in Saskatchewan. I would think that something as 

important as keeping workers safe and healthy would be a 

priority for the Saskatchewan Party government, 

especially when we have a larger number of people 

working in the province than ever before, but the sole 

purpose of Bill 85 is to reduce labour standards and to 

unfairly side with employers over working people. 

 

To try and suggest that the omnibus bill will somehow 

protect working people, especially those who are in 

danger of losing their lives, is absolutely wrong and it is 

extremely unfortunate that the minister tried to make such 

a claim. 

 

Lori Johb. Lori Johb is Chair of the Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour’s occupational health and safety committee. 

 

So clearly we have significant differences of opinions here and 

significant different opinions about what really is happening in 

terms of occupational health and safety. And so I think the onus 

on us as legislators is to get it right, to get it right. Take some 

time and deal with these concerns that people like Lori is 

talking about or rise up to the challenge that columnists such as 

Murray Mandryk is saying. Let’s get it right. This is one issue 

we can all agree really needs attention. 

 

We have more workers than ever working in this province. And 

when we see the numbers that came out from WCB last week, it 

is the time, the time to get it right. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

think that it would be just a really important signal to labour, 

and it was a great one today in Bill 604, Howard’s law, that we 

do actually value people’s workplaces and that they should be 

safe, that we do take the time to get it right. 

 

Now the other issue I wanted to take just a couple of minutes 

before we finish up for the week, I want to take a minute and 

reflect on the letter that Mr. Gary Dickson, the Saskatchewan 

Information Privacy Commissioner, wrote to the minister on 

March 1, 2013 in regards to Bill 85, the employment Act. And I 

always value his comments because they are very thoughtful 

and he takes a look at it from how do we serve the people of 

Saskatchewan in the best way. 

 

So he’s talking about privacy, and again I think this is really 

important. And I’ll read some of his comments into the record 

because I think that, I hope that, and I do know that the other 

side does actually read through this. And I hope that the 

minister does take some time to take a look at his letter again, 

take a look at Mr. Dickson’s letter and say, are we meeting the 

kind of standard we should be having in Saskatchewan in this 

day and age? He talks about some general comments, and I 

quote: 

 

Before dealing with the provisions in the Bill, I might 

offer some general comments. I recognize some of the 

elements of the Bill are not new and appeared in earlier 

iterations of Saskatchewan labour legislation. 

 

But he talks about: 

 

. . . since the 2003 proclamation of HIPA and the adoption 

by the Saskatchewan Government of the Overarching 

Personal Information Privacy Framework for Executive 

Government, and increased awareness about privacy rights 

of the individual in the information age, a number of those 

older elements may no longer be appropriate or at the very 

least . . . require modification to align with public 

expectations and current privacy legislation. 

 

So he is making a case, and it fits quite well into what the 

government is saying — time to modernize. He’s saying, let’s 

take a look. One of his primary concerns is around no privacy 

regulation on private sector employee information. He says, and 

I quote: 

 

A further observation is that Saskatchewan has still not 

made any move to align our privacy regime for employees 

of the private sector with the modern privacy laws utilized 

by our partners in the New West Partnership [particularly] 

(British Columbia and Alberta). Those privacy laws, the 

Personal Information Protection Act (PIPA), in both 

provinces are focused on small and medium-sized 

businesses . . . [Some] private businesses in Saskatchewan 

are still subject to the . . . federal Personal Information 

Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) they 

are disadvantaged relative to businesses in British 

Columbia and . . . [BC] that have much clearer and 

simpler rules for the private sector. 

 

So again there is an example of privacy issues that we need to 

take a look at, to modernize. He talks about asymmetrical 

privacy protection in Saskatchewan. He talks about: 

 

As a general observation, the privacy rules that apply to 

. . . [privacy] information (PI) and personal health 

information (PHI) of employees of government 

institutions and local authorities may be of limited benefit 

overall if the private sector organizations, which will be 

collecting, using and disclosing . . . [the privacy 

information] and PHI of their employees, are for the most 

part unregulated. 

 

So they have some real differences there, and that’s really 

important that they get them on the same page. He raises a 

concern about no whistleblower protection for FOIP [The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act], 



3312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2013 

LAFOIP [The Local Authority Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act], and HIPA [The Health Information 

Protection Act], that there’s no protection for those people. And 

that really is an issue because: 

 

The Bill fails to address the question of protection for 

employees who, in good faith, alert our oversight office to 

actions by government institutions or local authorities that 

violate FOIP, LA FOIP or HIPA. 

 

So it’s really important that you get that. So he talks about Bill 

85 as both too little and too much. And so I think it’s important 

that we get that balance, the balancing is right. 

 

So I think this is really, really important. And he talks about the 

fact that sometimes . . . He says quite clearly, “The employer is 

not entitled to specific diagnosis of illness but is entitled to a 

medical certificate confirming disability and the expected date 

of return . . .” So an employer cannot require a medical 

certificate for suspicious absences. 

 

So he really goes into a lot of detail. And I see that my time is 

running out, but we’ve not had a really good answer in terms of 

privacy, and I think that this is very important. 

 

I just also want to read this one last quote, but I will be asking a 

lot of questions in committee going through this letter in quite 

some detail actually. He says: 

 

In my respectful submission, absent a compelling business 

interest or a suspicious circumstance that would warrant 

an inquiry into the diagnosis of the illness or disability . . . 

there should only be the need for a medical certificate that 

would verify the absence is for appropriate cause. 

 

So he says there’s a balance in there. And this is what we’re . . . 

All of it is about balance, isn’t it? The employer is only entitled 

to know just what he needs to know or what she needs to know 

— was it reasonable for the person to be gone? — and not to 

get into the details of the illness. That’s a privacy issue. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s really, really important that we deal 

with people who have legitimate questions like this. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see that if we want to develop the 

very best legislation that we possibly can that will govern this 

province for decades to come . . . And we really hope that all 

legislation that we do in this Chamber is both — has very little 

unintended consequences but can stand the test of time and can 

stand challenges in court. And I don’t see that with this piece of 

legislation. There’s too many questions, and so we have a lot of 

worries and concerns about this bill. 

 

We do not challenge government in its authority of having a 

mandate to take a look at labour. In fact we welcome it, and in 

fact it looks like for example the Privacy Commissioner very 

much welcomes that as well. But we need to deal with this. So 

to that end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to listen to the 

advice of members of the Minister of Labour’s advisory 

committee and delay the passage of Bill No. 85. 

 

I do so move. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to listen to the 

advice of members of the Minister of Labour’s advisory 

committee and delay the passage of Bill No. 85. 

 

It now being past the hour of adjournment, this House stands 

adjourned until 1:30 p.m. on Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3283 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3283 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3283, 3284 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3283 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3284 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3284 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3284, 3285 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3284 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3286 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Local Band Performs at JunoFest 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 

 Juno Week 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3287 

 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3287 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3287 

 Agricultural Market Development Program 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3288 

 20th Annual Parkinson’s Curling Classic 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3288 

 Congratulations to Melfort Collegiate Cheer Team 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3288 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Long-Term Care and Home Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3288 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3288 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3289 

 Support for Children in Care 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3290 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3290 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3291 

 Monitoring Forests for Fires 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3291 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3291 

 Funding for Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3292 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3292 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3293 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3293 

 



 

 Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3294 

 Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3294 

 Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Howard’s Law) Amendment Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3295 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3296 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Importance of Entrepreneurs to Saskatchewan 

  Cox ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3296, 3305 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 3298, 3305 

  Doke ............................................................................................................................................................................... 3300, 3306 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3301, 3306 

  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3303, 3307 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3304, 3306 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3306 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3306 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3306 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 3 — Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3307 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


