




















































Hansard: November 26, 2013


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 56 NO. 19A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2013, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4217 

 November 26, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to make 

an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s really only one thing 

better than having a Grey Cup champion down here, and that’s 

having Grey Cup champions here and up in the gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always an exciting time here at the legislature 

when we are paid a visit by a Governor General, and the current 

Governor General, David Johnston, is doing a great job in 

leadership for our country. But I think even he would 

understand that he may not be our favourite Governor General, 

Mr. Speaker. Our favourite Governor General is Albert Henry 

George Grey, the 4th Earl of Grey who gave Canadian football 

the Grey Cup. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re particularly pleased to 

be able to welcome the Grey Cup and its bearers here to the 

Legislative Assembly today. They are all seated in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This building is now 101 years old, as we all know. As fate 

would have it, the building is now being featured prominently 

as part of the festivities of the 101st Grey Cup. Mr. Speaker, to 

make way for this event, I want to congratulate all sides of the 

House who very presciently, last year in the 100th anniversary 

— and you, Mr. Speaker, had a role in this — decided that the 

long-standing tradition of the House, of this House, for red 

carpet would be changed to green carpet this year, Mr. Speaker. 

This has made complete sense, especially in the wake of the 

events of the last 48 hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Riders are truly important to the province in a 

way that’s hard to describe to someone who’s not from here. 

It’s true for rural Saskatchewan. It’s true for urban 

Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. We have amazing 

superstitions and traditions that date back through the years and 

right now, Mr. Speaker, this is the absolute best time in the 

history, in the life of this storied franchise. We have now been 

to I guess four Grey Cups since 2007. We’ve won two of those 

Grey Cups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we make national news and international news. 

Tom Hanks shows up at our football games now, Mr. Speaker. 

As I said outside, you know, it was interesting, we as a Rider 

nation, we all saw Tom Hanks in the Green Mile and he was 

here to see us all on the Green Mile. Mr. Speaker, we had Chris 

Berman talking about the Saskatchewan Roughriders on the 

ESPN morning show yesterday and then again . . . well two 

days ago, and then again yesterday on Monday Night Football. 

 

And so we’re grateful that they play great football. We’re 

grateful that they’re champions. But we’re even happier that 

they’re examples for the province, provide leadership, and they 

really bring Saskatchewan together like no other institution I 

can think of, and for that we’re very grateful. 

 

So if I miss a few I apologize but, Mr. Speaker, bear with me in 

introducing, first of all, the Grey Cup. Everyone can recognize 

that. It’s being held by Chris Getzlaf, no. 89, and Geroy Simon, 

no. 81. So the top Canadian in the Grey Cup and Geroy Simon 

who was in three other Grey Cups prior to Sunday I think, but 

caught his first, well his first touchdown pass and his second 

Grey Cup touchdown pass. And he did it in green and white. 

 

And he’s with the best executive CEO [chief executive officer] 

in the CFL [Canadian Football League]. Right beside Geroy is 

our very own Jim Hopson. Not too long ago, the Deputy 

Premier reminds me, that he was director of education for the 

Sturgis . . . among other places, but in Sturgis, Saskatchewan 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, someone who, together with his assistant general 

manager, general managers put together this team and made 

some very, very bold off-season moves to make this very 

historic and really almost picture-book finish happen is our 

general manager, Brendan Taman. And he is seated . . . But 

seated beside him is the assistant general manager for the 

Riders and a good friend of the member for Regina Dewdney 

and an outstanding offensive lineman in his own day and an ’07 

Grey Cup champion, Jeremy O’Day. 

 

And I’m going to miss some of the names, and I apologize. But 

people wondered last week, who is going to cover Andy 

Fantuz? We all knew Weldon Brown’s going to cover Andy 

Fantuz. And Twila Brown, Weldon’s wife, is here up from 

Houston, Texas, so we want to say hello. As well as the team 

chaplain, a great guy well known in Regina, Rod Donison is 

there. Give us a wave, Rod. And no. 70, Steve Mazurak, is over 

there, an institution with the Riders. 

 

So we just want to welcome you. You’re representative of the 

team. A lot of them had to leave. We’re grateful you could be 

here. Again, thanks for the example you set. Thanks for 

bringing this province together in ways that are really hard to 

describe. And welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition, it is a true pleasure to join in in the welcome and the 

words of congratulation that the Premier has already stated. 

 

In the Premier’s remarks, he talked about some of the traditions 

and he talked about the green carpet. And, Mr. Speaker, you 

will know we also have fairly strict rules about props in the 

Assembly. And I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for being lenient in 

this case because not one of us on the floor or one of us in the 

province would call the Grey Cup a prop. And it brings a smile 



4218 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

to all of our faces to see it here in the Assembly today. 

 

I want to extend a huge thanks to the leadership, the 

management, the coaches, the players really for making dreams 

come true for so many Saskatchewan people. 

 

And when it comes to Rider nation, when it comes to the 

Riders, it really is something, Mr. Speaker, that brings us all 

together. It transcends some of the differences we may have 

from time to time in politics. It transcends some of the 

geographical differences in our province, transcends some of 

the age differences that we might have. 

 

Saskatchewan is thrilled with the Grey Cup and so happy to see 

it here today. I want to say thank you for the roles that you have 

played in making this happen. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 

to once again welcome the Grey Cup and welcome the entire 

Rider contingent who are here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just if I may as a part of 

introduction of guests, to say this. Coming up next month is the 

dispersal draft. And just because dispersal drafts work this way, 

it means we’ll say, potentially say goodbye to some 

Saskatchewan Roughriders we love who will join the 

RedBlacks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we might want to consider, by 

resolution of this House, perhaps, even making a statement to 

the country: Saskatchewan’s a have province; we give every 

day to Ottawa. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we should deserve 

special dispensation to not send them any players, to keep them 

all right here in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — I ask leave for an extended introduction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has requested leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, the reason I 

ask extended leave today because there is a very special group 

of grade 10 students from the Yorkton Regional High School 

today. They’re seated in the west gallery. There’s 41 of them. 

 

Their teacher, Perry Ostapowich, is pretty much a very 

recognizable fixture in this Assembly. I think he probably 

brings more students to this Assembly than any teacher 

probably in history. With him is his intern, Laura 

Sveinbjornson, as well as educational assistant Kaylee Duncan. 

And their driver, Pat Rawlick, I know very well. I don’t see him 

up there. He’s pretty hard to miss. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason I ask extended introduction is because 

Mr. Ostapowich is very good at engaging the students. In fact 

he sort of started a bit of a game here awhile back where if they 

contact the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], they 

might get a shout-out in the Assembly. And it’s a lot of fun but 

also, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a very good example that he 

teaches, where people in public office can be very 

approachable. And they should be very approachable. 

 

And because of that, I think 3:30 this morning I was answering 

emails. Yes, I’ll introduce you. There’s quite a few — a few on 

Twitter, Facebook, and some others. And it’s just something 

that Perry has done over the years that really engages these 

students in not only . . . Their knowledge of this Assembly is 

second to none I think and the ongoing operation of this House, 

but also again the students being able to engage with their local 

MLA, myself. And I know he’s done the same thing in the past 

with his former MLA, the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

So a few shout-outs I want to give out is Marisa Desmarais — 

just give us a wave when I mention your name — Jillian Just, 

Zackary Fry, Meagan Flunder, Kelby Brinley, Addison Wiebe, 

Emma Teneycke, Giac Deswiage. Two that actually asked the 

Premier to give them a shout-out — I saw he was twittering 

with them — but Wyatt Strutynski, Courtney Matechuk. And 

two very special people to me; they’re actually family 

members. Luke Walters is my nephew so to speak, and my 

nephew Turner . . . Sorry, not Turner. Turner’s not here. Brodie 

Ottenbreit. He refers to me as his favourite Uncle Greg. One 

point I’d like to make . . . I love him. 

 

Since 2010, November 30, 2010, Mr. Ostapowich has brought 

247 students to meet me here. This is his 22nd group since he’s 

been a teacher, well over 700 students to this Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And one point I’d like to make before I 

do take my seat is that the member from Dewdney, my seatmate 

here, was quite upset when he heard who was coming because 

apparently Mr. Ostapowich coached the minor football team 

that beat my seatmate’s team from Regina. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to recognize these 

students and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Request leave for extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has 

requested leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First off before 

I get over to some very, very special guests here today, I just 

want to quickly join with the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition and welcome our contingent that’s here today. As a 

kid born and raised in Regina and cheering for the team my 

whole life, like so many others in this province, just can’t 

simply can’t express what this means to Rider nation to win one 

on home turf and in Taylor Field on Mosaic Stadium, and 

you’ve done us all so proud. So thank you, President Hopson, 

General Manager Taman, Mr. Getzlaf, Mr. Simon. Thank you 

so very much, Jeremy O’Day, Steve Mazurak, the whole team. 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4219 

We really appreciate what you bring to our province. 

 

And I’d like to now focus some attention to some very, very 

special guests that are with us up here in the east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. So to you and through you, it’s my pleasure to 

welcome a contingent of a campaign here in Regina, A Million 

Acts of Friendship. Now this campaign in fact is going 

nationwide and across our province, but it started right here in 

Regina. A group of leaders sit in our Assembly that represent 

teachers, parents, and students here in Regina, and I’d like to 

introduce just a few of them who I’ll be sharing a little bit more 

about them here in the Assembly here today. 

 

But I’d like to recognize Janice Taylor. If you could give us a 

wave there, Janice. She’s the founder and CEO of Just Be 

Friends. She’s an impressive entrepreneur from Regina. She in 

fact has travelled the world with Oprah and has been recognized 

for her work. And she’s focused in a big way on making a 

difference in the community with A Million Acts of Friendship. 

And it’s a pleasure to have Janice here today. 

 

I’d like to also welcome Ginger Braaten here today. She’s a 

program director with A Million Acts of Friendship. But she’s 

probably most importantly a local mom to Ruth M. Buck and a 

school community council member for a long time and took a 

lead role in initiating the activities and the piloting of A Million 

Acts of Friendship over at Ruth M. Buck, which has now 

spawned the next stages of this program. 

 

There’s some very special guests from my constituency seated 

here today, and that would be teacher Tracy Muchowski and 

eight student leaders — if you can give us wave — from Ruth 

M. Buck School, one of the pilot schools. Give us a wave there. 

And they’re wearing the Just Be Me shirts with I think on the 

back it says, No More Labels. 

 

And there’s another group of 28 grade 5 and 7 students — give 

us a wave — from École Wilfrid Walker, along with grade 7 

and 8 student leaders from that school as well, and their teacher, 

Emma Champ. And these students, these teachers, Janice and 

Ginger represent leaders from within our province who are 

building a campaign that’s certainly important to us all. So I ask 

all members of this Assembly to welcome these leaders to their 

Assembly. 

 

[13:45] 

 

While still on my feet — excuse me, Mr. Speaker — it’s my 

pleasure to welcome my sister, Chantel LaHaye, to the 

Assembly here today. And she’s here with some very special 

guests. Chantel is a nurse here in Regina, and her husband 

always helps me with building projects, so I appreciate that as 

well. But she’s here with two of my nephews. I have six 

nephews. Elijah, can you give us a wave? And Nicholas. And 

these are grade 1, grade 3, and also really great fishing partners, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they’re joined by two international students, one of whom 

is staying with Chantel’s family, and whom we’ve got to know 

quite well. They’re from Japan. They’re studying English here 

in Regina. And I’d ask Yasue Kashihara to give us a wave. 

Yasue is from Fukuoka in Japan. And she’s here with Sara 

Nishimura from Nagasaki. And they’re both going to school at 

Miller and enjoying their time here in Regina. And you’ll notice 

that these students from Japan, it didn’t take long for them to 

put on the Roughrider gear. They’ve got it on up in the 

Assembly there today, and I know they were cheering hard on 

Sunday. So I ask all members of this Assembly to join in 

welcoming my family and these two special guests from Japan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s more, Mr. Speaker. I recognize, sitting up in the 

very top of the east gallery there, a leader within Moose Jaw, a 

principal from within Moose Jaw, a good friend of mine, Derek 

Hassen. Derek’s not only a great educator, he’s also one heck of 

a hockey player, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members to 

welcome Derek Hassen to his Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to welcome a grade 1 class from Lakeview, Mrs. 

Friesen’s class, and they came for the festivities out front today 

and decided to stay for lunch and now to the Chamber today. 

 

And with this class, Mr. Speaker, if I could also have a wave 

from two of the cutest Rider fans. Reilly and Gracie, could you 

give us a little wave? These are my girls, and my wife, Ali, has 

joined them as well. So please help me welcome the entire class 

from Lakeview here today. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of anti-bullying. And we know that 

bullying causes serious harm, and the consequences of bullying 

are devastating, including depression, self-harm, addictions, and 

suicide. And we know that bullying is a human rights issue, one 

of safety and inclusion. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to take immediate and meaningful action to protect 

Saskatchewan’s children from bullying because the lives 

of young people are at stake and this government must do 

more to protect our youth. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 

petitions on behalf of extremely concerned residents and 

families from across southern Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

entirely unacceptable closure of the emergency room at 

Regina’s Pasqua Hospital. And the prayer reads as follows: 



4220 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to ensure our capital city has two 24-hour 

emergency rooms. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents from Regina, 

Central Butte, and Raymore. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of residents of Far Reserve Road. This road is used as 

a main road into the regional landfill which is operated by a 

tripartite agreement between the communities of La Ronge, Air 

Ronge, and Lac La Ronge Indian Band. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave Far Reserve Road, which has not 

been given the proper resources by this government. The 

dust on this road is causing respiratory problems for the 

elders and community members. It also creates poor 

visibility for drivers. This is a safety issue, in that we have 

students walking along a very dusty road to school. This 

road has a high volume of traffic in this is the only road to 

the regional dump. 

 

It is signed by many northern residents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of replacing the gym at Sacred Heart 

Community School. The undersigned residents of the province 

bring to the Assembly’s attention the following: that the gym at 

Sacred Heart Community School in north central Regina is now 

quite literally falling apart, has been closed indefinitely since 

last spring, and is no longer safe for students or staff. Mr. 

Speaker, there is a temporary solution in place in terms of the 

refurbishment of the old sanctuary at the old Sacred Heart 

Church, but this is something that calls out for a permanent 

solution. 

 

The petitioners point out that Sacred Heart Community School 

is the largest school in North Central with 450-plus students, 75 

per cent of whom are First Nations and Métis. They point out 

that enrolment has increased by 100 students over the past four 

years and that attendance and learning outcomes are steadily 

improving. And they point out that as a matter of basic fairness 

and common sense, Sacred Heart Community School needs a 

gym, Mr. Speaker. And in the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 

cause this government to immediately replace the 

gymnasium of Sacred Heart Community School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 

Moose Jaw, Weyburn, and Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Grey Cup Victory Celebration 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when the sea of green took over 

downtown Regina and the whole province, it was evident that 

the Rider nation wears its Rider pride in full force in 

Saskatchewan and in Canada. And today we saw that parade of 

proud fans continue. We were pleased to have the victory 

parade that began at Mosaic Stadium travel along Regina’s 

famed Green Mile and end here at the legislature. 

 

It’s great to see that Saskatchewan people have rallied around 

the organizers and the volunteers who helped make this week a 

success. Players and their families, coaches, and team support 

staff joined the thousands of fans who filled the steps of the 

legislature to continue the celebration. 

 

The victory parade was well attended, and Rider fans had 

another opportunity to join the whole province in the 

celebration of the unbelievable performance of the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders in their Grey Cup victory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders and all their supporters for a successful Grey Cup 

event. We all look forward to another green Grey Cup in 2014. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Today is a great day of celebration for the 2013 Grey Cup 

champion Saskatchewan Roughriders. Just a few minutes ago, 

as we know, they hit the streets for the Grey Cup victory 

parade. The CFL championship team along with the Rider Pep 

Band, Roughrider management, and the coveted Grey Cup 

greeted fans as they travelled down Albert Street from Mosaic 

Stadium before making their way to the steps of the Legislative 

Building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a proud moment for Saskatchewan as 

dedicated Roughrider fans bundled up and, with their Rider 

pride to keep them warm, gathered in front of the Legislative 

Building to greet their beloved Riders and congratulate them on 

their big win. In addition to adoring fans, team family members 

and friends gathered on the front steps as well to join in the 

celebration. Mr. Speaker, as we know, not only does it take a 

great team to win a championship. It takes tons of support from 

those very important people closest to them. 

 

After a short program, the crowd roared as the team hoisted the 

Grey Cup high above the steps from the Premier’s balcony. 

Surely it’ll be a memory for all fans to treasure for years to 

come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all colleagues to join me in congratulating 

the Saskatchewan Roughriders, the heroes of Rider nation, on 

their outstanding Grey Cup victory. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4221 

A Million Acts of Friendship 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 

recognize the A Million Acts of Friendship campaign here 

today. This is a new program already working to build and 

support healthy relationships and reduce bullying in our 

schools. The social education platform was created by local 

entrepreneur Janice Taylor and her team. Janice is committed to 

making a difference in the community. 

 

But bullying is a serious issue. As a teacher and a member of 

this community, I am disturbed by the damage bullying causes 

to many children’s lives. This platform helps families and 

children connect with one another and with their communities 

in positive ways. Today we are joined by students, parents, and 

teachers from both Ruth M. Buck and École Wilfrid Walker. 

 

Last spring these guests and hundreds of students in my 

constituency took part in the Million Acts of Friendship 

challenge as a pilot. They were among the first in Canada to 

participate in this innovative school-based program. I want to 

recognize a local mom and now program director, Ginger 

Braaten, and all the students, parents, teachers for making a 

difference and for providing their leadership. 

 

Participating in A Million Acts of Friendship challenge is a 

great way to support healthy relationships and activities in our 

communities. I’ve signed up, and I’d like to challenge all other 

MLAs and community leaders to join me and participate in 

their communities as well. Mr. Speaker, I ask all in this 

Assembly to recognize Janice Taylor and her team for their 

tremendous work and to thank all the local students, parents, 

and teachers for their leadership. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Community Leader Chosen as Game Changer 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the final game of 

the Roughriders’ regular season, Scotiabank announced that 

Darren Whitehead, a constituent of mine and former Prince 

Albert city councillor, had been named the Scotiabank Game 

Changer for the Roughriders’ 2013 season. Darren was 

recognized on the field during halftime for the outstanding work 

he has done in the community and was awarded a $25,000 

donation for Special Olympics Saskatchewan. 

 

Darren is highly deserving of this recognition as he is a great 

example of how one person can make a meaningful difference 

to the lives of people in the community. For 30 years Darren 

has served as a leader, mentor, and coach to athletes with an 

intellectual disability, helping the development and growth of 

the Special Olympics. He has coached several medal-winning 

floor hockey teams at the provincial, national, and international 

levels. As a referee, he has officiated 15 provincials and was 

referee-in-chief for the three Special Olympic Canadian 

national games. 

 

Darren was selected as the 2013 season Scotiabank Game 

Changer from a group of eight finalists and was selected as the 

winner based on a combination of fan voting and a judging 

panel. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Darren Whitehead on this great achievement and thanking him 

for his hard work in the Prince Albert community. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Homes for the Holidays Tour 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise today 

to recognize the Homes for the Holidays tour, which took place 

in Regina November 8th and 9th, with all proceeds going to 

Kids Help Phone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Homes for the Holidays has been a successful part 

of Kids Help Phone in Regina for the past 14 years. This year 

my husband, Terry, and I were pleased to have our home in the 

tour. This year over 500 people bought passports and toured our 

homes, and over $20,000 dollars was raised. Mr. Speaker, that 

was a lot of folks in my house. 

 

Thanks to this incredible generosity of the community, Kids 

Help Phone has been able to continue to ensure counsellors can 

be an important go-to resource for Saskatchewan youth in need 

of help. By providing this immediate, caring support to children 

and youth located in urban and rural communities throughout 

Saskatchewan, Kids Help Phone significantly improves youth 

mental health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a big thank you to SaskTel 

who was the major sponsor for this event. We would also like to 

thank the following sponsors for their support: Remax Crown 

Real Estate, Greystone Managed Investments, Co-operators, 

Brown Communications Group, Tamco Homes, Superior 

Cabinets, CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.], My 92.1, 

Premiere Van Lines, STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company], and Clements Printers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing this 

year’s successful Homes for the Holidays fundraisers for Kids 

Help Phone right here in Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

New School for Hudson Bay 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise today to acknowledge a very significant event 

which took place in the community of Hudson Bay. Last week 

the community of Hudson Bay began the construction on a 

brand new school. I had the privilege of attending this event 

along with dignitaries and representatives from the North East 

School Division. It was a wonderful event and is a very exciting 

announcement for the whole community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new school in Hudson Bay will have room for 

almost 400 students, ranging from pre-kindergarten to grade 12. 

It will also include a child care centre with 36 available spaces. 

The total cost of the project will be about $28 million, with our 

government committing $17 million towards this project. 



4222 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that, since 2007, our 

government has built 20 brand new schools, completed 23 

major renovations, and completed over 900 smaller capital 

projects, investing approximately 600 million so we can 

continue to educate the future leaders of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just more proof that while the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] closed schools, 176 to be exact, merely 

managing . . . barely managing decline and ignoring rural 

Saskatchewan residents, our government will continue to meet 

the challenges that come with a growing province and will 

continue to build new schools. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Fond du Lac Firefighters Win Competitions 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to draw 

attention to the Fond du Lac fire department, which consists of 

Thurman Mercredi, Brendon McDonald, Lonnie Augier, 

Bradley Mercredi, Dejay Mercredi, Jerome McDonald, and last 

but not least, the fire chief, Georgie McDonald. 

 

The team won the 2013 Provincial Aboriginal Firefighters 

Competition held at the Peter Ballantyne urban reserve in 

Prince Albert this past July. Mr. Speaker, then they moved on to 

compete against teams from across the country and won the 

National Aboriginal Firefighters Competition held at Walpole 

Island First Nation in Ontario this past August. 

 

While certainly an impressive achievement on its own, Mr. 

Speaker, the honour is only compounded when noticing that 

this particular fire department has won provincials eight out of 

the last 10 years and nationals five times in the past 10 years. 

Through hard work, discipline, and a commitment not only to 

their community but to their province, they have truly raised the 

bar and become leaders by example. And for this we thank 

them and recognize their accomplishments here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Saskatchewan 

legislature join with me in congratulating these individuals on 

this achievement and thank them for continuing to keep our 

northern communities safe. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The closure of the 

Pasqua ER [emergency room] through the nights is hugely 

concerning to Regina and area residents. So I have a number of 

questions related to this development, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 

to the Premier: how many medical clinics are open in Regina 

throughout the night? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say in a general 

sense that this is a very serious issue for our capital city and for 

the province because it impacts emergency care available in 

southern Saskatchewan. It is a temporary closure, and this needs 

to be stressed, Mr. Speaker. Any closure is obviously not what 

we want, but it is temporary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have had a meeting again . . . The minister and I 

have been talking about this, as he has with his officials and 

with the region. We talked again today, and I have assured him 

that he has whatever resources he needs from the government to 

bring this to a quick conclusion, the temporary closure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we know, there are some issues even beyond 

financial for all of this in terms of just the availability of 

emergency docs, but there is much work being done today. And 

the Minister of Health is aware that he has the full support of 

the government and whatever resources he needs to bring this to 

a very speedy conclusion, this temporary closure. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Premier 

for those overview remarks. My question was specifically about 

how many medical clinics are open throughout the night. For 

the medical clinics that are on operation here in Regina, my 

question for the Premier is, when is the last patient accepted to 

those medical clinics in the evening? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll give way for the Minister 

of Health to answer the very specific questions that are put 

forward by the opposition. I can tell him though and tell the 

House today that I believe the Meadow Clinic, which is 

immediately across from Pasqua, can certainly provide some 

assistance to emergencies because of the nature of the qualified 

people. They have now extended their hours till, I believe it’s 

till midnight. And that’s seven days a week, Mr. Speaker, which 

is a help. 

 

But again, to bring this temporary change or reduction in hours 

of service to a speedy conclusion is the government’s number 

one priority. And the Minister of Health and the Ministry of 

Health and the region and I would expect the doctors are 

working hard to ensure that happens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think yesterday 

when we were having this discussion in question period about 

the hours that it would be available, I believe it was said till 9 

p.m. I’d have to check Hansard for the exact. But that’s why 

we’re asking these questions because patients obviously need to 

know where to go in the event of a life-threatening emergency. 

 

According to information that’s available and with some 

checking, it’s my understanding that there are no clinics that are 

available throughout the night and that the last patients accepted 

to those clinics, accepted, is at 8:30 in the evening. So this 

would be one change, but it’s important to know the policy 

across the board. 

 

So my question to the Premier: for the medical clinics that are 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4223 

operational for emergencies in the night when the Pasqua ER is 

closed, is the General emergency room the one facility where 

there’s 24-7 care for life-threatening emergencies for patients in 

Regina and area? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, directly to the Leader of the Opposition’s question and 

what he phrased life-threatening emergencies, first and foremost 

we would direct people to the General Hospital, Mr. Speaker, 

which will be open 24 hours a day throughout this time, Mr. 

Speaker. It will be fully staffed as it normally is, particularly to 

serve those issues, life-threatening, traumatic, neurology, and 

other types of, those types of issues that would be sent to the 

General Hospital. 

 

And as the Premier has indicated, Mr. Speaker, during the 

beginning weeks of this temporary disruption at the Pasqua, the 

Meadow Primary clinic will be open until midnight seven days 

a week to deal with those issues that wouldn’t be a 

life-threatening emergency. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — So with the Pasqua ER being closed from 7:30 

till 8 in the morning and with the nearby clinic closing at 

midnight as one small relief valve, the fact is that Regina 

General will have huge pressure in what is already a very busy 

ER. So my question to the Premier: what is specifically being 

done at the General Hospital in the ER in order to ensure that 

the health professionals working there can cope with essentially 

doing the work of two ERs throughout the night? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the General Hospital emergency department will be 

fully staffed during this period throughout the night, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well the region is working with the 

public to ensure that the public have other options that are 

available, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First and foremost we would refer people to the HealthLine to 

have that immediate referral for help, Mr. Speaker. As well the 

region is working with other clinics within the community to 

determine whether or not there’s capacity to also have them 

extend their hours, Mr. Speaker. So the region is working to see 

if there are those options available, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I would say the General Hospital emergency department is 

open 24 hours a day. The Pasqua will be open, Mr. Speaker, for 

much of the day in the emergency department. There will be 

health personnel at the emergency department at the Pasqua in 

the event that somebody needs transferred by a paramedic to the 

General Hospital. And the region is working with all the 

southern regions to ensure that they know what the procedures 

are in place to ensure that people will be referred to the General, 

which already does take place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So when the Pasqua 

ER closes at 7:30, that means that Regina General will have to 

deal with the life-threatening serious situations, whether it’s a 

motor vehicle accident, a heart attack, or a stroke. So it’s 

important to know what specific steps are being taken at the 

Regina General to ensure that professionals there can cope with 

the increased number of patients coming through the door. 

 

So my question to the Premier: what specific steps are being 

taken in order to ensure that patient safety is not being 

compromised? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to just ensure 

that the member opposite knows and the public know that, 

regardless of this temporary service disruption at the Pasqua 

Hospital, patients who to this point require specialized, for 

example specialized cardiac, neurology, and trauma care are 

currently transported to the General Hospital. That is the first 

option available, Mr. Speaker, for those traumatic incidences, 

those traumatic events, Mr. Speaker. That will continue, Mr. 

Speaker. Communication is taking place with all the southern 

regions to ensure that they still do know that that will be, Mr. 

Speaker, the first option that emergency medical personnel do 

know and are aware of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, as we move into this period that will begin later this 

week, the region will be evaluating the volume and the flow of 

patients to make any adjustments that they would need to to 

ensure that there is sufficient coverage within the emergency 

department. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Yesterday in question 

period we had some discussion about who will be left at the 

Pasqua ER in the event that patients show up seeking urgent 

care. So my question to the Premier: what kind of health care 

professionals will be at the Pasqua ER when the doors close at 

7:30 p.m.? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at this point the region is proposing that a paramedic 

and an additional paramedic team be brought on staff during the 

hours that the Pasqua emergency department will no longer be 

accepting people coming in. Mr. Speaker, the team paramedic 

will be there to transport individuals that may need to go to the 

emergency room at the General Hospital, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

also looked at, perhaps with the help of both the paramedics as 

well, perhaps as having a triage nurse available. They’re still 

making that final determination, but at this point it will be a 

paramedic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They will also ensure that people who arrive that aren’t in an 

emergency situation do know about the extended hours across 

the street from the Pasqua Hospital at the Meadow which, it has 

been mentioned several times, will be open until midnight. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. Excuse 

me, I recognize the Opposition House Leader . . . Opposition 

Leader. 



4224 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the topic that the 

minister was discussing, Mr. Speaker, in an event that someone 

shows up at the emergency room, there was a question, Mr. 

Speaker, about what health professionals will be there. I believe 

it was reported earlier on in the Leader-Post that there wouldn’t 

be a health professional there, so it’s good to know that a 

paramedic will be there. My question though is, how many 

health professionals will be there? What is the composition of 

the paramedic team in the event, Mr. Speaker, that multiple 

patients show up with life-threatening concerns at the same 

time? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the health region, Mr. 

Speaker, is putting together the contingency plans for the 

Pasqua, have indicated that they’ve decided that it will be 

paramedic, an additional paramedic team will be brought on 

staff, Mr. Speaker, to transport individuals coming into the 

Pasqua Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the event of an incident, some sort of traumatic 

accident, Mr. Speaker, what normally would already take place 

is, in those severe cases, they would already be going to the 

General Hospital. The paramedics, the 911 already know that 

that is in place and has been up until this point, Mr. Speaker, 

that the General Hospital is the preferred location for those 

traumatic incidences. 

 

In the event that there is walk-up traffic, Mr. Speaker, at the 

emergency room, they will be either transported by ambulance, 

will be instructed to make their own efforts to get to the hospital 

if it is not a serious incident or, Mr. Speaker, be dealt with at 

another location such as the Meadow Primary clinic. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — So my question, Mr. Speaker, in the event that 

someone shows up at the Pasqua ER and they need to be 

transported by ambulance to the General for their care, how 

does this work? Are there multiple ambulances that are there 

waiting to transport patients? How does the backup system 

work if the triage has occurred and it has determined that the 

patient needs to be transported rapidly to the General? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in the event that the ambulance would be needed and the 

paramedic team would be needed to transport somebody the 

short distance to the General Hospital, in that case, Mr. 

Speaker, there are other ambulances available within the city. 

They would make arrangements to ensure that there was that 

backup that would be brought to the Pasqua Hospital, Mr. 

Speaker, and continue that way to ensure that, while there may 

be a patient taken over to the General Hospital for that short 

distance over to the General, Mr. Speaker, there are other 

ambulances that will be on call and available within the city. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

Seniors’ Care Services 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not only emergency and 

acute care that is getting worse under this government. We 

know that seniors’ care is getting worse as well. Sandra 

Celantano is here with us today because she is frustrated about 

overcrowding and understaffing in care facilities. Her husband 

Joe is at Extendicare Parkside here in Regina. Sandra saw call 

bells ring unanswered and residents, including Joe, left to wait 

far too long for help. 

 

But what really upset Sandra was the lack of appropriate 

support for the physical therapy that Joe and other residents 

desperately needed. To the minister: why is this government not 

properly supporting physical therapy for those who desperately 

need it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as we’ve made our way through 2013, this has been an 

issue that has been raised a great deal in terms of seniors’ care. 

Mr. Speaker, we are making our way through applications from 

health regions to improve services, Mr. Speaker. What the 

members will know that, over the last six years, while the 

number of beds have essentially remained the same and the case 

mixes remained essentially the same, Mr. Speaker, over those 

six years, we’ve seen a 10 per cent increase in staff within 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the specifics of this facility and the 

region’s allocation of different health professionals, I won’t 

speak to that specific issue, Mr. Speaker. I can follow-up with 

the member after question period. But, Mr. Speaker, we have 

made significant strides to improve the care for seniors within 

our facilities. And, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to next 

month, not only releasing the Urgent Issues Action Fund $10 

million, but also a planning session for how we look to provide 

care to seniors better in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Sandra’s husband Joe is 

crammed into a room with three other residents, all of whom 

have wheelchairs, and all of whom are expected to do their 

physical therapy in that same crowded room. There is no 

dedicated space in that facility for physical therapy. So Sandra 

and Joe have actually tried to do his therapy in the hallway, 

amidst the coffee carts and laundry carts and patients and 

visitors. Those are hardly optimal conditions, Mr. Speaker. Yet 

we know from the CEO tour report that concerns about a lack 

of support for physical therapy exist in care facilities all over 

the province. 

 

Again to the minister: why is this government not properly 

supporting physical therapy for those who desperately need it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as a part of the member 

opposite’s question speaks to the space issue within some of our 

facilities, Mr. Speaker, we know that the way that we built 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4225 

long-term care facilities back in the ’40s and the ’50s and the 

’60s, Mr. Speaker — many of those facilities which we are still 

using today — were not built in a way that we would ever do 

today. Mr. Speaker, today we build a facility, it’s single rooms 

with individual bathrooms. It’s not four to a room. But, Mr. 

Speaker, what we’re dealing with is unfortunately a legacy of 

far too little infrastructure and capital renewal within this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have spent $1 billion in our first six years of 

government on health capital, Mr. Speaker, over 300 million of 

that working with communities to build new long-term care 

facilities in 13 communities, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a new 

facility for 100 individuals in Saskatoon. As well, Mr. Speaker, 

capital planning for a replacement in Swift Current, Mr. 

Speaker. But over $300 million in government funds, in 

taxpayers’ funds, will only get us 13 new long-term care 

facilities out of 156. Mr. Speaker, many of them are aging, and 

we’re working our ways through that infrastructure backlog. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just an issue of 

overcrowding. Sandra has had to put a lot of pressure on the 

care facility to make sure Joe actually received the physical 

therapy he desperately needed. Sandra feels fortunate because 

she was there to advocate and to speak out for her husband. But 

she is worried about what’s happening to other seniors who 

don’t have a strong advocate to demand proper care. 

 

To the minister: how many residents in care facilities should be 

receiving physical therapy but are not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I know that our health regions and our long-term care, 

the administration within long-term care and our affiliates do 

the best that they can, Mr. Speaker, to provide the services that 

our residents require, Mr. Speaker. That’s why they review the 

cases every three months to check to see whether or not the 

requirements of each individual have changed, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why this government has invested heavily into long-term 

care, heavily into health care over the last six years — a 48 per 

cent increase in the health regions’ budget, who do deliver 

health care on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, on behalf 

of the government. Mr. Speaker, $1 billion in additional 

funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’ve seen, while there is still more work to be done, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve seen significant gains in terms of staffing within 

long-term care, in terms of maintenance within long-term care, 

and in terms of new builds and new construction to replace 

what is an aging system, an aging infrastructure, but more work 

to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Sandra Celantano’s concerns 

should not come as a surprise to this government. The CEO tour 

report identified similar problems at this particular facility. The 

review noted a shortage of space to undergo physical therapy 

and not enough staff. 

 

To the minister: was a business case received to address these 

particular problems at this facility, and will the government be 

providing funding through its one-time payment fund? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t come as a 

surprise because it was as a part of the CEO tour. And what we 

heard back from residents and families, Mr. Speaker, perhaps it 

would have been a surprise to the NDP because they had never 

gone out to families and residents and heard first-hand and 

toured all 156 facilities across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve done that for the first time in this province’s history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the requests for the $10 million, Mr. 

Speaker, I wouldn’t want to speak to any specific request as 

they’re still being evaluated by the ministry, Mr. Speaker. We 

hope to have those dollars out over the course of the next 

couple of weeks. We will be requiring though, Mr. Speaker, 

that those dollars be attached to something specific in the 

report, and that the regions will follow up to the government in 

60, 90, and 120 days to ensure that the dollars actually made it 

to the residents, that quality improved because of those dollars, 

Mr. Speaker, and that we can use that to inform future decisions 

of the government in terms of investment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Prince Albert Bridge 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, last Thursday when I asked the Minister of Highways 

about a second bridge for Prince Albert and this is what he said: 

“. . . if we can see more economic development and more traffic 

in that area, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly look at it into the 

future.” Mr. Speaker, if there’s economic growth. Mr. Speaker, 

if there’s more traffic. That’s what this government’s answer is. 

This government is supposed to be ready for growth, but in the 

real world they’re just ready for excuses. To the minister: why 

does this government have so little faith in Prince Albert and 

northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we have great faith in northern Saskatchewan, great 

faith in the P.A. [Prince Albert] area. Mr. Speaker, that’s why 

we commissioned a report with the city of Prince Albert and the 

RMs [rural municipality] in that area to look at whether a 

second bridge was warranted. I would ask the member opposite 

if he has read the report, Mr. Speaker, because the report is very 

clear to say that if in the future there is more economic 

development, especially on the north side of the Saskatchewan, 

that will warrant more traffic back and forth, Mr. Speaker, 

across that bridge, then we should certainly look at a second 

bridge. 

 

But I can’t help it, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t the government that 

wrote the report. It was an independent business analyst, Mr. 



4226 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

Speaker, that wrote the report. Now I’m asking the member 

opposite, would they spend hundreds of thousands of dollars on 

a report that suggests one thing, and then completely ignore it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very important 

question that the P.A. people want answered because New 

Democrats believe in the tremendous potential of Prince Albert 

and northern Saskatchewan. This government apparently 

doesn’t think there’s much hope for economic growth in Prince 

Albert and northern Saskatchewan. The Minister of Highways 

says if there’s more economic development and if there’s more 

traffic in that area, then the government will actually be 

thinking about building a second bridge for Prince Albert. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what happened to the 

whole ready for growth talk? Why is this government always 

writing off Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this government, again, 

believes in northern Saskatchewan. We believe the economic 

development opportunity is there. That’s why we put $4.2 

million in to fix that bridge, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we put 

$90 million into P.A. and north, Mr. Speaker, through other 

ministries. We believe in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s too bad under 16 years of NDP government and 

representation from the two northern communities, they didn’t 

believe in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, when they had a chance to fix the bridge, they turned 

it over to the city and did nothing themselves. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert and 

the people of northern Saskatchewan are doing their part. 

They’re working hard, Mr. Speaker, to grow the economy 

despite being completely abandoned by this government. Yet 

despite the good work by the people and businesses of Prince 

Albert and despite the good work by the people and businesses 

of northern Saskatchewan, this government is still sitting back 

and being skeptical about the potential of that region. If there’s 

economic growth, this government says it might consider a 

second bridge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, well how about recognizing that there will be 

economic growth because of the hard-working people and the 

good businesses of Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan? 

And how about actually building a much-needed second bridge 

for Prince Albert? Again to the minister: when will this 

government stop neglecting Prince Albert and northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly on this side 

of the House believe in economic growth. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

why in 2007 I believe the people of Saskatchewan said, we 

could do much better in this province, and hence we elected a 

number of members. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the end of the 

story because in 2000, they had quite a bit of faith in this 

government. But in 2011, they had 49 per cent faith, Mr. 

Speaker — 49 members compared to 9. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province is doing very, very well. Northern 

Saskatchewan is going to do very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they had the chance to believe in northern 

Saskatchewan, they didn’t. Now when there’s only nine of 

them, they found some sort of faith in northern Saskatchewan 

that never believed in it before, Mr. Speaker. They had a chance 

to fix the bridge. They ripped the top off and had the city put it 

back on, Mr. Speaker. That’s in the record of the members 

opposite, and that’s especially the member from Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill 121, The Election Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved that Bill 121, The Election Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask for 

leave to make a motion of absence. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a motion of absence. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly: 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4227 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Martensville for Wednesday, December 4th and Thursday, 

December 5th, 2013 to conduct a workshop at the 

International Republican Institute meeting at Amman, 

Jordan. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Martensville for Wednesday, December the 4th and 

Thursday, December the 5th, 2013 to conduct a workshop 

at the International Republican Institute meeting in 

Amman, Jordan. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[14:30] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 192 through 197. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

192 through 197. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present to the 

House for second reading The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

I recommend the legislation be amended to allow for the 

following: the Act to prescribe in regulation that a percentage of 

pool funds annual net capital must be invested into innovation 

type investments. The minister will set the form by which tax 

credits will be issued to investors in the future and other 

housekeeping amendments. 

 

As members of this House are aware, the Ministry of the 

Economy is focused on growing various sectors of our 

economy, especially the innovation sector. Our researchers, 

developers, entrepreneurs already have a great track record in 

introducing or improving the products into the Saskatchewan 

marketplace, but we need to do more. 

 

For several years the labour-sponsored venture capital 

corporations have been prudently supporting provincial 

businesses. They’re investing funds from more than 40,000 

Saskatchewan people that believe in backing our local 

enterprises. Mr. Speaker, most of these funds are carefully 

invested in traditional businesses. 

 

However investment opportunities in Saskatchewan are 

evolving and we need the LSVCCs [labour–sponsored venture 

capital corporation] to keep pace with these changes. 

Specifically we’d like the see the LSVCCs step up investments 

into our innovation sector. We want these funds to increase the 

amount of innovation investments in this portfolio by up to 25 

per cent by year 2016. 

 

We expect this funding to stimulate our innovation sector and 

launch new and improved products into the marketplace. Our 

researchers, developers, and entrepreneurs sometimes work 

from early morning to late at night on a project. When they are 

not working on the research, they’re often looking for new 

sources of capital for their funding needs. However they would 

rather focus more of their time on inventions and innovations 

and providing access. The local funds will help do that. 

 

Saskatchewan people are the ultimate winners in any innovation 

success. The economic benefits will be shared by innovators 

and local investors. The Ministry of the Economy has made the 

necessary amendments to the legislation. We will fulfill the 

government’s goal as stated in the plan for growth. The plan 

highlights innovation as one of our engines for growing 

Saskatchewan’s economy now and into the future. We feel that 

this legislation is in the best interests of maintaining the 

momentum of our provincial economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now present The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 for second reading. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Economy has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m very pleased to be able to stand in my place today and 

offer our initial comments on this particular bill, Bill 109, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I noticed that one of the things that people ought to know 

in the province of Saskatchewan is that we have an exciting 

economy and things are moving forward, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly from our perspective as the opposition, we’re quite 

happy that the economy continues to build, we’re quite happy 

that the population continues to grow and, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

very happy that Saskatchewan overall is doing very, very well. 

Certainly we want to see that opportunity continue for the years 

to come. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we hear from some of the comments 

that attach to the bill talking about investing into innovation, 

talking about the 40,000 Saskatchewan people that invest in 

some of these funds, and talking about one of the things that the 

minister’s spoke about was maintaining the momentum for the 

economy to continue for years to come, Mr. Speaker, that’s all 



4228 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

part of the language of our smart growth strategy that the NDP 

has certainly adopted over the years. And we have developed, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’re continuing to develop and continue to 

hone some of the very valuable advice that we’re getting from 

many businesses and from many organizations throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We just don’t have confidence that the right wing party across 

the way knows how to run a booming economy, Mr. Speaker, 

as we obviously see the number of problems that they have 

created. And they have bungled their way through this mess. 

And yet, despite their bungling, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan continue being optimistic. We see the investors 

coming to our province in droves, which is great. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that kind of momentum is very important to maintain. 

We understand that particular language and, Mr. Speaker, one 

of the things that we obviously also understand is the fact that 

you have to make sure that you invest in many strategic areas as 

possible. And obviously one of the thrusts of this bill talks 

about investing into innovation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things that I think is important for the people of 

Saskatchewan, I noticed on the news early today the fact that 

the farm income was up a substantial amount from last year. 

We see I think the amount that they had, I think it’s almost 30 

per cent more that they got in income. I’m talking about the 

agricultural sector. They got 30 per cent more income this year 

than last year. We’re seeing a lot of activity in oil and gas over 

the last couple of years. We’re seeing a lot of investment into a 

number of other areas, Mr. Speaker, and we want to make sure 

that Saskatchewan is positioned well. We know, and sometimes 

we often pray, that we never see bad times come to the province 

ever again, Mr. Speaker. But we know that history will tell us 

that the boom in Saskatchewan is, it’s important that we capture 

as many benefits for as long as we can to make sure that 

Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan residents benefit for 

years and years to come. 

 

Now one of the things that we often say, and it’s not something 

that we want to admit as a province, but when you have good 

years we can also anticipate bad years, Mr. Speaker. So as part 

of the governing process you want to make sure that we deal 

with as many pre-emptive issues as possible beforehand, that in 

the event that we expect a couple of bad years that 

Saskatchewan is well prepared and that our province is strong 

and that our province is able to withstand some of those 

economic storms that may be coming up on the horizon, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there’s no question from our perspective. Smart growth from 

the NDP perspective means understanding that you’re going to 

have some great years, you’re going to have some good years, 

Mr. Speaker, but you also have to anticipate some tougher years 

and some really bad years. And that’s why it’s important that, 

as you consider some of the bills coming forward from the 

government, that you pay very, very close attention to what 

they’re doing when you talk about investment, and certainly 

trying to attract more investment and attract more people, and in 

this instance, Bill 109, to try and attract more investment into 

innovation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one of the things that I often tell people back home is when a 

government introduces a bill, the NDP want to make sure that 

they pay very close attention to what they’re trying to do. And 

as always, there’s always the issue that we always ask is, have 

you consulted certain groups? Have you met with certain 

groups and what is their immediate questions? Now, Mr. 

Speaker, you look at the economic building that we often speak 

about and I tell people about this back home. We’ve said this a 

thousand times if not a million times that part of building a 

brave, bold new economy that’s going to be sustained for future 

growth, that’s going to be smart, that’s going to be 

forward-thinking, it’s going to be innovative, it’s going to be 

exciting, it’s going to engage as many people as possible, it 

really is basically on three or four principles, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The first principle is you’ve got to be able to open up the 

environment for having people come to invest and live and 

work into the community or into our province. And so certainly 

trying to attract corporate involvement, business involvement, 

bringing investment to the community, that’s pretty clear, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s pretty common sense as well. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, you obviously want to make sure that 

you have the Crown sector that is going to continue being a big 

part of the Saskatchewan economic plan overall because the 

Crown sector — whether it’s SaskTel or SaskPower — they 

obviously create a lot of wealth for the province. They 

obviously create jobs and they obviously add to the GDP [gross 

domestic product] overall of our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the third component that we speak about is 

obviously making sure that we work in concert with our 

working men and women of this province and also the students 

and many other people that are continuing to work. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they have to also be part of a plan. 

 

So from our perspective, you look at the three components that 

I spoke about. And there’s other components as well, but the 

three main components of course is making sure that you have a 

strong private sector, a vibrant sector that is ready to invest and 

bring their skills and bring their dollars and bring their expertise 

and bring their services to the province overall. We think that’s 

a very important, crucial part. And certainly that continues to be 

part of what the NDP has built in the past and what they’ll 

continue to build into the future. 

 

And of course the second one, as I mentioned, is to make sure 

that our Crown sectors stay very, very close to the 

Saskatchewan people in terms of ownership. The Saskatchewan 

Crowns need to be owned by the people of Saskatchewan. It’s 

so very important that they cannot be for sale, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course the third component I spoke about earlier is 

making sure that you engage the working men and women and 

not go to war with our unions and not go to war with the 

different organizations out there that represent workers’ rights, 

Mr. Speaker. That is so very important, so very crucial. 

 

Now other aspects certainly from our perspective, when he talks 

about a smart growth economic plan so to speak, Mr. Speaker, 

we want to make sure that you also take into account things of 

the importance of taking care of the environment overall. We 

think that environmental issues are really important when you 

look at the economic plan overall. And we think a lot of times 

when you look at what the federal government is doing, what 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4229 

this provincial government is doing, they’re really not taking 

care of the environment as much as they should be. And we 

think that’s an integral part, an integral part of any economic 

plan that any province might have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we look at those particular components when you want to 

build a province, you want to have a long-lasting benefit from 

some of the boom that we’re having now. You’ve got to start 

thinking of incorporating many issues into your plan, and that 

includes making sure you have good investment planning; 

making sure that you have a strong Crown sector; making sure 

you’ve got a good, solid supply of qualified labourers, a labour 

pool; making sure that you have an environmental plan as well 

attached to this overall plan; to make sure that you engage First 

Nations and the Métis people; to make sure that you engage the 

public on a number of other sectors such as making sure that 

they understand what the plan is. These are some of the things I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that I think goes without saying, that these 

are the basic building blocks of any economic plan for the 

province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we want to know a lot more about this 

particular bill. Bill 109 talks about investing into innovation. 

One of the things that the minister mentioned is that he would 

have a role, and I think the point that he raised is the minister 

will decide, will have some influence on how you invest into 

that innovation. And, Mr. Speaker, that goes against the grain of 

the right wing party over there saying that they shouldn’t be 

involved in the economy whatsoever, but on this particular bill 

he says that he would have some decision-making power. We 

want to know what kind of decision-making power that he’s 

conferring upon himself or that he’s bestowing upon his 

government. 

 

We need to know those particular details, Mr. Speaker, because 

from our perspective we have no confidence whatsoever that 

the Saskatchewan Party is able to manage the boom properly 

and is able to manage the boom for years to come to make sure 

that the benefits are there for the people. I don’t think they have 

the ability, Mr. Speaker. We never had that confidence in them 

before. We certainly don’t have that confidence in them now. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you look at Bill 109 . . . And I’m 

really impressed with the amount of people that are investing in 

this particular bill or have invested in some of the venture 

capital funds. The amount that we see is 40,000 Saskatchewan 

people have invested in some of these funds, and that’s an 

impressive amount. And it goes back to my earlier comment 

that 40,000 Saskatchewan people have chosen to invest in the 

province of Saskatchewan through some of these funds. And I 

think that’s certainly a strong indication of how many people 

are prepared to invest in their own homes, in their own 

communities, and of course in their own province, in their own 

businesses. 

 

And that’s something that we ought to capitalize on, and we 

need to make sure that we’re not only recognizing our 

homegrown effort to invest into our communities but we also 

have to make sure that we open up the investment opportunities 

from outside the province because obviously that helps 

Saskatchewan overall when you have many more people 

investing in some of our businesses and some of our 

corporations and some of our opportunities. 

So that being said, Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s a lot of 

work to do. Saskatchewan is a strong province right now. The 

economy is strong. The population is growing. And there’s 

good news on a number of fronts, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s oil 

or gas, and certainly whether it’s the ag sector, that there is 

some good news and there are some bright days here, Mr. 

Speaker. But as we always learn from some of our elders back 

home that if you have some good days, be ready for the tougher 

days because certainly they will come, and those people that are 

prepared for that certainly will be able to weather that storm at 

the time. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So I think one of the things that’s important as I look at the 

province of Saskatchewan, we’re an exciting province. We’ve 

got a great economy, as I mentioned, but we also know that we 

have to find many more aggressive ways and innovative ways 

to attract investment capital here. As everybody knows, 

investment capital is fleeting. There are people out in the world 

that are . . . And there’s a huge competition for that investment 

capital. And how do we as a province, how do we as a province 

position ourselves to capture as much of that worldwide 

investment capital that’s out there, to try and attract that 

investment here in the province of Saskatchewan? In the large 

country of Canada, Mr. Speaker, how do we position ourselves 

well? 

 

And that’s one of the biggest questions that we have on this 

particular bill is, how do we . . . What objective is attached to 

the bill? And how will the people of Saskatchewan know that 

this bill is certainly going to make the benefits of the province 

that it says it’s going to benefit? Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the 

important questions that we ask this particular government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the 40,000 Saskatchewan 

people. These are very learned people that have taken the time 

to study this particular bill, and they obviously would have a lot 

of influence as to how this process would look. But my biggest 

question on this particular Bill 109 is the 40,000 people are 

obviously going to be impacted and we want to know what their 

opinions are, what their comments are. I mean that’s one of the 

most important things that we ought to understand in 

government, is that if we don’t understand anything in 

particular, we should always make the effort to try and find 

those that do have that knowledge and to learn from them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there’s a lot of people out there that are leaders in 

understanding investment, the venture capital dollars. We want 

to find out from these particular organizations how this 

particular change, how the particular change will impact the 

venture capital corporation overall. We don’t have that 

information readily, Mr. Speaker. We obviously have some 

time to do so, so we want to make sure that we take that time to 

do that and ask the folks out there that have that experience and 

have that knowledge and certainly have some advice for us, that 

we would ask you to come forward and share that information 

with us to make sure that what this bill is purporting to do does 

exactly that, that it doesn’t interfere with the marketplace 

overall when we’re talking about attracting any kind of dollars 

to help our province build this economy for years to come. 

 



4230 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you look at some of the language, there’s 

no question from our perspective that we’ve got to find as many 

ways now to maintain all the momentum in this current 

economic building that the province is doing. 

 

We see a lot of good, solid corporations doing their work. We 

see the Crown sector doing their work. We see the private 

sector, we see the small businesses doing their work. They’re 

all moving Saskatchewan forward. And what you don’t need is 

a government that’s interfering with that effort. The 

government’s role quite frankly is to try and position as much 

as they can to provide some of these corporations and 

companies and businesses with a solid, skilled workforce, with 

making sure that they have the adequate infrastructure. Like the 

list goes on as to what the government’s role is, Mr. Speaker. 

But they cannot interfere with that process. It’s got to be 

undertaken by the investment sector, and they have to be able to 

know that this is a good place to bring that money and to help 

the economy overall. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are my initial comments on this 

particular bill. We have a lot more to say about this, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s one piece of many, many other pieces when 

we talk about how we position Saskatchewan as a government, 

how we position Saskatchewan well. 

 

We have a lot of challenges overall as a province. We are a 

landlocked province. We are a province of over 1 million 

people. We have a great resource base, whether it’s forestry or 

potash or oil and gas. We have all the assets of a province that 

could really build a solid economic plan for years to come. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to ever go back to the day when our 

interest payment on the debt that was left to us as a government 

of over . . . close to $1 billion a year, we don’t want to go back 

to those kind of days of debt, Mr. Speaker. So it’s important 

that the people of Saskatchewan learn from that lesson and 

learn that, from the NDP perspective, it is always about smart 

growth. It is always about proper growth. And we have to 

always keep in mind that we want to benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s why we’re here in this particular Assembly and that’s 

why, as an opposition, we watch very, very carefully as to what 

the government is trying to do. And we would ask them, 

whatever happens in the future, that you . . . The issue that 

we’ve raised as the official opposition is that, you know, this 

particular government inherited a booming economy. They 

inherited billions of dollars in the bank. They inherited a 

growing population. Optimism was coming, Mr. Speaker. 

Everything was just all set up for them. They became 

government at the right time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And all we ask them from our perspective, despite the hard 

years of rebuilding Saskatchewan’s credibility financially and 

putting in all the economic building blocks in place, is not to 

mess it up. That’s the simple thing we ask them, not to mess it 

up. Remember the principles of making sure that you have a 

strong, vibrant Crown corporation, that you have a strong union 

sector with skilled labourers because they’re just as important 

as investment capital, and to make sure that you have the 

atmosphere for the private sector to come and thrive in the 

province of Saskatchewan. These are all basic building blocks 

that were put in place by the NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, we watch 

very carefully that the current government that’s in charge here, 

and we’re working very hard to make sure that their term is 

limited, that we’re making absolutely sure that anything they 

bring forward to try and meddle in the economy overall, that we 

scrutinize that and watch that very, very carefully. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 109. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 109, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 112 — The 

Accounting Profession Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 112, An Act respecting 

the Accounting Profession and the Institute of Chartered 

Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts. And we understand 

this is part of an initiative that’s happening right across Canada 

to streamline the accounting profession and roll three 

designations, the CPA [chartered professional accountant], 

CMA [certified management accountant], CGA [certified 

general accountant], into one CPA, chartered professional 

accountant, which seems to be a laudable goal. And I think this 

will be an interesting discussion as we proceed forward to 

debate this in detail. 

 

And it’s quite a thorough bill in front of us, and I just want to 

take a minute and talk about the institute. What they are 

establishing is an institute, the Institute of Chartered 

Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan, and it would be 

operated under the name of the CPA Saskatchewan. And I think 

this is an interesting piece. It’s always good to set out what are 

the duties and objects that you hope to establish. And of the 

institute, it is the duty . . . And it’s section 4(1), so people who 

are listening or at home: 

 

4(1) It is the duty of the institute at all times: 

 

(a) to serve and protect the public; and 

 

(b) to exercise its powers and discharge its 

responsibilities in the public interest. 

 

(2) The objects of the institute are: 

 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4231 

(a) to regulate the practice of the profession and to 

govern the registrants in accordance with this Act and 

the bylaws; and 

 

(b) to assure the public of the knowledge, skill, 

proficiency and competency of registrants in the 

practice of professional accounting and other services 

provided by registrants. 

 

And all things flow from those to the duties and the objects of 

the institute. So it’s relatively straightforward, but if only it 

were so. And that’s why we have accountants, because things 

do get complex and complicated. And it is a very important 

thing that we have well-trained professionals who are 

accountants, and we can only look as close as our own auditors 

here in our province and the good work that they do to make 

sure that we’re on task and things don’t veer off too far from 

what our targets were in terms of what our spending was and 

the efficiency and use of our financial resources because after 

all that is what we are tasked for here in the province. 

 

But I want to step back and just say . . . Well I just want to 

review the duties of the institute. And it’s straightforward: serve 

and protect the public. That is straightforward. They don’t talk 

about private interests. They talk about the public. And then it 

goes on, “to exercise its powers and discharge its 

responsibilities in the public interest.” 

 

I would have liked to have seen maybe a little bit more 

definition or some parameters or some discussion around what 

is the public interest. I often refer to a very good piece of work 

that was done earlier in the 2000s around the provincial interest, 

and it lays it out quite specifically, whether it be heritage, 

whether it be environmental, whether it be the water, whether it 

be even gravel. It’s quite laid out nicely. 

 

But here, when we just generally say public interest, what is the 

public interest here? That opens up a whole Pandora’s box 

about what might be in my interest may not be in your interest. 

And what is the definition of this? And of course even 

somebody might argue the public interest as opposed to the 

common interest. And there could be shades of different you, 

know, different shades here, and I think that it would be 

interesting to have that conversation. And I hope, I hope when 

this is referred to committee that we may actually invite some 

of the accountants to be part of that discussion, and what’s their 

interpretation of this. 

 

Because I know it is well within the ability of the committee to 

ask witnesses to come forward. And I would hope that maybe 

we have those witnesses come forward and give some input into 

this because I would like to know about the public interest. 

 

And of course the reason is, I mean for many of us, you know, 

the use of accountants decades ago was, you know, the sign of 

high finance. It was something that we didn’t often associate 

with. But clearly in the last two or three decades, and I do think 

about particularly around 2000 when we saw what was 

happening in the world of some of the major corporations, 

particularly in the States — I think of Enron as one — where 

there was a lot of questions being asked about how could such a 

thing happen? People were investing. Apparently the 

corporation was on sound footing. And people were assuming 

that things were being checked, that all the bases were covered. 

And all of a sudden a major corporation, a major, major 

corporation collapsed. And then people had many, many 

questions about the professional responsibility involved in that 

type of thing, and the impact on shareholders and the impact of 

citizens in terms of retirement funds that just disappeared 

overnight. 

 

And we saw that again in the States with the housing collapse 

and the mortgage fiasco around, in 2007-2008. And again what 

happened there? What happened there? Because people were 

counting, were depending on professional responsibility of 

many disciplines — and I think accountants would be included 

in that because quite often they are the auditors of the 

corporations — and somehow things went astray. 

 

So I think that it would be really interesting to talk about the 

public interest, and I know the minister had referred to how 

important this is going to be for consumers. And I’ll get to that 

in a minute. But I do want to underline what is the meaning 

here and what is the interpretation of public interest? It would 

be very interesting to get that on record, and the minister did not 

refer to that in committee. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We can definitely see it at the provincial level when we have 

auditors doing the good work. And we know that the 

relationship with the auditors in this government, and 

particularly this minister when we talk about balanced budgets, 

they don’t see things eye to eye. And when our auditors have 

said, let’s do things in one set of books and people can 

understand that more easily, this government insists on using 

two sets of books, depending on the place the people are talking 

to. And of course there is a lot of confusion about whether the 

books are actually balanced in this province or not. There’s 

some very big questions about that. 

 

And so this is why it’s very important to talk about the public 

interest because sometimes I think this government thinks it’s 

about the government interest and not the public interest. But 

that is who they’re charged to be responsible for; that’s their 

mandate, the public, the public interest here in the province. But 

I sometimes wonder if they’ve taken it to a different level, and 

that is the government interest. And that’s not, that’s not what 

this is about. So when we get the minister and hopefully we 

might be able to get some accountants in, we can talk further 

about this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this is how the stage is set out, and 

it’s been asked for by the accounting profession. And it’s one 

that, again, it’s interesting. We’re getting a lot of material. A lot 

of legislation is being created this way. Are there others that 

should’ve been consulted in this, in the development of this 

Act? You know, because once we create an Act, we want to 

make sure there are no unintended consequences. It is our goal 

to make sure that this is the strongest the legislation could 

possibly be. 

 

And one of the ways of doing that is to talk to a lot of different 

stakeholders, not just one set of stakeholders who clearly . . . 

And I think they have the best interests at heart, the public 

interest they say, but we need to make sure we take a look from 



4232 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

all different angles. In fact that’s what auditors and accountants 

would probably say to us — make sure you take a look at this 

from all different angles and not just one angle. And I think 

that’s important. 

 

So who else did they consult? What things did they hear from 

those people? Did they consult at all with others? Now it might 

be the universities or the institutes from which accountants are 

trained in. They may have some input into this. Some large 

financial institutions might have some input into this. It would 

be interesting if our own auditors had some input into this. 

 

Did they go out and cast a wide net for more input on this? 

Because I think once we pass this, then our part as legislators is 

done. And we won’t have a chance to take a look at this again 

until they start to find the mistakes and the oversights that they 

did. Then it comes back to us as an amendment, and I hope 

that’s not in a year or two. Often that’s what we see. In a year or 

two after the fact with this government, there’s been 

amendments come back. 

 

So we have a lot of concerns about that. And of course once it’s 

passed here then we go into the regulatory, the regulations part, 

and we don’t have a lot of input in that. We ask, we can ask in 

committee, but generally the work is then done by cabinet and 

it’s removed from the public scrutiny to the same extent. So we 

have a lot of questions about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things I do take an interest in and that is 

around the discipline section. And it’s fairly significant and 

that’s a good thing. I am interested in this one particularly 

because, you know, I did talk about this last night about the 

legal profession. And I made remarks in terms of the teaching 

profession in terms of how for the teaching profession they 

went to a medical doctor for input on how they should 

discipline themselves. They didn’t do that with the legal 

profession. They didn’t go outside the profession for an outside 

opinion, and I don’t know if they went outside the profession 

for an outside perspective. 

 

Now clearly this government is making, breaking new ground 

in terms of the report on the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation]. And I think it was an interesting report. But I think 

it’s important that, you know, when we’re doing this kind of 

thing, particularly when it comes to discipline, how has this 

particular section been scrutinized? Has there been an outside 

body take a look at this to say, okay if we’re looking at other 

disciplinary processes in professional organizations, how does 

this stand up to that same standard? 

 

Now in education clearly, when there’s children involved, they 

have a unique benchmark that they must meet. That’s a unique 

benchmark, and I understand that and I appreciate it. And it’s 

very important as a teacher, I think, that we have to always 

strive to do our very best when it comes to the situations that 

involve children. Parents absolutely must have confidence in 

that. And this process must be transparent and accountable and 

in fact there is some value in the public right to know. 

 

Here in terms of discipline, and the minister did talk about the 

concept of consumer protection, and I refer back to the housing 

crisis that happened in the States: Enron, the large corporations 

that have failed. And there’s been examples here in Canada. 

I think that there needs to be — now I’m not sure, maybe it’s in 

here — but the public right to know and how is that carried out. 

There are public appointees, and that’s important. And I think 

almost all professional organizations have public appointees. 

But the question really becomes, how is their work 

communicated to the public? How is their work communicated 

to the public? Quite often they do their work and they do good 

work, but it’s not communicated at all. And in this case, well 

how is the public aware of the things that are happening in 

terms of the accountants? 

 

I think it’s a very important question because we have the Act 

open now. And it would be one that I hope we ask and we get 

answers to in terms of so what happens with the discipline 

because that’s a big, big thing. Money is being invested and 

money moves around fairly quickly, and that’s because people 

want to take advantage of good opportunities. And if there are 

situations that are problems, we want to know about it right 

away. 

 

I think of only the White Bear situation with their accountant. 

We’ve read about that in the media where their accountant 

actually went back to Central America but came back. And we 

have yet to see how that plays out. But clearly this is a big, big 

issue. And when you have non-profits, you have reserves, you 

have a lot of organizations that are working with money that is 

precious, absolutely precious, and their work is significant in 

the health of our communities and in our families because of 

investments, particularly when it comes to retirement, it’s 

important that the disciplinary action is even more than just 

transparent, but it’s readily accessible. 

 

And I see that there is a section 35, a duty to report, and I will 

just take to minute to see what that says. I think that it will be 

. . . and it will report its findings. And I’ll read what it says: 

 

If the professional conduct committee in its investigation 

pursuant to section 28 or the discipline committee at the 

conclusion of its hearing pursuant to section 31 believes 

that the registrant whose conduct is the subject of the 

investigation or hearing may be guilty of a criminal 

offence . . . 

 

may immediately discontinue its investigation . . . 

 

So this is a case of criminal misconduct so it’s, report of its 

findings to the president of the institute and the Deputy Minister 

of Justice. 

 

So there you go. That’s what they do if its criminal. But what 

do you do if it’s otherwise? Now it may be that pretty much, 

and I would almost think that pretty much all their work if it’s 

not done well could be the nature of a criminal offence because 

of the severe . . . the seriousness of their work. But I think it’s 

important. I think this is something that, as I said in the case of 

Whitecap, you had a major impact in terms of, I believe, the 

loss was well over $1 million, and it’s a significant one. So this 

is something that we really, really need to take seriously. 

 

And once we have the Act open like this, it’s important that we 

take some time, scrutinize it. Clearly it’s come from three 

credible sources and I think that bodes well for it. But we need 

to make sure that . . . It is our responsibility, you know. We are 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4233 

a body that scrutiny is so, so critically, so critically important. 

And so we will be checking with folks about this. 

 

And it will be interesting to see, it will be . . . You know, might 

be even interesting to see what the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] have to say about accountants. That would be 

interesting if they have any in terms of their work. Now I would 

imagine 99.9 per cent would be positive but, you know, in 

terms of the kind of fraud or crime, it might be of worth, 

interesting to see what they would have to say about this. 

 

So I just want to take a minute as well just to review what the 

Minister of Finance had to say. And of course he talks about the 

three organizations: the CAs [chartered accountant], the CMAs, 

and the CGAs all represent the professional accountants in 

Saskatchewan. And there’s approximately 4,400 members and 

970 students. So there were extensive consultation, and of 

course there was a supportive vote to merge together. And this 

is something that, as he mentions, is happening right across, 

right across Canada. So that fits well as we know that we want 

to establish standards that fit right across, right across Canada. 

So he talks about the accounting profession and the regulatory 

system they have is internationally recognized as being robust, 

competitive, and consistent, and that supports our economic 

objectives. And truly, truly, that is . . . And that’s why this is so 

critically important that we get it right. 

 

And the merger into a modern streamlined regime will have 

benefits to the public in that we can know the CPAs are trained, 

licensed, and regulated by the professional accounting 

profession. Now that’s really critical. And I know at some point 

sometimes we’re always wondering which level, a CA or a 

CPA or a CGA, is which better for our processes. And that’s 

very good. 

 

It talks about better protection to the consumer: “. . . that they 

can feel assured that accountants are qualified to provide a 

service in their designated speciality.” 

 

And so I hope that will be easily understood though I do worry 

about sometimes when we get overly complex. And we know 

that this government last year, a year ago, brought forward the 

employment Act where they were forcing unions to have 

audited statements. And because of that language, all of a 

sudden the costs for some organizations were going to actually 

be higher than the amount of money that they actually gathered 

because some of the locals were very small. And so I do worry 

that sometimes we . . . There is a balance, isn’t there. Because 

we want to make sure the records are robust. They’re 

transparent. They’re accountable. People can have access to 

them and they’re easily understood. But at the same time you 

don’t want to overdo it where you’re paying more for work than 

you’re actually . . . the value matches the amount of money 

that’s being involved. So that’s very, very important. 

 

So it is important we have the protection for the consumer but, 

as I said, the section around discipline, we’ll have questions in 

terms of the accountability and the reporting out of that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know other people will want to get up and 

speak to this. Of course this will be interesting to see how this 

plays out because we’ll have time in the House to discuss this 

further, and we’ll have questions in committee. But of course as 

with any piece of legislation, the devil will be in the regulations 

and how that all plays out together. That will be interesting to 

see how that happens with this Act as you merge three 

designations and three organizations and the way they’ve done 

it before. And if there’s any group that was ever a stickler for 

detail, I imagine it would be the accountants and that they could 

anticipate concerns. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So we do have questions. You know, as I said, were there other 

bodies that were consulted, and what was that? You know, 

generally this makes sense off the top of it. But as I’ve said, it’s 

our duty, it’s our role to make sure there are no unintended 

consequences and that we don’t have to open up this piece of 

legislation next year because something was forgotten. Let’s 

talk about this right now. 

 

And as I said, I am interested in having the discussion about the 

parameters of the term public interest. What does that really 

mean? It’s a term that can mean an awful lot to a lot of different 

people. I know that there are examples of where the definition 

of the public interest has been defined in a really helpful sense, 

but this is not the case here. It’s a general term, and we really 

want to make sure that it’s as clear as possible. 

 

And you know, interestingly I was up on the floor last night in 

the legislature. The Legal Profession Act talked about how the 

public interest had priority over the individual lawyer’s interest. 

So there was a discussion about that. We don’t see that 

reference in here. Whether that’s something that should have 

been in here, I’m not sure. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that, as I said, many others 

will want to rise and debate this bill . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . They’re that close, very close. Well that’s interesting . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . We’ve talked that long? Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to move adjournment of Bill No. 112, An Act 

respecting the Accounting Profession and the Institute of 

Chartered Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan and 

making consequential amendments to other Acts. I do so move 

adjournment. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 112, The Accounting Profession Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 99 — The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and speak to Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension 

Plan Amendment Act, 2013. Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation 



4234 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

is quite a short piece of legislation, and there’s maybe not a lot 

of content to it, but often what we find is when we look at 

legislation that doesn’t appear to be that significant, there’s 

maybe more going on here than is recognized. 

 

Now I know when the minister brought forward or set out his 

second reading speech on November the 12th, it was actually 

quite a short speech, even though this plan affects 53,000 

members in the public employees pension plan. And there are 

79 different employees, and there’s $5.6 billion in assets in this 

plan right now. And all members of the legislature and the staff 

of the legislature, we’re all members of this particular plan. So I 

think it’s important that we take a look at what is being 

contemplated here in this amendment, and there are a number of 

different amendments. 

 

Now normally when the minister brings forward a bill, we have 

somewhat of an explanation about why these amendments are 

being brought forward, who called for them, and what was the 

reason for the amendment. Now some of them we can I think 

maybe surmise what the reason is, even though the minister 

didn’t say directly. I think his comment was, the world is 

always changing and therefore investment options are always 

changing, so therefore we have to change the Act. Now that 

may be a laudable point. But what’s the actual reason? 

 

And so the first amendment that’s being brought forward here is 

in section 4, and basically it’s . . . In this particular amendment 

bill, it’s section 3, but it’s amending section 4 by adding section 

4.1. And as far as we can tell, this relates to the decision making 

made by the board of the public employees pension plan. 

 

We have no indication from the minister why this particular 

provision was brought forward. And so I’ve been trying to 

figure out, well what is it that’s a concern? It looks as if they 

ended up with some problems around getting 100 per cent 

agreement on some of the decisions that they were making on 

that board. I think it would be helpful for all of us if we knew 

what kinds of decisions where they were having to invoke a 

majority rather than unanimity or consensus decision making. 

 

I think for many years this particular pension plan has operated 

on a consensus basis and part of the reason for that is that it has 

representatives from both the employers’ side and the 

employees’ side as well as some independent people. And so in 

a situation like that, you end up wanting to have consensus as 

your governing model. And so in this particular situation, the 

amendment coming forward is saying, well let’s get rid of that 

method of decision making that we’ve used for a long time and 

set out a method whereby decisions can be made by a majority 

of the members of the board present at the meeting. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not sure what particular issue arose or what 

particular situation arose that generated this change on the 

board. 

 

Now what’s even more curious when you look at the new 

provisions that’s coming in, which would be section 4.1(2), is 

that it sets out that: 

 

No member of the board is liable with respect to a decision 

or an action taken at a meeting of the board if: 

 

in the case of a member who was present at the meeting, 

the member: 

 

(i) did not vote for or otherwise approve the decision 

or action taken at the meeting; and 

 

(ii) requests that his or her dissent be entered into the 

minutes of the meeting; or 

 

the member was not present at the meeting at which the 

decision was approved or the action taken. 

 

So obviously on this board, there’s been some number of 

disputes. It may be one dispute. It may be a whole string of 

disputes, but we have no information from the minister about 

what it is that generated this particular change in the legislation. 

And that’s somewhat troubling because he’s asking for a 

change in legislation that affects billions of dollars of 

investments and many, many employees. I think it was 53,000 

employees and 79 different employers. 

 

But practically, I would have expected we would have had 

some explanation of what the reason is for this particular 

change. And I assume we’ll maybe get a chance to ask more 

about it in committee, but, but practically this is one of the 

downfalls of the present government’s limiting of this length 

and explanations that they set out in their second reading 

speeches. 

 

What I know as a lawyer is when you have difficulty with 

legislation that’s passed five years, ten years down the road, one 

of the first places you go to look at the meaning of the 

legislation or trying to interpret what the minister and the 

government was trying to do is to go and look at the second 

reading speech of the minister when it was presented in the 

legislature. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the speech that we got on this bill doesn’t 

provide any enlightenment on this particular section and 

practically on the other sections as well. What we will also . . . 

in this situation then, probably having to go to the speeches that 

we provide on the opposition side and then to the answers that 

we get to questions when it gets to committees. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the next change is section 4 of the bill. And 

what section 4 does is amend section 5 by adding a clause after 

(g), 5(g), which becomes 5(g.1). And what’s stated in the 

explanatory notes is that this is for the purpose of undertaking 

short-term borrowing. And effectively this is probably brought 

forward by the investment managers, but once again we have no 

explanation around that as to what particular problem has arisen 

that requires this kind of a change. 

 

And so I make the plea to the people who are working within 

the departments and preparing the documents for the legislature 

that we have more information in the second reading speech of 

this minister, but I would say frankly, Mr. Speaker, on all 

ministers generally we do not have very thorough explanations. 

 

Then we go on to the next change in this bill, and that would be 

section, I guess it’s section 5 of the bill itself. And in that there 

are two clauses. And effectively what’s supposed to be 

happening here is setting up a default fund for the public 

employees pension plan. And I think this is something that I 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4235 

think the minister could have explained to us why it’s being 

done. 

 

But it’s clear, it’s clear that what’s happening here is that when 

the plan was changed to have a whole number of choices 

around the funds in the plan itself, it became clear that some 

people just didn’t make a choice. And so effectively what the 

plan managers needed was some ability to designate a choice 

for a person who didn’t want to make a choice. And so what we 

have is a situation where there’s no longer a requirement for an 

election of a particular fund for the investment, and then the 

ability to have a default fund, a standard fund that everybody’s 

money goes into. 

 

I think some people who have been part of this plan, that was 

the original way the plan worked, that there really wasn’t much 

choice and everybody went into the same plan. This is I think a 

reflection of a change, and it relates to the size of the fund, the 

number of employees, and also clearly the number of employers 

that are part of the particular plan. So this one doesn’t really 

have an explanation in the minister’s speech, but it’s a little 

more understandable of what’s going on. 

 

Now the next provision in the legislation is section 6, and that 

relates to an amendment to section 10. And basically this 

particular clause relates to the fact that the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council, the government can by regulation permit this plan to 

accept members and funds from a registered pension plan and 

include them in this public employees pension plan. 

 

Now there must be some opportunities or some changes that are 

happening that require special provision for this. There was no 

provision like that before. I think the advantage of this is that 

the plan can expand. I know people are quite envious of the 

efficiency of the management of this plan and how various 

things are done. So this is, clause 6 is allowing for the plan to 

receive new members. 

 

Now clause 7 goes to the regulatory clause and effectively adds 

a whole section of regulations that relate to the opposite of 

accepting funds. It relates to the fact that you are going to 

terminate members or transfer members out of the fund to 

someone else. And so what clause 7 does is says that section 26 

is amended, and put into there are provisions whereby people 

can transfer money out of this fund. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now I’m not totally certain, but I assume this relates to the 

Information Services Corporation, ISC, where a number of 

members are being transferred out of the public system, or some 

other preparation for the downsizing or changing of how benefit 

plans for public employees are done when the government 

privatizes or sells off a portion of the government. I think this 

would have been an area where it would have been helpful for 

the minister to explain why this particular provision is being 

added here. I think that there is an explanation owed to the 

employees, clearly, and possibly even to employers as to why 

this provision is being added. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are, as I’ve explained, a number of 

relatively straightforward changes being proposed, but we don’t 

know exactly who asked for them, and we don’t know what 

particular problems are being addressed or issues that are being 

resolved. 

 

When we look at pension legislation in general, what we know 

is that this is a method of deferred income. All of the people 

who have pension plans under our federal and provincial 

income tax Acts are allowed to take a certain portion of their 

present-day earned income, set it into a fund so that it can then 

be accepted later and with tax paid at that later time. This is a 

public policy which is a good policy, and it recognizes that, 

where possible, employees should have a plan that does this. 

 

In Canada we have a whole number of levels of deferred 

income methods. Some of them are right part of your 

employment, like this public employees pension plan. Others 

are ones that are generic. They go right across the board. I’m 

thinking here of the Canada Pension Plan. Unfortunately that 

Canada Pension Plan has not kept up with the cost of living 

that’s present today, and there have been quite a number of 

discussions on a national level to improve the Canada Pension 

Plan, both on the contribution side but also on the benefits side. 

That’s tied in with this type of legislation because they all work 

together. 

 

Ideally you’d end up with a generic or across-the-board plan for 

all workers and all employers that then would allow for 

something like the public employees pension plan to be a layer 

on top of that. We also have our methods of old age security 

and the supplement for low-income people, and we also have 

obviously registered retirement savings plans and the tax 

deferred savings plans that are other adjuncts to what happens. 

 

But on a straight policy basis, it’s been disappointing to see that 

our present government here in Saskatchewan has not been as 

adamant about improving the Canada Pension Plan system 

across the country. We know that some of the other provinces 

have shown some leadership on this, but clearly Saskatchewan 

has sort of stepped back and not been as strong an advocate for 

all of the people of our province. 

 

Now when people have a good pension base so that they can 

plan for the long term, it makes a big difference in confidence 

around how people are going to live in the long term. We know 

that the financial crisis in 2008 put a chill over all kinds of 

pension plans like the public employees pension plan that are 

defined contribution plans rather than defined benefit plans. 

 

In Saskatchewan, changes were made in the public service plan 

to go to a defined contribution plan which, in other words, it 

designates exactly how much you put in that goes to your 

credit, and then after your years of service, that amount plus 

whatever income has been earned on that is what you have 

available to purchase the pension plan for yourself. The 

previous plan would be that everybody would put in their 

percentage of their income and then the benefit would be 

calculated based on years of service and other factors. And that 

kind of a plan has many advantages to it, but it also has 

disadvantages in a time of high inflation. 

 

But for better or for worse, we have a fully funded plan here in 

Saskatchewan. There are very few if any present employees of 

the Government of Saskatchewan that are on the old defined 

benefit plan. I think most people are on this defined 



4236 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

contribution plan. 

 

But what that does mean is when the assets of the plan take a hit 

like in 2008 or at other times, then it changes people’s options. 

And what we’ve seen is many people who thought they were 

ready to retire in 2007, by the time they got to 2008 and early in 

2009, there were many plans that had to be changed. And that’s 

unfortunate because it affects many people within the system, 

those people who decide, well maybe I can’t take early 

retirement or move to a job-sharing arrangement or something. 

That means that younger professional people or younger 

employees don’t have the same options to move into some of 

those jobs. 

 

And what we’ve seen then over the last five years is that that 

decision or those decisions that are based on the security that 

people have around their pension plans have affected not just 

the people who are getting the pensions themselves but their 

families, the other employees at places where they work, and all 

of the whole community. Now practically there’s been a 

recovery in some of, many of the investments in these plans, but 

when you have this particular legislation and it affects so many 

people, we have to be really careful about how we examine 

what’s here and how we understand what’s being done. 

 

And so I make a plea once again to the minister and to all the 

people who are providing advice to the minister. It’s very 

important in the second reading speech to set out the reasons 

that you’re making all of these changes. And even if it sounds 

like it’s obvious, what we need to have on the record from the 

minister, from the government, is the rationale for these 

changes. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a failing of this government 

over a number of years, and no matter how often we mention it 

on this side, it doesn’t seem to get any better. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s helpful for the members of the 

legislature. It’s helpful for the public. It’s helpful for judges and 

lawyers who have to later interpret this. It’s helpful for people 

who are managing plans to actually have some of the rationale 

set out when bills are prepared. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this point I don’t have any more comments 

to make, but I will be looking forward to trying to fill out the 

information gap that’s here in the second reading speech in the 

committee. I know that a number of my colleagues still want to 

speak about this legislation because it affects each one of us, 

but more importantly it affects 53,000 people across the 

province. And so, Mr. Speaker, with that I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 99, The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The Child 

Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am joining in to 

debate the bill on 98, The Child Care Act, 2013. 

 

We know that child care is very important to working families, 

single parents. We know that there’s not enough. You know, 

government keeps talking about the economy is growing. 

People are working. But there are strugglers. 

 

Families are struggling out there, Mr. Speaker, with child care, 

whether it’s during the daylight hours . . . And we know that 

there are some daycares that are operating, and I think some of 

them operate 24 hour for those individuals who work evenings 

and night shifts, late shifts in the evening. And there are . . . 

whether a different industry where those opportunities are there 

for those individuals to work. And we have many people 

working late hours rather than regular hours we’ll say are from 

8 to 5 or 9 to 5, 9 to 6. There are many people who have to 

work and some working two jobs to make ends meet. And they 

have to make sure they have affordable, you know, child care 

for their family. 

 

And I want to be very clear on it. We’re seeing the challenges 

out there and sometimes families struggling if they don’t have a 

family member, you know, a grandma, a grandpa, an aunt, an 

uncle to watch those kids. If they’re not in a situation where the 

family has the one spouse is working, and the type of job the 

income is well, and they can take care of their family. 

Everybody wants that in this province, and people expect that. 

But having said that, sometimes that doesn’t happen. And when 

it can happen and a family member chooses to stay home and 

raise the children, we think great. That’s great for that family, 

you know, and that’s fine. But when both family members have 

to go out or if it’s a single parent, they need affordable daycare. 

 

And unfortunately we’ve been hearing from lots — whether it’s 

in the North, the urban, the rural — the challenge when it 

comes to daycare, finding affordable, and daycare that you want 

to make sure that you leave your children are there. And that’s 

the struggle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government hasn’t done enough. It needs to do more. And 

you can announce all these spaces they want in the world and 

say, oh well, we’re opening more. But they have to materialize 

and you can’t just say, you know, they’re there and make 

announcements. So let’s make sure that those spaces are 

available for, I guess, working families and individuals who 

need to have daycare. It’s very important. And we’ll get into a 

bit of the changes here that’s been requested with Bill 98. 

 

But having said that, I want to be focused a little bit on the 

families and the struggles that are going on with individuals 

trying to find a suitable daycare for their children. It’s important 

and people want to make sure their children are safe. They want 

to make sure that organizations that are running . . . whether 

they’re a board, whether it’s, you know, a home daycare where 

somebody is running a private one in their home. We have 

those too and they do great work and nobody wants to take that 

away. 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4237 

We have to make sure that the regulations, people understand 

the regulations, whether it’s in English or — we have two 

official languages — French. We have to make sure that at the 

end of the day that people have . . . and if it’s a francophone 

person and they’re operating a daycare, they have to make sure 

they have that language available. If it’s their first language that 

it’s in French and we know that that’s what they’re requesting 

and that’s important. But having said that, we’ll see some of the 

changes and provisions that are coming in here. 

 

But I want to, you know, go back into making sure that people 

that are watching and what we’re hearing, people who are 

bringing concerns forward saying there isn’t enough daycare 

spots to cover the need. And I think the waiting list in some 

communities when they have a community daycare, the list is 

ongoing. And I want to commend the schools. Some of the 

schools are having daycares right in the schools and that’s a 

good thing. And we think, you know, not only is it for students, 

for community members, but it gives that whole community 

atmosphere in the school and it has a daycare providing that 

type of service for community members whether they’re 

students, whether they’re working there, and I assume workers 

have the opportunity to bring their children. So there are 

opportunities. There might be a priority list that, you know, 

maybe it’s students first, maybe it’s community members first, 

then staff, however it is. But at the end of the day it’s a service 

that’s provided and a good service. 

 

And there’s home daycares and I know a lot of people use home 

daycares. They have their children going there and it provides a 

good service. We have to make sure, whether it’s in English or 

French, that that home daycare . . . And it might be someone 

who’s a francophone and they want to make sure the 

regulations, they understand that those regulations and the 

bylaws and the rules, that they’re adhering to those and 

following them, that they make sure that they’re available to 

them in the language of French or in English as we see the 

regulations right now for daycares. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important that we, 

you know, we make sure we have enough. And I’ve said this. 

The government hasn’t done enough to make sure there’s lots 

of daycares, and the waiting list is so long, and it’s getting 

longer. And I think government needs to do a better job when it 

comes to daycare spaces. 

 

But having said that, also, you know, this has been supported by 

the francophones and they’ve requested this. And I think there’s 

about six, maybe more, daycare centres that are operated for 

francophone families. And it is their first language so we want 

to make sure that — you know, as official languages we have 

are French and English — that we make sure the legislation is 

in French and the regulations and rules, that the francophone 

families and the French-speaking community and members of 

this province have access to that to make sure they’re 

interpreting the rules and regulations properly so they’re not 

confused. 

 

So I guess basically you look at these changes. It’s supportive. 

We’re supportive. And it’s good and it’s giving a chance to give 

opportunity to, you know, individuals, individuals that want to 

speak their language. And if French is their first language, 

that’s their choice. The regulations are in them. And I think it’s 

something that has to be provided, you know, within the 

Charter and the constitution and making sure the language is 

there. 

 

So having said that, you know, I don’t have any further 

comments about it. I think it’s a good thing. It gives them 

opportunity to see the regulations in French, and this is a good 

thing. And we’ve said this on this side of the House. When we 

see legislation that we can work with, we’ll work with the 

government when it makes good sense, common sense to do so. 

We’ll work with that. 

 

In this case it’s a group requesting it. We’ll work with them to 

bring it forward and change the regulation so they can have, 

you know, the daycare regulations in their language. And of 

course French is the language that they were requesting it be put 

into. We support that. There’s no reason to think not. I don’t 

think this gives any more . . . There might be some minor 

changes in the legislation, and we’ll have to, you know, if we 

have more questions, we can talk about it in committee once it 

goes there. 

 

But I know other colleagues have more to talk about on this end 

and we’ll bring forward some of their concerns and comments. 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 98, The Child Care Act, 2013. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 100 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and I am pleased to rise today to speak to this bill, Bill 

No. 100, the Act to amend The Assessment Management 

Agency Act. 

 

What we see in this bill is a number of proposed amendments 

that are accomplishing several goals as pointed out by the 

minister in his introductory remarks. As I read through the 

changes that are being proposed, it struck me about the 

complexity of the work that’s provided by the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency and the important role it 

plays in the property taxation system in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. And also the, I guess, the changes that came prior to 

my arrival here in the legislature in relation to the role of 

schools and the taxation, property taxation rules as they affected 

schools. 



4238 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

And it’s apparent to me, as I read through this, that those were 

some significant changes in the way business had been done in 

relation to property taxation in this province for many years. 

And I know other members of my colleagues on the official 

opposition were around during those days and some have 

commented on it already and others will provide more 

comment. But certainly as I went through this I could see 

there’s a number of things going on here. 

 

Once again, I think much of what’s being brought forward is at 

the request of SAMA or the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency. So those changes . . . As we know, we’ve 

got good people out there doing hard work to make sure these 

organizations and agencies function properly. And from time to 

time, amendments to legislation are required to make sense and 

to reflect modern practices. 

 

I guess the substantive part of this bill, as far as this government 

is concerned, is the changes to the way the assessment agency is 

funded. And as we know, SAMA — I’m going to refer to it as 

SAMA, Mr. Speaker, but that’s the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency — SAMA was a part of this bill being 

introduced. 

 

SAMA was funded on a 65/35 sharing split between the 

province and the municipalities of Saskatchewan. And what the 

minister indicated in his comment was that the change would 

prevent SAMA from seeking greater funding from the 

municipal sector. I’m not sure why that’s an issue, and certainly 

would have appreciated more comments from the minister in 

his remarks to indicate why this type of change was necessary. 

There’s no explanation or justification for this statement other 

than just simply stating that the goal is to prevent the agency 

from seeking greater funding from the municipal sector. 

 

I’m not sure that’s accomplished by this bill because it seems to 

me that the agency can make certain demands on the 

municipalities here. And now that it’s separated from the 

provincial requirements for a revenue split or a split sharing of 

the funding, it’s not clear to me how this is going to meet the 

minister’s stated goal in his comments made on November 

12th, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He went on to say that there are other financial amendments, 

that I will talk about in a minute, that will give SAMA a greater 

flexibility respecting increases to municipal requisitions, 

providing timelines that are achievable and ensuring a properly 

funded agency. 

 

So without more clarity and more explanation from the 

minister, there seems to be a bit of a disconnect between those 

two paragraphs. But perhaps we can tease that out a little bit 

more as we continue the debates and also have opportunity to 

question him when this bill is presented to the committee after 

the debates are finished. 

 

And finally he talks about some changes that are being 

proposed of a non-financial nature, which would reflect the 

roles and respond to the responsibilities of the ministries of 

Government Relations and Education. And again I think this 

sort of points back to the time when the Ministry of Education 

was much, much more involved in the property tax assessment 

than it is now. And certainly in the explanatory notes that were 

provided, we do have some guidance as to why some of these 

proposed amendments are being put to the House. 

 

So just quickly going through some of the proposed 

amendments, we know the first one is — and we see this one 

throughout the bill — wherever we see the words executive 

director, there’s now a substitution to chief executive officer. 

And this was an amendment that was requested by SAMA, and 

there’s no issue with that, Mr. Speaker. That’s more a modern 

parlance issue and there’s no issues with making those kinds of 

changes. 

 

The next section that’s being look at or amended is section 11 

of the existing Act. And a number of those clauses are being 

repealed, subclauses (4) to (7). And this was a request as well 

from SAMA because subclauses (4) to (7) dealt with a technical 

advisory committee which, according to SAMA, has fallen into 

disuse. It’s not being used anymore. And certainly the power of 

the board to establish committees under 11(1) is, according to 

SAMA, is sufficient. So this is a request from SAMA, and 

again there is no issue, I don’t think, with that kind of request. 

 

The next change is found in the existing clause 11.1(1). Again 

this is a change to process within SAMA’s . . . the conduct of 

annual meetings, and SAMA just wanted an ability for 

resolutions to be made from the floor. And I think that’s a 

reasonable request, and certainly I think the suggested changes 

in that clause achieve that goal. So it’s reorganized a little bit, 

but I don’t think there’s any real significant change that requires 

comment. 

 

The next one is section 12 which is now being amended. And 

what we’re told there is there’s a number of changes that are in 

relation to the reference to schooling. The first two, there’s a 

repeal, and a repeal to some of the powers and duties of the 

board in relation to how assessors are trained. And we’re told 

that this is more the responsibility of rural municipal 

administrators and urban municipal administrators, as well as 

the University of Regina which has a course related to that. So 

apparently the way the Act is written now, that the training 

sections are not reflecting what’s really on the ground. 

 

Clause (k) is being amended to follow up the changes to the 

funding of the education system in 2009. And any reference you 

see to the Minister of Education is being removed in the Act 

now as the government has changed responsibility to the 

Minister of Government Relations, so that’s a clause 

amendment that reflects that. 

 

I think one thing that’s of interest, and I would question the 

minister, is why he hasn’t made the same change to clause (m) 

that he has to clause (n) of section 12. And the changes that are 

being proposed to clause (n) is to remove the reference to 

school divisions where it shows up a couple of times. But for 

some reason the minister has chosen to leave school divisions in 

clause (m), and it doesn’t seem to be consistent with the rest of 

the goals of the amendments. So I would really question the 

minister in that clause and query why that hasn’t been struck 

out as well. Because it doesn’t make . . . In my view, it isn’t 

consistent with the changes that are being made to clause (n). 

So we would want some clarity around that, Mr. Speaker. And 

perhaps it’s just an oversight in the drafting changes that 

perhaps needs to be looked at. 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4239 

Going on then. The next clause that’s being amended in The 

Assessment Management Agency Act is in clause 12. And really 

there’s just a clerical change there that is very minor. The same 

with the changes to clause 13 and 14 — these are very minor 

changes that are being proposed, again referring to the chief 

executive officer instead of the executive director. So those are 

very minor changes. 

 

In clause 16 there’s the borrowing changes that are being 

proposed. And what this does is give SAMA an ability to 

borrow . . . The maximum term for borrowing is being 

increased to five years, and this is more in line, we’re told, with 

funding initiatives such as its capital funding programs. Again 

this was requested by SAMA. It seems to be a reasonable 

request to extend the term of temporary borrowing from three 

years to five years. And there were some other minor changes 

in that clause as well. 

 

In clause 18 we see sort of the meat of the changes to this bill 

starting to be reflected. And what happens is clause 18 of the 

existing Act deals with the annual funding, which is based on a 

four-year plan, and then clause 18.011 is the formula for 

funding by the Government of Saskatchewan. Now what’s 

happening in the amendments that are being proposed, under 

18(1) we’re changing the date to September 1st from July 15th, 

and apparently that will give SAMA more time to prepare its 

plan for the annual provincial budget cycle. So that appears to 

be in order. 

 

And then in 18.01(1) there’s been significant changes that we 

find. And what the government is attempting to do here is to 

split out the funding formula. Rather than the 65/35 split, we 

now see two separate clauses that describe how municipalities 

will fund SAMA and how the Government of Saskatchewan 

will fund SAMA. I think it’s a lot of numbering changes and 

rejigging of the way the words are ordered. 

 

But I think that the big change you will find is previously in the 

existing clause 18.01(3), we see the government’s 65 per cent 

share. Now it just simply will say the Government of 

Saskatchewan shall provide annual funding to the agency that 

reflects the provincial interest in . . . And there’s a list there of 

five things. Originally it was assessment research and policy 

development, maintaining a central database, providing 

assessment information pursuant to clauses 12(1)(m) and (n), 

assuring the quality of assessments, and used to be for funding 

education. And that was still there, Mr. Speaker. It’s being 

proposed that that be struck and it’s now going to reflect a new 

subclause (e), “the property taxation system.” 

 

So it’s I think a significant change. And this is I think the one 

that needs the most attention, and we’ll certainly want to get 

more comment from our municipal partners and also from 

SAMA itself to make sure that this is reflecting and will meet 

the needs of SAMA because when you have the government 

and municipalities tied to a sharing formula, I think that implies 

commitments on the part of both. And now that that relationship 

is severed and you have municipalities doing their funding and 

the province doing its funding with its own objectives and 

initiatives, there may be a significant impact on SAMA and 

there may also be a significant impact on municipalities. 

 

So it’s certainly something I think we’re going to want to ask 

more questions from the minister when we have the opportunity 

in committee. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So this is the heart of the changes, for those that are listening. 

Take a close look at clauses 18.01 and 18.011 because I think 

that really is where the substantive changes to this bill exist. 

Throughout these changes there’s always a reference to funding 

education. Any time it exists it’s being removed. So that’s 

certainly something I think that also reflects the change in 

approach from this government in terms of assessing property 

taxation values in the province. 

 

18.03 is also substantively changed, again to reflect some of the 

fiscal year requirements, and the references to the funding 

sharing is also being removed. So these are things that I think 

will make for more orderly flow of the money to SAMA. 

Apparently it has cash flow issues from time to time because of 

certain dates that are referenced in the Act. So the attempt here 

is to update the dates to make sure that municipalities pay 

SAMA on time and in a fashion that allows them to avoid those 

cash flow problems. Seems to be reasonable changes on that 

part. 

 

18.031. 18.031 there’s a minor change there, and in terms of the 

explanatory notes, these are again requests from SAMA to 

clarify interpretation of this particular clause. And so I think 

that that certainly is in order. 

 

Next clause that’s being changed is 18.04. It’s just a change 

removing an actual date reference of September 1st and 

inserting a 60-day requirement that seems to assist SAMA again 

in making sure that they’re not tied to a specific date in terms of 

the confirmation of assessments and the payment of such. 

 

A few more changes being made. Some redundancies in 18.05 

that are being taken care of and then some numbering issues 

that are being taken care of in clause 18.1. In clause 20(1), 

again just some renumbering. And reference is being removed 

in relation to the funding share agreement. 

 

We see in section 22 references to The Education Act being 

removed, again reflecting the changes this government has 

made in terms of how property taxes and education taxes are 

being handled. And again I defer to my colleagues who were 

here in 2009 in terms of the impact of those policy decisions on 

the municipalities and on SAMA, of course. 

 

Another redundancy in clause 22 that’s being dealt with, just a 

number of small changes. No issues there. Again in clause 22 

there’s some references to school divisions that are being 

changed to refer to the minister. And the explanatory note there 

gives us some discussion about what happened in 2009. And in 

there we read: 

 

In 2009, the funding of the education system changed with 

the province now establishing provincial mill rates. School 

divisions are still recognized as the ‘other taxing authority’ 

in the municipal Acts, but [here it’s saying] the ministry 

[now] has a stronger interest in terms of what occurs to the 

assessed values of any given municipality [rather than the 

school boards] . . . 



4240 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

Amendments are being made to replace reference to 

school divisions with the Minister to reflect the change in 

responsibilities in terms of education funding. 

 

And this particular clause 22 is on appeals of secondary audits. 

So this is where a municipality or the appraiser can appeal the 

findings of SAMA on a secondary audit. So any time that 

happens, notice is going to now be provided to the minister 

instead of the affected school division. 

 

In section 24.1(3) there’s a small change being made. Just a 

note to the drafters and to the people who prepare the 

explanatory notes, the wrong clause is included in the 

explanatory notes. They may want to fix that and make sure that 

they make proper reference. They are referring to clause 24(1) 

when actually it should be clause 24.1. So there’s an error in the 

explanatory notes there. It just makes the English teacher in me 

happy when I find something like that, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

glad to share that with the legislature. 

 

Then there’s a few more clauses that are dealing with some 

other minor changes and there’s really nothing of any import in 

those. 

 

So on a general review of this Act, the requests by SAMA to 

update language and to reflect current practices, to provide them 

some of the flexibility they need in terms of time frames and 

dates, makes sense. To extend their borrowing capacity of 

short-term borrowing from three years to five years makes 

sense. 

 

In terms of the changes to the split in revenue sharing, I think 

that’s something that we will need to talk more to people to find 

out if that’s appropriate, to find out if that’s meeting the needs 

of SAMA, and whether this is an example of the government 

off-loading some of its responsibilities for ensuring proper 

assessment to the municipalities. And we know that they talk 

often about how much more money they’ve provided to 

municipalities over the past few years. Obviously we know 

there are other costs and charges that are being put on the . . . 

for the municipalities to be responsible for. So is it a net 

balance? Those are the kinds of things that I think, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to determine and take a close look. 

 

So at this point I think that would be the extent of my comments 

on this bill. I know that other of my colleagues are wanting to 

weigh in on the debate as well, and I would like to move that 

we adjourn debate on Bill No. 100, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 100, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 101 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pleased to rise to 

speak to Bill 101, An Act to amend The University of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1995. Mr. Speaker, this bill is I think rather 

straightforward, and it includes a number of changes that have 

obviously been requested by the university and by the officials 

that are trying to make sure that the Act complies with what 

they are doing at the university. But I think I’ll go through a 

few of these provisions with my perspective on them and 

provide some comments that hopefully will be of assistance in 

using the legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the first amendment is section 3. And 

effectively it acknowledges that the university has many 

functions, including conferring diplomas on people as well as 

degrees and certificates and honorary degrees, and also what 

they call admitting graduands into the convocation. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, that seems like a reasonable request because there are 

many people we know who have received diplomas from the 

university, and it’s been an important part of their careers in a 

whole number of areas. So we don’t have any great difficulty 

with that. 

 

Then we get into the changes that are being proposed in section 

4 of the Act. And effectively they’re adding in some changes to 

make it clearer about who’s part of the convocation and where 

these people are and how they can serve in the senate of the 

university. I think there have been some difficulties that relate 

to the election of the members of the senate and how they fit 

into the overall structure of the university. 

 

At this point I’ll maybe digress a little bit to say that 

universities are interesting organizations because of their long 

history. And so many times the rules that we have set out in 

legislations which incorporates a university don’t always 

capture 1,000 years of tradition or various adaptations and 

accommodations that have been made by an institution that 

reflect how that particular institution works. And this legislation 

has I think served the people of Saskatchewan very well for 100 

years or more. But clearly there are different expectations and 

understandings of how the university should be operated. 

 

Now one of the things that we need to make sure when we look 

at legislation like this is to make sure that some of those 

traditional checks and balances that are in the actual structure of 

the university are not in any way damaged or changed in a way 

that is a surprise to people who are part of the community. 

When some of the management structures that are brought in to 

a university are more reflective of corporate structures or maybe 

co-operative structures in other places, there can be 

misunderstandings of how some of the traditional ways of 

running the university have operated. 

 

And so when I look at some of the changes here, I recognize 

that they are addressing concerns that are held by the people 

who are running the university, but I think we also need to 

make sure that we’re not in any way creating further problems 

by some of the things that we’re doing. 

 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4241 

So then when we look at the legislation, the next section, which 

is section 7, basically deals with the length of service in office 

by members of the board. There were some discrepancies 

between the length that different board members could serve, 

and this I know created some consternation within the 

university community. And I see that here it’s being fixed by 

making sure that everybody has the same kind of term. And 

obviously there are transitions, provisions that are needed to 

make sure that these things are done in an orderly fashion. 

 

Now the other provisions, as you move on in this whole area of 

section 45, is that there are some changes around the numbering 

in the Act. But once again, it reflects what’s happening, you 

know, how these changes are dealt with to make sure that the 

terms of the members are of the appropriate length. 

 

Now when we get into section 8, I guess it would be, in the 

legislation, we get into an amendment of the powers of the 

council. And effectively there we’re adding into this whole 

section a further provision around members of a council to deal 

with particular problems for students. There hadn’t been an 

adequate reference to the students and to make sure that they’re 

included in this particular provision, but now it’s being changed 

to move the requirement for students on the committee to be 

members of council. 

 

The effect of this is similar to what we saw when we were 

looking at The Legal Profession Act. There aren’t necessarily 

sufficient numbers of members of the council to serve on all of 

the committees that might be designated by the legislation. And 

what we’re seeing here is a situation that will allow for an 

appropriate panel of students who would be available to serve 

on some of these special committees. That process would be 

allowed to make sure that the provision, that there’s a student 

on every one of these committees, is there. I think originally 

there wouldn’t have been the need for as many of these review 

councils or whatever to take place, but clearly as an institution 

gets bigger and bigger, there’s more and more requirement for 

that type of thing to happen. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now the final section in the legislation is section 9, and it talks 

about the execution of documents. And this is a bit of an 

interesting one because it basically removes the requirement for 

a corporate seal. And this is not an unusual provision in 

present-day legislation because the use of corporate seals and 

similar kinds of things has changed quite dramatically in the 

last 30 or 40 years, as many more documents are no longer 

paper. They’re no longer created in a single copy, and so when 

you have all kinds of documents that are very . . . have legal 

status without any even signatures sometimes, to have a 

provision in the legislation that requires that the corporate name 

and the seal of the university are fixed to any of these 

documents is clearly somewhat anachronistic and not of use 

anymore. 

 

It is interesting to think how much of a change we’ve had in our 

society in the last number of years. Practically when I started 

my own legal career in the ’70s, there were many times where 

documents that today we’d send by email or some other very 

quick method had to be taken physically to another place. So if 

you had a document where you had one party to a contract, say 

located in Saskatchewan and the other party in New York, well 

you had to take that document to New York to get it signed or 

send it there and wait for it to come back. And sometimes 

where time was really crucial, the job of officials or clerks or 

people that you had working with you was to make sure a 

document got to a place and was assigned appropriately. 

 

Now we have rules that allow for electronic acknowledgment of 

documents. We have many things that are done at a much, 

much different pace. And this amendment in this legislation 

reflects that they probably hadn’t followed this rule for a long 

time at the university, and it’s time to update the legislation to 

reflect that. 

 

So practically my sense is that this legislation does reflect 

requests from the University of Saskatchewan. There may be 

some things in here that we need to have a little more 

discussion about in committee, especially as it relates to the 

members on the board and their terms and also the whole issue 

around students being on these council committees. But other 

than that, I think that the provisions do reflect what is required 

in this situation. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know some of my colleagues will 

want to make some comments as well, but I will adjourn debate. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 101, The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 107 — The 

Wildfire Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to join the debate today on Bill No. 107, The Wildfire Act. It’s 

interesting the way that this particular piece of legislation has 

evolved in terms of the way that it was first brought up with 

certain of the partners that would be affected by this, but 

particularly rural municipalities and First Nations throughout 

the forest fringe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And also of interest to me is the way that we’ve seen the 

members opposite, the way that their position on this has 

evolved from previously a different sort of agitation that was 

engaged in around riparian management, dating back, you 

know, over the last part of the past decade. But as well, Mr. 

Speaker, with this latest iteration the way that it came forward 

and the way that rural municipalities — again, I’m thinking 

about those throughout the forest fringe — took the measure of 

this legislation and properly called it for the off-loading 

involved in it as regards the prevention and fighting of a 

wildfire, Mr. Speaker. 



4242 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

We’re glad to see that some common sense has prevailed. I 

think of the work that was done by the member from Nutana, 

certainly an individual with a long-standing connection to the 

boreal forest and particularly in and around the Nesslin Lake 

recreation area, Ness Creek, Big River — that neck of the 

woods, Mr. Speaker. But I’d also like to say as well that the 

municipalities themselves, the way that they came forward, the 

way they marshalled their case was of particular effect. And as 

well, individual First Nations and the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, I know that they certainly had an 

opinion on the legislation that was first brought forward. And 

one of the challenges that we’ll be engaged in, Mr. Speaker, is 

to assess whether or not those concerns have been adequately 

addressed in this latest iteration of the legislation. 

 

Again in looking through the minister’s second reading speech, 

and again that’s where the minister gets to state first principles 

for the legislation, gets to talk about the cause for bringing forth 

the given piece of legislation and also some of the consultation 

that has gone on, the different stakeholder groups that have 

been reached out to in the process, I see that the minister is 

referencing the full support of the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities, SARM. And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

welcome change from the reaction that had previously been 

elicited from places like the RM of Buckland and the way that 

those RMs saw this as off-loading costs onto the backs of the 

rural municipal ratepayers. 

 

So again we’re glad to see that being referenced, but we’ll 

certainly check to see if that is in fact the case. The minister 

references other stakeholders, but there’s no specific mention 

made, again, of how the concerns that have been raised to date 

by the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and relevant 

First Nations through the area . . . I think of tribal councils such 

as the Prince Albert Grand Council. I think of the Agency 

Chiefs Tribal Council. I think of the Meadow Lake Tribal 

Council, and the different First Nations that are party to those 

tribal councils, Mr. Speaker, and many of those individual First 

Nations having had a long involvement, not just in the forestry 

side of this business life in Saskatchewan but certainly in the 

management of that forest resource, the stewardship of that 

forest resource. And you know, be it as far back as to the 

trapline or beyond, Mr. Speaker, these are First Nations that 

have had a historical and ongoing involvement with the forest 

and with the approach around prevention and fighting of 

wildfire. 

 

So again their voice should carry significant weight on these 

questions around The Wildfire Act. We’ll be looking to gain 

some measure of assurance from them that the concerns they 

have raised have in fact been addressed in this latest iteration of 

the legislation being brought forward here today. 

 

Again, as the minister brought forward the legislation, in terms 

of the work around the balancing of responsibility and 

accountability, reducing the likelihood and consequences of 

wildfire being appropriately shared by governments with 

individuals, industry, Crown corporations, and municipal 

authorities, again that shared responsibility is something that we 

think is as it should be. But alongside that, Mr. Speaker, again 

that there’s no mention of First Nations in this regard. Again 

we’ll be doing our due diligence, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 

that that consultation, that work has taken place as regards 

something that is very important to First Nations. 

 

I’d also note parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, in the federal 

Auditor General’s report that came forward today, one of the 

things that came up for mention is the way that the federal 

government has been falling down around working with First 

Nations, not just on the fire prevention or the firefighting side 

of the equation, Mr. Speaker, but on fire prevention as well. 

And how that interacts with this particular piece of legislation is 

something that we’ll be looking to gain a better appreciation of, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again that this is part of the results-based regulatory framework 

championed by the previous minister of the Environment, the 

member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, and now carried forth by 

the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs. Again we’ll be 

looking to see how this lines up with that, what this will do to 

satisfy questions around not just the prevention and the fighting 

of fires but also questions of liability, questions of the joint 

responsibility that again is mentioned in different places in this 

legislation. But again that talk demands certain resources be 

brought to bear and how that relates to this legislation. 

 

We’ll be interested to see how the property loss and the changes 

around the level of liability as regards the Crown provincial 

forest, how that is brought to bear. And we’ll be interested to 

see how the Act works in the field and how burn notification or 

the different notifications being issued forth under the authority 

of the Act, how those will be considered. 

 

Another thing we’ll be interested to see is in terms of the status 

quo being retained on the 4.5 kilometre, 3-mile buffer zone 

adjacent to provincial Crown forests and the clarification 

around the way the costs can be indeed shared, close the quote 

from the minister’s second reading speech. We’ll see how that 

works again, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been around this House long 

enough to have seen different of members currently sitting 

opposite, some who’ve gone on to different movies, Mr. 

Speaker, get out across the North, raise significant concerns 

around the adequacy of that buffer zone only to, once they 

became government, Mr. Speaker, embrace that which they had 

once decried. So again interesting to see that there, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’ll see how this shakes out around how the bills 

actually come due. 

 

[16:30] 

 

I know that other of my colleagues have a great interest in this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. I know that. And again I’d return to a 

bit of where I started in stating my appreciation on the record 

for the work of the member from Nutana in her role as 

Environment critic. My appreciation for the good work that has 

been done on the part of the affected rural municipalities 

throughout the forest fringe that again took the measure of this 

legislation in a previous iteration for what it was, which was 

off-loading the responsibility and cost onto municipalities. Not 

working in a spirit of partnership. Not working in a spirit of 

co-operation. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I still have concerns about how this 

has engaged First Nations as regards the concerns that I know 

were out there and concerns I know that were raised with the 

minister. The fact that they’ve not been referenced to date in the 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4243 

public comments on the part of the minister gives me some 

concern around that, that they’ve not even been countenanced in 

the second reading speech, again, in the speech in which the 

Minister of the Environment introduced this legislation into this 

Assembly and to the public. But we’ll certainly be following up 

with the affected parties to make sure that both those mentioned 

and those absent from the minister’s remarks have been in fact 

adequately consulted and met, in fact their concerns have been 

addressed. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I say it again. I know I’ve got 

colleagues with a great deal of interest in this legislation. I 

know that other of them would definitely like to participate in 

this debate. So with that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 107, The Wildfire Act. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member that Bill 

No. 107, The Wildfire Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 111 — The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter discussion as it relates to Bill No. 111, The 

Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013. This responds to 

some of the pressures in long-term care. Or I guess more 

appropriately, this doesn’t impact specifically 

government-owned long-term care, publicly funded long-term 

care. This relates specifically to the private homes across the 

province. 

 

It is my understanding from what I’ve read from the brief 

comments from the minister, the minister’s suggesting that this 

legislation will provide better accountability, better 

communication to residents and their families about inspection 

results. Certainly that’s something that we would support. We 

believe and we’ve been pushing in this Assembly better 

treatment for our seniors, better supports for those in long-term 

care, in seniors’ care. A lot of that focus has been on the 

government’s operations in publicly funded long-term care, 

where government has clearly dropped the ball in a significant 

way. And the impact, the price, the consequence is being paid 

for by our seniors through their quality of life, through their 

quality of care. 

 

This bill relates not to those facilities, not the ones that are 

funded by this government, not the ones that are managed by 

this government that are in crisis across this province but of the 

private care homes across this province. So I want to make sure 

that there’s that distinction. Certainly I think it’s appropriate 

and fair for the inspection results to be shared with the public of 

these facilities and for residents and their families to have better 

access to the information contained with them and better 

transparency on these fronts. And those are something that we 

would support. 

 

But I would, you know, certainly say to the government 

opposite that this goes no distance and doesn’t make any 

improvements to addressing the crisis and the challenge that we 

see in government-owned, government-funded long-term care. 

So this relates directly to the private home operators. They play 

an important role in providing care, one I wouldn’t dismiss, and 

I’d thank the many good homes and operators for their work in 

providing care and dignity to seniors. 

 

That being said, inspections are important. Dignity and quality 

of care in those facilities is very important as well, and on that 

front this legislation, this mechanism to communicate to the 

public and to families is something that we would support. But 

the problem being, this only focuses on those private operators. 

And it’s this government that needs to stop shirking 

responsibility for where it has direct responsibility, and that’s 

the countless facilities, the many facilities directly related to or 

involved in the long-term care that government has a hand in or 

that they’re funding, the public long-term care that we’re 

hearing in so many cases is in crisis under this government. 

 

And we hear stories that simply aren’t, simply aren’t dignified, 

aren’t appropriate, aren’t acceptable for the seniors, the pioneers 

of this province who have built communities, who have built 

their lives in this province, who have contributed so much to 

our province and now aren’t being afforded the very basic level 

of care and decency that they deserve by that government. So 

that’s something that we are making as a critical focus in this 

Assembly. We see a crisis in long-term care across this 

province, and we’re disappointed by government shirking 

responsibility time and time again, seeming to only be ready for 

excuse after excuse when our seniors in this province deserve 

better. 

 

We hear of circumstances where seniors have been left on 

toilets, Mr. Speaker, for hours on end without care. We hear 

circumstances where call bells are left unanswered. We hear 

circumstances where facilities are in disrepair, where staffing 

ratios don’t allow the professionals to provide the kind of 

support and care that they need and want to provide or to 

provide the kind of care and support that families expect for 

their loved ones in care. 

 

And when we’re thinking of our seniors, when we’re thinking 

of the pioneers of this province, when we’re thinking of those 

that have given so much, these are our grandparents. These are 

our parents. And we need to do better, Mr. Speaker. And that 

government is dropping the ball on this front. It’s failing seniors 

across this province. It is not stepping up to the plate and taking 

any level of accountability and not taking meaningful actions to 

address the harsh challenges facing far too many seniors right 

across this province. 

 

We know government went out and did a little bit of a tour and 

a report back in. They haven’t acted on the vast number of 

recommendations that are there. And we know that government 

sort of wanted to I guess do a little bit of a PR [public relations] 

band-aid of sorts on this issue by putting forward a one-time, 

inadequate fund that is barely a drop in the bucket to address 



4244 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

the hard and real challenges facing seniors and senior care 

facilities, long-term care facilities across this province. And we 

know the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region has spoken to 

how these dollars that have been brought forward by this 

government are inadequate to address the staffing shortages in 

place in these facilities. 

 

And so this government, what they’ve brought forward has 

been an inadequate response to a crisis in this province and one 

that, if you look at the demographics of this province, if you 

look at the trends in this province, if you look at the number of 

seniors that are going to be entering the system, we need 

government to be ahead of the curve on this front, not in a 

circumstance of crisis as we see here today. 

 

And the challenge for many on this front is they recognize the 

good times for Saskatchewan or for the government on a lot of 

fronts, with its revenues, with the economic strength, with 

population growth. And it’s leaving so many of those that have 

built this province left to wonder why they’re being forgotten at 

a time of economic opportunity, at a time where those critical 

investments should and can be made, and at a time where 

certainly those investment are going to be required for the 

demographic pressures and those that are going to be entering 

the long-term care in a significant way.  

 

We still don’t see any of the smart investments that are required 

as well into home care to alleviate pressure. And we know the 

consequences and the impact are felt in a big way by the entire 

health system by this government’s crisis in long-term care, 

where you end up having all sorts of individuals, seniors, and 

families that are taking space that’s not the appropriate space 

for them into hospitals, causing overcrowding, causing 

pressures. 

 

And we know the impact of that where now, if you can 

imagine, Mr. Speaker, here in our Queen City, here in Regina at 

a time of economic opportunity, at a time of population growth, 

we have an emergency room that’s being closed, Mr. Speaker, 

through the evening, through the night. Two hospitals that have 

served Regina for a long period of time, two emergency rooms 

that have provided services and supports to southern 

Saskatchewan for a long period time, and that government, 

during a time of unprecedented economic opportunity, with a 

growing population, can’t keep the emergency room open and 

are forcing closure of an emergency room in this province. And 

when you think about the importance of an emergency room 

here in Regina and in southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you 

can understand why families and communities see this as it 

being entirely unacceptable and certainly a raw and real case of 

mismanagement by that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, the Deputy Premier, of course, he gets loud, 

Mr. Speaker, and he shouts across the floor. I wish he’d take 

that sort of passion back to the table to ensure that they can 

bring forth some real solutions for the seniors of this province, 

for the families of this province to address the pressures that are 

being felt and to ensure that the emergency room at the Pasqua 

Hospital doesn’t close, Mr. Speaker. Because I’ll tell you this, 

Mr. Speaker, that emergency room, when someone goes to the 

doors of that emergency room, it’s a matter of life and death in 

many circumstances, and it’s a place where minutes matter in 

someone’s life. And the fact that they’re talking that they might 

shuttle them around with an ambulance to another space, Mr. 

Speaker, doesn’t cut it. They deserve emergency room doctors, 

and they deserve a full range of supports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these are the kinds of examples, Mr. Speaker, that has the 

people of this province questioning this government. All of this 

opportunity that that government’s been presented — the 

economic strength, the population growth — and they can’t get 

it done, Mr. Speaker, for the people of this province. And we 

see it, as they say, in the crisis in long-term care across this 

province, in the facilities that that government has direct control 

over, in the facilities that are funded publicly by this 

government. We see that crisis and we see the impact that it has 

on the rest of the system, back into our hospitals, back into the 

circumstances of overcrowding. And we know of course that 

Saskatchewan people deserve better than that. 

 

So when we look at health care in this province under this 

government, it’s understandable why families all across this 

province are concerned. And we know that Saskatchewan 

people deserve better than what they’re getting under this 

government on this front. And provided all of the opportunity, 

all of the economic strength, this government’s failing to fulfill 

an important promise to the people of this province, failing to 

make good on the opportunity presented to them, and are 

putting too many residents at risk, too many families at risk, the 

health and security and safety of families at risk, and certainly 

the dignity, compromising the dignity and peace of mind and 

care that the seniors of this province, the grandmas and 

grandpas, the mushoms and kohkoms, the moms and dads of 

this province, that they deserve. 

 

So this piece of legislation . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You 

know, they can heckle all they want, Mr. Speaker, and make a 

whole bunch of noise. And you know, members from Regina, to 

be shouting across the floor when we’re talking about 

something as critical as the inadequate care for our seniors in 

this city and in this province, and to be talking about the 

unprecedented closure, the unprecedented closure of the 

emergency room at the Pasqua Hospital in this city, and for 

them to shout across and for others to be laughing, for others to 

be making a whole bunch of noise, goes to the arrogant 

dismissal we see of this government on issue after issue in this 

province that Saskatchewan people are bringing forward. 

 

So you can make all the noise you want. You can ignore the 

emails that are coming into your offices. You can ignore the 

phone calls that you’re receiving. You can ignore the needs of 

Saskatchewan people and brush off the real and hard concerns 

people are facing. But the official opposition of Saskatchewan, 

the New Democrats, will stand strong as it relates to health care. 

We’ll stand strong as it relates to the unacceptable, 

unacceptable closure being forced of the emergency room in 

Regina, and particularly focusing on the needs in long-term care 

of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this bill that we’re looking at here today, as I say, doesn’t 

relate directly to the needs in the long-term care system . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The football game is over. The team 

has left. No need to replay the Grey Cup here on the floor. I 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4245 

recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker references the football 

game here this week of course that we all cheer for in a feverish 

way. But I think it’s time for government to realize there are 

some realities going on in this province, to get their attention 

back to where it matters in the life of our communities and the 

lives of our families, and to step up and to act to ensure that the 

Pasqua Hospital, that their emergency room isn’t forced to 

close, putting at risk families across this province. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And as I say, Mr. Speaker, when you think of those that are 

going to the emergency room and you think of your own wife 

or you think of your family or you think of your dad or you 

think of your mom or you think of the loved ones or you think 

of your neighbour, you think of those in your communities. 

When those individuals are going to receive care at an 

emergency room, they’re not going, Mr. Speaker, for a basic 

checkup. They’re going there because there’s a crisis within 

their life and minutes matter at that point in time. And it just 

doesn’t cut it to be shuttled around or to have inadequate 

supports or to not have emergency room doctors to tend to their 

needs, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a matter of life and death for 

many, Mr. Speaker, that are connecting with these emergency 

rooms. 

 

And it’s absolutely unacceptable for a government, during a 

time of such opportunity and economic strength and population 

growth, to be failing the residents of this province and our city 

in this matter, Mr. Speaker. And we call on government to step 

up to the plate, to not sit idly by in this Assembly, but to make 

some meaningful actions and investments to ensure that that 

emergency room doesn’t close. 

 

As it relates to the crisis in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, this bill 

relates to the private operators, not the crisis we see in 

government-funded long-term care where there’s a direct 

responsibility for this government. Certainly we support 

provisions of better transparency and accountability and 

communication of inspections, but again this government is 

shirking its responsibility on this front and failing to step up to 

the plate with a meaningful action plan and investment to 

address the crisis facing far too many seniors in far too many 

communities right across this province. 

 

With that being said, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan New 

Democrats will continue to make the case of why seniors 

matter, why long-term care needs to be improved, highlighting 

the crisis. And certainly, as it relates to the absolutely 

unacceptable closure of the emergency room at the Pasqua 

Hospital here in Regina, we’ll be calling on government every 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, and members shout about other hospitals, Mr. 

Speaker, when they can’t even keep open two emergency 

rooms, Mr. Speaker, in our Queen City, Mr. Speaker. At a time 

of unprecedented economic opportunity, it speaks directly to the 

weak management and the wrongheaded priorities of this 

government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time as it relates directly to 

Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013, 

I adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 111, The Personal Care Homes Amendment 

Act, 2013. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 108 — The 

Athletics Commission Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to enter Bill 108, 

The Athletics Commission Act. 

 

It’s interesting. We want to support different I guess activities 

and sports events in the province, and we know the federal 

government has made provisions now to open it up and has 

given the opportunity to the provinces to do that. And the 

government is introducing legislation that will bring I guess 

regulations, licensing, rules, and a commission, and I will talk 

about that a little bit. 

 

But I guess I want to talk about . . . You know, it reminds of a 

young man back home who truly wants to . . . He graduated, 

he’s working. He’s a young man. He graduated a couple of 

years ago, a year ago. And he’s thinking about doing some type 

of a trainer and he likes martial arts. And the different things, 

the different activities he really gets into, and he talks about it. 

And when you talk to this young man, he talks about, you 

know, his vision and what he would like to see to get young 

people involved for the idea. And he talks about it, and it’s 

about discipline and he talks about what he sees. 

 

And when you listen to him talk about the event . . . And as an 

athlete he talks about conditioning oneself to make sure that 

you can handle the activity that he wants to engage in. And 

watching him talk about and present what he would like to see 

happen, this is something I know where he will think about it 

and say, hey maybe there’s provisions to bring this up north, 

whether it’s a promoter to bring it in, whether the commission. 

 

So I just want to talk about this individual and his heart that he 

has and what he wants to do. And he wants to mentor or he 

wants to use it to take young people and make sure they 

understand. And I asked him about this, well you know, 

whether it’s fighting . . . And I referred to it as fighting. And it 

was interesting to watch him, Mr. Speaker. He talked about, 

well no, it’s teaching young people discipline, knowing how to 

handle the responsibility, you know, not using it in a bad way if 

you’ve got training. And we see that, whether it’s judo, karate 

— different activities going on that athletes use for training. 

 

You know, in La Ronge we know that we have that. But we 

don’t see those individuals as students going out and causing 



4246 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2013 

grief. They’re trained. They use discipline. And if you get that 

training and if you get an instructor, someone who’s teaching 

you to make sure that you understand what it is you’re doing 

and you respect the training that he provides for you . . . And 

we know that there are many instructors, many people who 

teach young people, whether it’s karate, judo, tae kwon do. 

There’s many different ones that people are bringing in. 

 

And you know, we’ll talk about a little bit about the 

commission, but watching this young man talk about getting his 

own training program, his own, whether it be as an 

entrepreneur, a business, watching him develop a business plan 

and what he sees it doing, whether it’s going to add . . . And he 

knows that he has to bring in more than just one area, so he has 

to make sure that there’s opportunity. Maybe he’s going to sell 

goods. So there’s different opportunities, Mr. Speaker, for him 

to do, and he’s going to move forward. So it’s kind of 

encouraging to see a young person come forward, especially the 

timing of this, that the federal government made provisions and 

now provinces will too. 

 

And I think the minister refers to I think there’s three provinces, 

and I don’t know if that includes ourselves, that currently do not 

have the regulations, the legislation that’s needed to come up 

with either a commission or some form of a body that would 

look after sanctioning, regulating, ensuring that there’s certain 

provisions that have to be met. And in here it talks about the 

commission, a body of five that would be a commission would 

be appointed to govern and to make sure licensing . . . making 

sure that the promoters make sure they have the licence but also 

that they are going through the insurance, the liability insurance 

that the fighters and those that are competing, whether it be in 

an activity. 

 

And they talk about a lot of different activities and whether . . . 

They talk about also testing, making sure blood testing, making 

sure the insurance is there, having a medical for the individual. 

But when they’re in the ring and they’re competing in their 

events and they’re promoted and everything else, they’re 

making sure that the trainers and the people that are assisting 

them in those events are trained properly and they’re regulated 

to make sure that they’re taking good care of the individuals 

that are competing in the competitions, whether, you know, it’s 

martial arts or whatever, MMA [mixed martial arts], whatever 

they’re going to do that they develop. 

 

But at the end of the day, I think it’s to make sure that the sport, 

you know, has that commission to ensure that safety is number 

one with the individuals competing. And we wish them well. 

And if it develops, I think they’re going to have to do some 

educating to make people understand what it is. I mean a lot 

people watch different fights and, you know, whether it’s 

boxing here in the province, you know, we have that. But this is 

opening it up so that they can, a commission could sanction, 

you know, and give the licensing to promoters to promote 

certain activities. And it could open it up and this could be good 

for the province, for the business people, hotels, for, you know, 

economics and our entrepreneurs. And this could be great. You 

know, we could sponsor or host certain activities, events. 

 

So we’re not, we’re not opposed to this type of a, you know, 

commission. But making sure that the regulations and how that 

commission conducts itself I think is some . . . We will have 

some questions making sure that the public’s well aware, 

making sure that people . . . it’s safe, making sure that the 

provisions are in there, that the commission would follow, you 

know, the regulations. And making sure, enforcing the rules 

that, you know, are developed by legislation or powers that are 

granted to the commission to carry out, to make sure that those 

promoters, the licence, they’ve complied to the licence, the 

regulations. 

 

And it’s about safety. And I want to make it very clear. It’s a 

sport. It’s, you know, athletics. It’s encouraged. People want to 

encourage that. It has a lot of potential. But we have to make 

sure, number one, safety of residents, safety of that type of a 

sport is clearly there. We want to, you know, we want to make 

sure that, you know, people are protected and that’s important 

that the athletes have the protection so you can do what you can 

do. 

 

And we know like some of the sports and we see some of the 

injuries that certain sports have with them. And we want to be 

clear, Mr. Speaker. We want to make sure safety is number one. 

So having said this, I know there’ll be a lot of questions and on, 

whether it’s my colleagues or it’s in committee. And they’ll be, 

you know, regulations or commission may ask what do they 

think; what are other provinces doing in Canada and maybe 

around the world to protect the athletes and to make sure the 

promoters, you know, are in compliance with the licence, with 

regulations, regulating the industry. 

 

This is some opportunity, and it is. It’s opening it up. But we 

think, you know, let’s make sure at the end that you open up, 

that we want to have that competition and we want our province 

to do well. And we encourage business and we, you know, we 

want to make sure that those, that industry and sports . . . And 

we’ve seen that. You know, people want to watch the sport and 

then they talk about it as a sport. 

 

So we want to make sure that it’s done correctly; the proper 

training’s in place. We want to make sure the proper training’s 

in place to protect the athletes, to make sure that the facilities, 

to make sure the equipment, whatever it is they’re needing, that 

the commission that would sanction these events are making 

sure that the promoters and everyone else that’s part of it covers 

the liability and make sure that they have enough insurance, that 

there’s protection should something go wrong, that, you know, 

with an athlete, they’re protected with some liability. Or if 

something would happen at an event, God forbid that that 

would happen, where there is some liability to protect people 

that are there even watching it or whatever. So that liability is 

clear. It talks about that. So there’s a lot of different, you know, 

talking about the commission, you know, and the powers that 

they will have. And it’s going to be a five-person commission, 

and we’ll see where it goes. 

 

And I think they talk about, they refer to the five of them. And 

there’ll be a commissioner appointed, and I think they referred 

to about three individuals. And then there also will be . . . Now 

let’s see. I just want to make sure as I go through that. There 

would be five of them. It might be someone who is involved in 

that, within the industry itself that gets appointed to that 

commission, so that they would have an opportunity to . . . 

Adjudicator might be one of the ones that would be involved in 

that. And I think they referred to that individual as well. So 



November 26, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 4247 

you’d have the commissioner, adjudicator, and maybe three 

others that would sit on that. So that would be very important to 

have. And they would oversee and make sure that this body 

would have the powers with regulations to oversee these events. 

And there could be some good events. 

 

And some people might have concern. And I think if they have 

concerns, they need to bring them forward because there may 

be residents out there that are concerned about this. And it 

might be that the industry will have to educate people at what it 

is and what it isn’t to make sure people understand. It’s about 

athletes, and they’re asking this and they want to be able to 

bring in those activities. So there might be some education, 

some work to do as promoters, you know, as an organization, as 

they bring in the activities. So they’re going to have to do a lot 

of work educating maybe some of the residents that do show 

concern. 

 

And if there are concerns, I encourage those individuals to get a 

hold of the opposition, to raise those concerns with the 

government and with the minister to make sure they understand. 

You know, if there are issues or concerns that people have in 

the province about bringing this in and allowing a commission 

to carry on certain activities, I think it’s important that they 

share that with the government, share that with the opposition to 

clearly bring that forward. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

prepared to adjourn debate on this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 108, The Athletics Commission Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being close to the hour of 5 o’clock, 

this House recesses to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4217 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4217 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4218 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4218 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4219 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4219 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4219 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4220 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4220 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Grey Cup Victory Celebration 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4220 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4220 

 A Million Acts of Friendship 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4221 

 Community Leader Chosen as Game Changer 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4221 

 Homes for the Holidays Tour 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4221 

 New School for Hudson Bay 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4221 

 Fond du Lac Firefighters Win Competitions 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4222 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Emergency Medical Services in Regina 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4222 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4222 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4223 

 Seniors’ Care Services 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4224 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4224 

 Prince Albert Bridge 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4225 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4225 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Election Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4226 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4226 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4227 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 109 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2013 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4227 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4227 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Accounting Profession Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4230 

 Bill No. 99 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4233 

 Bill No. 98 — The Child Care Act, 2013/Loi de 2013 sur les garderies d’enfants 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4236 

 Bill No. 100 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2013 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4237 

 Bill No. 101 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2013 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4240 



 

 Bill No. 107 — The Wildfire Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4241 

 Bill No. 111 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2013 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4243 

 Bill No. 108 — The Athletics Commission Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4245 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


