




















































Hansard: March 13, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 32A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 13, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2673 

 March 13, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce some friends and some guests who are 

seated in your gallery. In the gallery, Mr. Speaker, Maria and 

Daniel Vaiaso. And they’re joined today with their family 

Natalie Vanidour and Cameron Vanidour, ages 10 and 8, who 

go to Westmount Community School in Saskatoon. And, Mr. 

Speaker, along with them is a newborn son, Tali Vaiaso, born 

about one month ago, so it’s his first trip to the legislature. And 

they’re a wonderful family, Mr. Speaker, living in Saskatoon 

and good friends. And I’m very happy that they’re able to be 

here today. I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

this family to the Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition on cellphone coverage 

for northwestern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along with 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities of these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say that this petition is 

supported all throughout the province, as many people from 

many cities and towns and villages have signed this petition. 

And the petition I’m sending today, Mr. Speaker, are people 

that have signed this petition are from Canoe Narrows and area. 

And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to introduce this petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know there is no labour crisis to fix and no necessity to rush 

this omnibus bill through that will likely govern workplace 

relations for decades to come. And you know, if we do pass 

this, that stable labour relations in all sectors run the risk of 

being thrown into turmoil as a result of its sweeping changes. 

Thousands of represented workers stand to lose their rights to 

bargain collectively and be represented by the union of their 

choice. I’d like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish to 

present a petition for a private bill on behalf of the petitioners 

from the Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan. The 

prayer, Mr. Speaker, requests that the Act which incorporated 

the Orange Benevolent Society be repealed. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to repeal An Act to 

incorporate The Orange Benevolent Society of 

Saskatchewan, being chapter 79 of the statutes of 

Saskatchewan, 1927, accordingly. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 

to present a petition for a private bill on behalf of the petitioners 

from the Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon. The prayer of 

the petition requests to amend An Act to incorporate Lutheran 

Sunset Home of Saskatoon. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to amend An Act to 

incorporate Lutheran Sunset Home of Saskatoon, being 

chapter 98 of the statutes of Saskatchewan, 1967, 

accordingly. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

2012 Prince Albert Citizen of the Year 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise in 

the Assembly today to recognize Mr. Harris May of Prince 

Albert who was named the 2012 Prince Albert Citizen of the 

Year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Harris May is a volunteer who has contributed to 



2674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

numerous organizations and charities in Prince Albert for 

approximately 40 years, including the Prince Albert art gallery, 

the Prince Albert Downtown Improvement Association, Habitat 

for Humanity, and the Calvary United Church. He has also 

worked hard at Prince Albert Historical Society in recent years, 

including playing a key part in organizing last year’s successful 

Centennial of Flight Air Show. 

 

Mr. May was named Prince Albert Citizen of the Year in 

December during a personal presentation at his work site, 

which caught him completely off guard. Earlier this year, Mr. 

May’s tireless contributions to his community were officially 

recognized at a banquet in Prince Albert on February the 8th, 

which my colleague from Prince Albert Carlton and I were 

happy to attend. 

 

The Prince Albert Citizen of the Year Award is a joint effort 

between the Prince Albert Daily Herald and the Prince Albert 

Kinsmen Club. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

congratulating Mr. May on being named Prince Albert Citizen 

of the Year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Saskatchewan Cookbook Wins Gourmand Award 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we would like to congratulate the 

Saskatchewan women who wrote Breast Friends, a bestselling 

cookbook. Their cookbook, Breast Wishes for the Men in our 

lives, targeted at raising awareness about prostate cancer, 

recently won a Gourmand Award for best charity cookbook in 

Paris, France. The women even beat out First Lady Michelle 

Obama’s cookbook. That’s quite a sign of their success. 

 

To date, their six cookbooks have raised $1.4 million for cancer 

awareness and services. Their books, including Breast Wishes 

and Breast Friends Inspire Health and others, have been 

purchased around the world. They have contributed to services 

and regional hospitals ensuring that individuals don’t have to 

travel as far to access treatment. They have supported shuttle 

services and awareness-raising programs. The strength of our 

Saskatchewan communities is demonstrated in their ability to 

come together and create something that is of benefit to all of 

us. 

 

I want to personally thank Linda Helgason, Jacquie Klebeck, 

Nat Dunlop, Anne Reynolds, Cecile Halyk, Patti Hack, Darlene 

Cooper, Charlene Rokochy, Val Helgason and Jeannie Johnson 

for their dedication to building a better Saskatchewan through 

this ongoing project. I ask all members of this Assembly to 

please join me in congratulating Breast Friends on their recent 

Gourmand Award. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to rise 

in this Assembly today to recognize that March 8th to the 24th 

has been proclaimed Rendez-vous de la Francophonie in 

Saskatchewan. During these two weeks, francophones and 

French speakers in this province will join together with millions 

of others from across the country to celebrate Canada’s 

francophone culture and heritage. I myself have a little bit of 

French heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these festivities are held in March every year 

throughout Canada to promote French language and 

francophone culture and to coincide with the International Day 

of La Francophonie on March 20th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has nearly 50,000 French speakers 

and a vibrant and diverse francophone culture that is an 

important part of our history. For over 100 years francophone 

culture has been an important part of this province and is woven 

into the very fabric of Saskatchewan’s identity. Everyone in 

this province, no matter their heritage, is welcome and 

encouraged to celebrate this important occasion and to learn 

more about francophone culture in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that this Assembly recognize the great 

contributions that francophone culture has given to this great 

province, and wish success upon all festivities and events 

planned in Saskatchewan and across the country. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatoon’s Western Development Museum 

Wins Reader’s Choice Award 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to congratulate the Saskatoon Western Development 

Museum on being awarded RVwest magazine’s highest honour, 

the platinum Reader’s Choice Award, in three categories: 

favourite Saskatchewan attraction, favourite overall 

Saskatchewan RV [recreational vehicle] destination, and 

favourite Saskatchewan historical site. The Reader’s Choice 

winners have been chosen by the readers, representing RVers’ 

favourite places, attractions, and other RV-related topics. 

 

Jason Wall, the manager of the Saskatoon branch of the 

Western Development Museum, describes his reaction to 

receiving the award as “a wonderful feeling.” He says these 

awards “speak volumes about the staff and volunteers who 

work very hard to ensure our visitors have a remarkable 

experience.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we all know here in this Assembly, last year the 

Western Development Museum was forced to cut one day a 

week from its schedule. This has meant that the WDM 

[Western Development Museum] was forced to close Mondays 

in Moose Jaw, North Battleford, Saskatoon, and Yorkton as a 

direct result of the zero per cent increase in its annual budget 

allocation from the Sask Party government. We hope the 

government sees fit in the budget next week to support our arts 

and culture sector that contributes so much to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that my colleagues join me in celebrating the 

work of the Western Development Museum. We’re proud to 

share the history of Saskatchewan with visitors to our province, 

school groups, and families. Thank you. 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2675 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Battlefords Farm Family of the Year 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise in the 

Assembly today to recognize constituents of mine, the 

Nachtegaele family, who have been named the Farm Family of 

the Year by the Battlefords Agricultural Society. Mr. Speaker, 

the Nachtegaeles received the award at the annual Evening Out 

for Farmers and Friends on March 2nd at the Agrivilla in North 

Battleford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Nachtegaele farm has been in the family for 

over 100 years. Gustafson and Eugenie Nachtegaele came to 

Canada in 1911 from Belgium, eventually settling on the land 

their descendants are farming today. Mr. Speaker, the land has 

been passed down from generation to generation and is now 

farmed by brothers Keith and Dwayne Nachtegaele, who took 

the farm over from their father Alan. Keith and Dwayne also 

own a seed business, Nachtegaele Agri Services, through which 

they support numerous local events and organizations. Keith 

and Dwayne credit their wives, for without them, running the 

farm would be impossible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in recognizing 

the Nachtegaeles on receiving the 2013 Farm Family of the 

Year award. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Canadian Challenge Sled Dog Champion 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

this Assembly today to acknowledge the recent accomplishment 

of one of my constituents. Last month, Mr. Speaker, Stefaan De 

Marie became this year’s Canadian sled dog champion. While 

this is the second time Mr. De Marie has won the Canadian 

Challenge; it’s the first time he’s won it on his own. In 2008 he 

had to split it with another competitor. 

 

Mr. De Marie has been an active competitor in the 12-dog race 

for a number of years, but Stefaan is not the only one passionate 

about dog sledding in the De Marie family, Mr. Speaker. His 

brother Bart also mushes competitively and works as Stefaan’s 

handler to ensure their dogs are in top physical condition. The 

brothers train their dogs year-round in the beautiful boreal 

forest near their hometown, Christopher Lake. 

 

Next up for Mr. De Marie and his pack of dogs is the Hudson 

Bay Quest this Friday, which takes place on the windblown 

flats of northern Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 

me in congratulating Stefaan on his recent championship and 

wish him luck with the rest of his season. Mush! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Perspectives on Pipeline 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday NDP [New 

Democratic Party] leader, Thomas Mulcair, said President 

Obama should reject the Keystone XL pipeline. This is an 

alarming betrayal of Canada’s national interest by a man who 

wants to be prime minister. And now Saskatchewan’s NDP 

leader won’t say where he stands on this important issue. 

Here’s a quote from today’s Leader-Post: “We’ve passed our 

comments on to Mr. Mulcair,” said the NDP leader to reporters, 

but he wouldn’t tell us what those comments were. Well isn’t 

that special? The NDP leader will tell Thomas Mulcair what he 

thinks but he won’t tell the Saskatchewan people what he 

thinks. Mr. Speaker, what kind of leadership is this? 

 

Then he said he had to wait for approval from the National 

Energy Board. Well here’s a news flash for the Leader of the 

Opposition. The National Energy Board approved Keystone 

pipeline three years ago. Here’s their news release from March 

11, 2010. The headline reads, “National Energy Board 

Approves Keystone XL Pipeline Project.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday while he was ducking the question, the 

NDP leader said the project needs to pass the triple bottom line. 

Here’s the real triple bottom line: the NDP leader won’t stand 

up for our energy sector; he won’t stand up for Canada; and he 

has failed to stand up for Saskatchewan. Will the Leader of the 

Opposition do the right thing and tell Mr. Mulcair he is wrong 

on Keystone? Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re about to find out. 

 

[13:45] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Highway Access and Land Acquisition 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Smart 

growth for our province should be encouraged, and this 

includes consulting landowners when new roads and 

interchanges are being built. This isn’t the case at one of the 

interchanges outside of the city at Pinkie Road and Highway 

No. 1. Instead the Saskatchewan Party government is now 

being sued by landowners because they failed to consult after 

they took that land away from those owners. 

 

The landowners co-operated. They wanted to help, and they 

wanted to invest into this new economic development 

opportunity. Instead the Saskatchewan Party government has 

bullied these landowners with abusive powers and have 

repeatedly gone back on their word. To the minister: why has 

the Saskatchewan Party government allowed this to deteriorate 

to the point of lawsuits because they broke their promise to 

these people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as is the tradition, I will 

not comment on anything that is before the courts, Mr. Speaker, 

as far as lawsuits. But what I will talk about is certainly the 

growth that we are experiencing throughout the province and no 



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

doubt in southern Saskatchewan. I’ll also talk about the great 

work that has been done by the Global Transportation Hub and 

attracting businesses to that front. With that Global 

Transportation Hub, there is a need for infrastructure. 

 

Our government has moved on the west Regina bypass, a 

bypass at Pinkie Road and No. 1. Mr. Speaker, that construction 

is going on right now. There are safety concerns around that 

intersection, Mr. Speaker. If you look at any of the other 

jurisdictions that have had major system interchanges — and 

that’s what this one will be, is a system interchange — they 

limit access on and off of No. 1 Highway, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

what this will do as we move forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that under this government, we 

attract growth. We welcome growth. And that will never 

change until the NDP get back in power, and that will never 

happen. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we knew that the minister 

would say that matter’s before the courts, but he’s very happy 

to play politics when the issue is before the House. Sue Ailsby 

is here today, and she’s participating in that lawsuit. And she 

told the media, “The rest of the land that they didn’t take, 

they’re essentially saying we’re not going to have any access to, 

so they’re making it useless as well.” 

 

When co-operative landowners see their property taken away 

by this government, there should at least be an open dialogue 

with them. It is apparent that the Saskatchewan Party does not 

listen to these co-operative people. Again to the minister: why 

has the Sask Party government told landowners that they have 

no access to their own property, because of the road 

construction, that they rightfully own and should be able to 

access? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, if it’s an issue 

around access, we’re certainly welcome to talk to these 

landowners, Mr. Speaker. But if it’s access to No. 1 Highway, 

if it’s access to No. 1 Highway, Mr. Speaker, with a major 

interchange such as the west Regina bypass, the general design 

rules, Mr. Speaker, that have been developed for quite a long 

time, is no access within 2 miles of that or 3.2 kilometres of that 

interchange, Mr. Speaker. There’s been some access . . . A fly 

in here anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is limited access certainly on No. 1 

Highway, but that doesn’t mean that property owners in that 

area will not be granted access off of service roads eventually 

or other municipal roadways, Mr. Speaker. But if they’re 

looking for direct access on to a No. 1 Highway with a system 

interchange so close to their property, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid 

the answer will be no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first time that this 

government has taken away land from people and has created a 

major problem for all the parties involved. They’ve had trouble 

with the set-up of the Global Transportation Hub located in that 

same area. 

 

There is an emerging trend here, Mr. Speaker, and that trend is 

that the Saskatchewan Party government cannot manage this 

exciting growth. The people who want to help with that growth 

and opportunity are now being overpowered. They’re being 

bullied and are forced to go to the courts. To me, Mr. Speaker, 

and to all of us, that is not smart growth. Smart growth for our 

province means it’s not just about development for government; 

it’s about opportunity for all people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When will this minister get it right and listen to the landowners 

when he takes away their land? Will he at least keep the 

dialogue open? When will he do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say, 

absolutely for this government the very, very last resort in any 

of these negotiations is expropriation. We do not want to get 

down to that level, Mr. Speaker. What we’d rather do is go 

through proper negotiations and land on a price, Mr. Speaker, a 

fair market price and even a buffer, an inflator, Mr. Speaker. 

That has been the tradition of our government. There is 

mediation offered up. There is a long process to go through 

before we get to expropriation, and that is the last resort. 

 

But the member opposite was the Minister of Highways. Is he 

standing in his spot and going to claim that under his watch and 

under his signature they never expropriated any land, Mr. 

Speaker? Is that what he’s saying, Mr. Speaker? Because quite 

frankly, he just finished saying NDP are all about smart growth. 

When they were in power, the NDP were about no growth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s time we take the training 

wheels off that government. You’re the minister; you figure this 

challenge out, Mr. Speaker. But this isn’t a surprise, Mr. 

Speaker, this isn’t a surprise. The Sask Party has gone to war 

with the teachers. They have gone to war with working men 

and women. They have gone to war with the Aboriginal 

community. They’re ignoring the middle class. They have 

refused to admit their mistakes. And now they’re being sued by 

landowners who have co-operated with this government to this 

point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very apparent that the Sask Party government 

just can’t manage that growth, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister 

stand up today and admit that his government, his government 

is failing the people of Saskatchewan, and will he simply learn 

to work closer with the landowners that are trying to help build 

the economy here and all throughout the province? Will he do 

that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that over 

the last six years this province has increased by 80,000 people, 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2677 

Mr. Speaker, because of the Saskatchewan Party government. 

Mr. Speaker, we see the very lowest unemployment rates in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, because of the Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing growth throughout the province, 

Mr. Speaker, that brings on issues, absolutely. But, Mr. 

Speaker, many of us just got back from a SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention, the bear-pit, which was very, very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. Lots and lots of support for what we are doing. Yes, 

some challenges along the way, but every one of those 

challenges is centred around growth. The same questions were 

never posed to the NDP because there was absolutely no 

growth under that government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Building Northern Roads 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in 2008 the Sask Party 

government promised the community of Wollaston Lake an 

all-weather road. They put that promise, Mr. Speaker, clearly in 

writing. 

 

The all-weather road is vital, Mr. Speaker, because currently 

the community needs to rely on a barge and an unsafe ice road, 

Mr. Speaker, for the winter months. Sadly but not surprisingly, 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government broke its promise to 

this community, to the people in the area. My question to the 

Premier: will he admit that his Sask Party government broke 

this very specific promise to the community of Wollaston 

Lake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can certainly see why 

they changed questioners, why they have the Leader of the 

Opposition now asking this question because the former 

minister of Highways never got it done, Mr. Speaker. And he’s 

from that area, Mr. Speaker. He always talks about northern 

Saskatchewan, and he never got it done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved on this issue a bit, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve developed some roadway. We haven’t gone all the way 

around Wollaston Lake, Mr. Speaker. We see the cost of that, 

Mr. Speaker. We had a delegation in the House in the fall 

session and answered these questions at that time. I had met 

with that delegation and offered up some alternatives such as 

changing the barge, Mr. Speaker, because right now, Mr. 

Speaker, when you look at all the priorities — and that’s what 

we have to do is look at all the priorities in the province, with a 

growing population, a need for more infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker — at this time, Mr. Speaker, that project has not 

moved forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it was their promise. It was their 

promise that they put in writing February 19th, 2008: “Province 

approves first leg of construction on all-weather road to 

Wollaston Lake.” 

Mr. Speaker, if we want a successful province in the 

generations to come, it means extending opportunity to more 

and more people. It means whether we are First Nations and 

Métis, whether we’re the descendants of immigrants, we all 

deserve the opportunity to reach our full potential. To do that, 

Mr. Speaker, many people need to travel the province for 

economic, social, and educational reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of Wollaston Lake know this. They’ve come here to 

lobby for a road. Recently, Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned that 

they are now pursuing a P3 [public-private partnership] 

approach, taking matters into their own hands because the Sask 

Party government has turned their back on them. We know, Mr. 

Speaker, that under this approach, if the province picked up the 

tab, it would cost much, much more in the long run than if the 

minister actually lived up to his promise. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he turning his back on the 

community of Wollaston Lake and forcing them to pursue a 

path which will cost the province much, much more in the long 

run? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 

outlined the specific answer to the hon. member’s question. The 

context for his answer are I think four, now five, record 

Highways budgets from this particular side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. We have built roads in the South. We have built roads 

in the North. We have fixed roads in all regions of the province 

at record levels. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member will note that in the growth plan we 

committed another $30 million to the important northern 914 

connector road, Mr. Speaker, that’s there. We’d like to do 

actually more. One way we could do more is if we had the $300 

million in extra oil revenue that closing the differential would 

give us, that the Keystone pipeline would give us, Mr. Speaker. 

If that member is serious about the economy of this province, if 

he’s serious about opportunities for people, north and south, he 

will finally articulate an economic vision; he’ll finally have the 

courage to stand up, go against Mr. Mulcair, and support the 

Keystone pipeline. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Wollaston Lake is a growing 

community. It’s a young community, Mr. Speaker, with many 

people wanting to reach their full potential. I travelled there 

with the member from Cumberland and met many of these 

individuals at a graduation ceremony. 

 

The social reasons for this road are hugely important, but so 

too, Mr. Speaker, are the economic reasons. With prospective 

mines coming into the area, Mr. Speaker, the road can also 

benefit industry. I understand, Mr. Speaker, and see that the 

Sask Party has turned their back on the people in the 

community who need access for social reasons, for educational 

reasons, but there’s also the economic argument, Mr. Speaker, 

for increased mining activity. My question to the Premier: is he 

turning his back on the mining activity in this area through his 

denial of this road? 

 



2678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in the first 

answer I just indicated that the growth plan that we released to 

the province in the fall involved $30 million from this 

government to be matched by Cameco for one of the most 

important northern roads in terms of economic opportunity in 

the North. That’s the 914 connector. That’s something that 

industry has asked for for a long time, the North asked for for a 

long time, as they have with respect to the member’s road that 

is the subject of the member’s question, that were ignored by 

the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, again we have an opposition that wants to 

talk about economic growth for the province, that wants to talk 

about resources, but a Leader of the Opposition who is unable 

to articulate a clear position on things like, well uranium 

mining, selling more uranium to China. Or the Keystone 

pipeline. In fact, Mr. Speaker, he can’t even get his facts 

straight. Yesterday he said he would wait until the National 

Energy Board approved the Keystone. They did it three years 

ago, Mr. Speaker, March 2010. Does he now have a position on 

Keystone? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Consultation With Northern Trappers 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow the Northern 

Saskatchewan Trappers Association will be meeting in Prince 

Albert. One priority for the trappers is consultation. The 

trappers association believes that not all trappers are made 

aware of developments that affect their traplines. This happens 

even though the provincial government has a duty to consult. 

 

When trappers live off the land, they have their traplines 

disrupted. The government won’t listen to them. They say that 

they do not have to consult with commercial trappers. That 

leaves many feeling left out of decisions that affect their 

traditional way of life. To the minister: why do northern 

trappers feel the minister has not shown respect to them or their 

traditional way of life? Why will his government not consult 

with the trappers of northern Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I certainly reject the premise of the member’s 

question. We on this side of the House have the utmost respect 

for trappers across Saskatchewan, the northern trappers. We 

consult with them on issues that they bring forward. The 

member himself knows I went up and, with him, consulted with 

them on educational issues. Very recently I attended the 

provincial trappers association meeting in Humboldt. Northern 

trappers were there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Trapping is an important industry in Saskatchewan. It’s an 

industry that’s growing again in the province. The members 

opposite may not recognize that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow the Northern 

Trappers Association meets in P.A. [Prince Albert] and I made 

that very clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many northerners participate and live a traditional 

lifestyle. They need to be consulted. Mr. Speaker, the prices for 

furs are rising. They help protect the way of life, one of 

Saskatchewan’s very important traditional cultures. It’s a point 

of pride. And there’s an opportunity for economic development 

in the North which the Premier should take serious. And there’s 

an opportunity for an economic development in northern 

Saskatchewan. The minister told trappers in a recent letter, 

“Commercial trapping is not recognized as a treaty or an 

Aboriginal right. The CPFN is therefore not directly captured 

within the consultation process.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, up north those that make a living off trapping are 

trappers. End of story. To the minister: why are trappers being 

treated differently? Now that they are expanding their business 

opportunities, why are they not being not consulted? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, that is simply not the 

case. Since becoming minister some 9 or 10 months ago, I’ve 

had a chance to meet directly with northern trappers to talk 

about their issues. One of their most important issues was 

education, talking to me about ideas and how the Ministry of 

Environment can change how it helps trappers. We have taken 

those recommendations. We’ve acted upon them. 

 

Again, most recently I met with the provincial trappers 

association in Humboldt. They had some very specific things 

that they wanted me to address. We’re taking those under 

consideration. We’re working with them. This is an important 

industry in our province. It is growing. We are working with the 

industry to help it grow, and members opposite just don’t 

understand growth, I guess. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the trappers association wants 

the minister to recognize their industry as an opportunity for the 

North. With the price of fur increases, there is an opportunity 

for economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister suggested that northern trappers, that 

he would work to support them and their proposals, but to date 

there has been no commitment from the Sask Party to the 

trappers. What is the minister’s commitment to northern 

trappers and what can they look forward to in this year’s 

budget, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, to be very clear, 

trapping is an important industry in our province. This minister 

believes that. This government believes that. And we’re willing 

to work with them. We’re willing to consult. More so, we’re 

willing to listen to their ideas. We’ve acted upon some of their 

ideas. We encourage more ideas coming forward and certainly 

we will consult with them when necessary and when they want 

to do that. So my door is always open. I’m more than willing to 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2679 

meet with them on a wide variety of issues and if the member 

opposite wants to set up some of those meetings, I’d be happy 

to undertake them and help to grow this important industry. 

 

Prices are up. They’re at the highest level in some 30 years, I’m 

told. And we’re very encouraged by that, and we encourage 

people to make their livelihood in this important way. It’s part 

of economic development. It’s part of what this government 

does. Let industry do what they do best — do their own thing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Student Population Increases and 

Support for Education 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Education wants standardized testing, 

even though he has yet to give a single reason why the province 

should be going down this path other jurisdictions are rejecting. 

 

Teachers know if there are more resources available for 

education they should be put into learning, not into preparing 

students for exams. But the Sask Party has nothing but 

platitudes as why it’s barrelling ahead with standardized testing. 

The minister’s answers so far have been, and I quote, 

“Evidence to support enhanced outcomes is evident,” and 

“Investing in school infrastructure is an investment.” Nothing 

but platitudes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, the classrooms are packed with 

students, a clear sign that the Sask Party has its priorities mixed 

up. Now to the question: why does the Sask Party have time to 

entertain standardized testing and not standardized class sizes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for the question. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

the success of Saskatchewan students is a priority for this 

government. All Saskatchewan students are a priority for this 

government. 

 

We need to get a couple of things straight. We have significant 

growth in this province, Mr. Speaker, and that is a great thing. 

And so we need to continue to support education, so much so, 

Mr. Speaker, that we’ve increased funding, operating funding to 

schools, by 21 per cent since coming into government — $258 

million, Mr. Speaker, for student supports since coming into 

government, Mr. Speaker. We have more teachers today in 

Saskatchewan schools, Mr. Speaker, than ever before — 469 

more teachers, Mr. Speaker. And we are committed to 

supporting the learning outcomes of our students and we will 

continue to move forward in that regard. 

 

The Speaker: — If the members on either side of the House 

want to carry on a conversation, they can leave the Assembly 

and do so in the rotunda. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we have 350 less educational 

assistants since they took government. Mr. Speaker, in the 

schoolyard around the province are more young children, and 

we think that’s a good thing too. And we’re happy to see this 

province growing. But the Sask Party can’t seem to manage its 

growth. And many schools, kindergartens and other grades, are 

bursting at the seams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at Dr. John G. Egnatoff in Saskatoon we 

understand there’ll be 95 kindergarten students there in the fall. 

The already large number of portable classrooms will make 

schools congested. That means the school board must pack in 

more kids who need one-on-one teaching to help them start 

their learning. To the minister: why are families being told to 

make the best of a crowded situation in schools? Where is the 

planning for our education system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Again, Mr. Speaker, in reference to the 

student achievement initiative, the student achievement 

initiative is just one support. There are many supports that our 

government is committing to education. And let’s get the record 

straight. Again, special ed supports, $258 million, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s an increase of 4 per cent, not a cut. Twenty-one per cent 

increase in operating funding to schools, Mr. Speaker, not a cut. 

 

School divisions have hired more educators, more 

professionals, paraprofessionals, and educational assistants, Mr. 

Speaker. Since 2008-09 there are actually 19 more educational 

assistants in our schools than before. There are 439 more 

regular teachers, 86 more student support teachers, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that evidence is fairly clear that we are 

committed to the success of Saskatchewan students in our 

schools. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well I am amazed that the minister is 

impressed by the number of 19 educational assistants in this 

province that’s growing the way it is. What an impressive 

number. Mr. Speaker, parents and teachers know with crowded 

classrooms there’s less time to focus on the individual needs of 

the students. And following the Sask Party’s mistake of cutting 

350 educational assistants — and now they say 19, which they 

will still refuse to admit that they’ve done — that one-on-one 

learning with teachers and students is just simply spread too 

thin. 

 

Only the Sask Party would think cramming in more students 

into a classroom is somehow a good thing for students, and 

only the Sask Party would think forcing those students to 

undergo standardized testing would somehow magically 

improve outcomes. Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister of 

Education pushing forward with standardized testing for 

students instead of lowering class sizes and giving teachers and 

students the breathing room for real learning? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this government is 

planning for growth. I was Chair of a board when we were 

losing in the neighbourhood of 2,000 to 3,000 students 

annually, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day we had four leading educators in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker — four educational leaders from 



2680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

around the province that are leading the charge in success for 

student outcomes. Mr. Speaker, the evidence that they are 

producing, the evidence that their teachers in the field are 

actually enacting with our students is remarkable and quite 

dramatic, Mr. Speaker. Chinook School Division, for example, 

moved 63 per cent success rate to 84 per cent in the span of 

four years. Prairie Valley School Division, another school 

division, Mr. Speaker, out of 26 student achievement initiatives, 

23 have been increased. Mr. Speaker, the evidence is really 

quite clear, quite accurate, and quite dramatic and we’ll stick to 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural Health. 

 

Rural Physician Incentive Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

note that since 2007, under our government, the number of 

doctors practising in Saskatchewan has risen 14 per cent. 

However, Mr. Speaker, we are very aware that many rural 

communities face a shortage of family physicians. Our 

government firmly believes that all Saskatchewan residents 

deserve timely access to quality medical care regardless of 

where they live. Today I am pleased to advise this Assembly 

that our government has launched a new program to help bring 

more doctors to Saskatchewan, particularly in rural areas. 

 

Earlier today the Premier announced the new rural physician 

incentive program. This new program fulfills our government’s 

2011 campaign commitment to provide up to $120,000 in 

student debt relief over five years to recent medical grads, both 

Canadian and international, who practise in rural communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the original promise was to forgive government 

student loans. However, as I travelled around the province last 

summer meeting with dozens of rural doctors, community 

leaders, and local health foundations, I heard that medical 

students often carry the bulk of their student debt outside of 

government loans. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we went above and 

beyond our campaign commitment and developed an incentive 

program that will be provided as a grant. It will still be targeted 

towards recently graduated doctors. Eligible physicians are 

those who practise in rural communities with a population of 

10,000 or less people; Canadian medical graduates, including 

those from Saskatchewan, who have graduated in the last two 

years; and international medical graduates who have completed 

their post-graduate training within the last three years due to the 

additional timeliness associated with obtaining citizenship and 

licensure to practice in Saskatchewan. 

 

We know this new program will help ease the heavy debt load 

that many new physicians carry when they finish their training. 

It will also expose them to the benefits of practising in rural 

Saskatchewan. And we know from our discussions with health 

regions that physicians who practise for three to five years in a 

rural setting and experience that lifestyle are more likely to 

stay. 

 

This program will be retroactive to April 1st, 2012 and will be 

administered by the Physician Recruitment Agency, Saskdocs. 

Anticipated cost of the program will be approximately 

$250,000 in year one and growing to approximately $2.6 

million once fully utilized in five years. 

 

Much like our government’s highly successful graduate 

retention program, annual payments will be increased towards 

the back end of the program. We are estimating 30 new 

physicians each year will benefit from the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rural physician incentive program supports our 

growth plan goal of ensuring that health services are available 

to all Saskatchewan residents. It is one of a variety of initiatives 

that will help us attract and keep more doctors in underserved 

communities, and we look forward to seeing its results. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The program that the 

minister has described here, it appears to have been adjusted 

from the original campaign promise to make sure that it 

actually accomplishes its purpose, which is to encourage people 

to try out rural practice and then hopefully stay in rural practice. 

And how it’s been changed is to make it a grant and not debt 

relief, and I think that’s a good plan to do it that way because 

it’s quite difficult to describe all the different ways that people 

fund their medical educations. And this makes it much simpler 

for everybody, and I commend the minister for what he’s done. 

Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 206 to 208. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled questions 

206 to 208 inclusive . . . has answered questions 206 to 208 

inclusive. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 85 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on the discussion on a very important piece 

of legislation — important, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

implications that it has to so many people working here in the 

province. And when we think of working people, Mr. Speaker, 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2681 

there are of course many types of people that we think of. We 

think of families. We think of individuals. We think about those 

who have recently arrived to the province, those who have been 

here a very long time and, Mr. Speaker, we think of our 

neighbours, our constituents. 

 

And so when we’re dealing with a piece of legislation like this, 

it’s necessary to have a thorough conversation. It’s necessary to 

ask the right questions and to cover the topics that matter so 

much to the content of the bill. This is something, Mr. Speaker, 

that has not been done, in my view, in an adequate way by the 

Sask Party government in looking at this piece of legislation. 

 

Bill No. 85, Mr. Speaker, is the government’s work in 

overhauling and looking at 12 pieces of legislation — 12 pieces 

of legislation that affect workers in many different areas and 

pieces of legislations, Mr. Speaker, that have been worked on 

and created and understood in the province for many decades. 

 

The pieces of legislation that are included in Bill 85, Mr. 

Speaker: The Assignment of Wages Act, The Building Trades 

Protection Act, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Act, The Employment Agencies Act, The Fire Departments 

Platoon Act, The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act, 

The Labour-Management Dispute (Temporary Provisions) Act, 

The Labour Standards Act, The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act, the radiation therapy and safety Act, The Trade 

Union Act, The Wages Recovery Act. So we can see, Mr. 

Speaker, just by the content of the bills that are being looked at 

or included in this Bill 85, by the titles alone we can see that the 

scope of the content and the scope of the individuals affected is 

in fact very broad. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that when the government chooses 

to look at legislation in this way in such a large format, it takes 

a considerable amount of time and energy in order to 

understand and see, Mr. Speaker, how the new changes — and 

whether they’re minor changes or major changes — how they 

will actually affect Saskatchewan people, affect the workplace, 

and affect the labour environment here in the province. 

 

As the Sask Party government introduced and stated that it was 

going down this path, Mr. Speaker, one concerning part was the 

amount of time that they allowed for consultation with 

Saskatchewan people and allowed for proper listening and 

engagement with Saskatchewan people, whether that be 

workers, businesses, unions, whatever the case may be. It was a 

very short period of time, Mr. Speaker, a 90-day review, and I 

think that is not an adequate amount of time given the 

importance of this legislation. 

 

I think it’s also important to look at this piece of legislation 

within the context of other pieces of labour legislation that the 

Sask Party has brought forward: Bills 5, 6, Bills 80, and 43. 

We’ve seen a track record, Mr. Speaker, where the Sask Party 

has not approached the matter in a thoughtful way, has not 

approached the matter in a truly consultative way seeking 

information from people. But on the other hand, the approach 

that they have pursued is having a clear idea where they want to 

be before they start any sort of consultations. So not a genuine 

consultation in my view, and it’s caused some problems with 

respect to relations in the province, and it’s caused some 

problems with respect to the quality of labour legislation that 

has been brought forward by the Sask Party government. 

 

We understood this on the opposition side, Mr. Speaker, when 

the Sask Party said they were pursuing the course of Bill 85, 

and we wanted to ensure that there was in fact necessary and 

proper consultation and discussion with Saskatchewan people, 

with working people, with families.  

 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, we as an opposition 

conducted our own tour, meeting with people, hearing from 

organizations, hearing from individuals in order to gain a better 

understanding of what are the issues that Saskatchewan people 

want to see addressed through legislation, either through 

amendments or revisions or brand new legislation because the 

Sask Party was saying they had an idea of what this was, that 

they knew where they wanted to go, but it wasn’t necessarily 

matching up with the things that many of us were hearing as to 

what workers and families actually do in fact want. So there 

was a tour, Mr. Speaker, throughout the province in larger 

centres and in smaller regional centres that provided people 

with the opportunity to voice their concerns, to voice their 

priorities, to state what they think needs to be included in any 

sort of changes to do with labour legislation. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon Centre, who serves as the 

Labour critic for the official opposition, organized a great 

amount of this. And it was a fruitful process, Mr. Speaker, that 

was, I think, a positive and a sincere way to hear what 

Saskatchewan people had to say. And when we listen, when we 

hear that sort of information, it better informs the approach that 

we ought to be taking as a legislature, in my opinion. And 

there’s a report with a number of recommendations that were 

provided coming out of that process. 

 

When looking at legislation, there’s obviously a number of 

considerations that need to occur. One area, Mr. Speaker, is 

examining how legislation and how this particular piece of 

legislation, Bill No. 85 — and as I mentioned it, it includes 

about 12 pieces of legislation, so it is a lengthy document — 

but it’s important to ask ourselves how this document can in 

fact promote and strengthen the position of vulnerable workers 

that we have here in the province. So that’s certainly one 

component. And, I mean, vulnerable workers are not by any 

means the entire workforce, but they are an important part of 

the workforce that we need to keep top of mind and ensure that 

the legislation we’re bringing in does in fact promote their 

interests. 

 

So the issues around vulnerable workers, Mr. Speaker, issues 

like fair hours of work, appropriate rules and guidelines around 

overtime, appropriate minimum standards for rest periods in 

between shifts; also scheduling issues, Mr. Speaker, such as the 

ease of having split shifts and how that can affect vulnerable 

workers, the importance of weekends; as well as the importance 

of accommodating or ensuring that legislation is appropriate 

and sensitive to the needs and priorities of women who are 

pregnant, or of disabled workers. And especially within this 

category, also young workers, Mr. Speaker. There are many 

young individuals who work either out of necessity or out of a 

want to do so. And it’s important to ensure that the legislation 

that we’re bringing forward does in fact have the necessary 

protections and promote the interests of vulnerable workers. 

 



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

Another category of workers that we need to keep in mind as 

we consider employment legislation, I think, are non-standard 

work situations. And we can think of artists in this situation, 

Mr. Speaker, who may be operating in a variety of 

environments with a number of different sources of income. 

This is another category, the non-standard work situations, 

where we need to ensure that the legislation that we’re bringing 

forward can in fact improve their situation and their lot in life 

and their ability to do what they want to do as a profession and 

what they have been doing well. And also, Mr. Speaker, 

another group that I think we need to look at are low-income 

individuals and how increased participation . . . and how we can 

have better outcomes for individuals living and working with a 

low income. 

 

We do see in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, a number of 

significant changes. And they’re significant changes and 

because they are significant, I think it drives home the point all 

the more that the proper consultation, the proper listening 

should occur when this type of process is embarked on. 

Because when we’re dealing with significant changes, if we are 

not actually listening to what Saskatchewan people want and 

need and care about, this is how we get into a problematic 

situation where people’s interests aren’t promoted as they ought 

to be. 

 

A big change in the way that the information is being brought 

forward, Mr. Speaker, is by having all of these pieces of 

legislation into one bill. By having the thickness of the actual 

bill and the content in it, it requires necessary examination. It 

requires necessary discussion and time to process what is in fact 

in the new piece of legislation and to see how that compares to 

existing pieces of legislation. 

 

When dealing with legislation, especially when it relates to 

labour issues, placements of commas or changes in words, 

definitions, these sorts of things can have a huge implication for 

the actual effect of the legislation. And I think that is an 

important point to make and something we need to be cautious 

about when pursuing this path. 

 

We’ve also in my view, Mr. Speaker, seen not a great 

explanation by government members in what is their motivation 

for many of the changes that have been brought forward. And it 

ties into the consultation component with the question mark of 

who has asked for these changes, whose best interests are they 

in or do they consider, and what will the consequences be for 

all Saskatchewan people. So I don’t think we’ve necessarily 

had a good explanation from the Sask Party government on 

who they’ve been talking to, who has informed this legislation, 

who has been calling for it, and who are the main proponents of 

it. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, with these big changes there are 

really big concerns with the amount of time that the 

government put aside, only 90 days, for the feedback coming 

back from the public. I think that is a concern when we’re 

dealing with the enormity of the piece of legislation. We know 

there’s a lot of information in there, and a 90-day review period 

isn’t acceptable in my view, especially considering, or vis-à-vis, 

other review periods that Sask Party members or the Sask Party 

government has had for other projects longer than a 90-day 

period. 

To me that would indicate that there’s not a true and genuine 

desire to hear what Saskatchewan people have to say, but 

instead the government is coming with beliefs and coming with 

an agenda that they want to see put in without listening or 

talking to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And another component to keep in mind with these big 

changes, Mr. Speaker, is that of the issue of regulations. And 

much of the detail and a lot of the actual content or the 

on-the-ground reality of what this legislation will mean for 

working people comes through the process of regulations. And 

I think it’s necessary to ensure that this also be part of the 

discussion. What will the regulations look like and how will 

this affect, how will the law be interpreted through the 

regulations? I think that’s very important. 

 

Our view, Mr. Speaker, in the opposition is that when dealing 

with labour legislation, it’s important to have a balanced 

working environment. It’s important for employees and 

employers to each have their rights, to each have their roles, to 

operate under a banner of respect, and to have a constructive 

workplace that is good for the worker, good for the employer, 

good for our cities, our society, and ultimately good for the 

province. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, some of the discussion around overtime 

provisions that have been provided in this legislation do cause 

us to pause and examine how this will affect working families 

and individuals. I think that is very important . We think of 

families who are working hard, raising children, involved in 

their community. Some of the expectations around overtime 

and some of the changes may make it more difficult for families 

to achieve the life and family balance, work-life-family balance 

that individuals want and need to have in order to have a 

successful life. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker, I think an upsetting of the balance 

between workers and employers through some of the changes 

that the Sask Party’s bringing forward in this bill. We see 

increased ability for employers to interfere with collective 

bargaining and strike votes. And, Mr. Speaker, within a free 

and democratic society, the right to organize is hugely 

important as is the right to strike, Mr. Speaker, for those 

workers who are organized. So when we see, Mr. Speaker, the 

erosion in ways of that right and that right being weakened, I 

think that is concerning, Mr. Speaker. And it’s concerning not 

just for actual workers, though of course that is hugely 

important, but it’s also how we have a strong democracy. It’s 

how we have a strong civil society, Mr. Speaker, by having 

people who have their rights, have them respected, and are able 

to exercise them as they see fit. 

 

The issue also, Mr. Speaker, of last offer votes, which forces a 

vote on an employer’s last offer at any time, can have 

implications when . . . It is always best, Mr. Speaker, to engage 

in collective bargaining in good faith, to allow two sides to 

come with their two positions and through discussion, through 

compromise, through bargaining to arrive and achieve a 

resolution that is acceptable to both sides and then ultimately in 

their best interest. We know, Mr. Speaker, that is the best 

approach because when it’s based on respect, when it’s based 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2683 

on a healthy tension, I think both sides end up happier and there 

is also actually an incentive to co-operate and to do things 

better. And I think that is a positive and a constructive thing. 

 

There are also changes within this legislation, Mr. Speaker, that 

can affect the dynamic within the workplace. We see by taking 

supervisors and workers out of the same bargaining unit, that 

can cause different challenges within the workplace. So I think 

that’s certainly something to keep top of mind and to consider 

properly when looking at this legislation. 

 

And we also see, Mr. Speaker, with this legislation what could 

lead to, in my view, as an increased fragmentation of 

bargaining units, making it more difficult to bargain, making 

that healthy process of collective bargaining more difficult by 

having the units fractured more and more — less cohesiveness, 

I suppose, within the workplace, Mr. Speaker — and a more 

arduous and difficult process at times for achieving and 

reaching collective agreements when there is increased or 

fragmented bargaining units within the workplace. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have here, there’s a number of concerns. And one, Mr. 

Speaker, is we have to look at the track record of the Sask Party 

government. And one area, Mr. Speaker, is in the issues of the 

essential services Act. And here we have a piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, that was brought forward in a similar manner, 

brought forward in a manner that did not have true consultation, 

a manner that demonstrated there was not a clear understanding 

of who was asking for this, Mr. Speaker. But the Sask Party 

introduced this in a way, despite some of the calls from 

individuals to have proper consultation, to have a proper 

examination, and we see, Mr. Speaker, because the Sask Party 

government ignored that and pushed through the legislation, 

they now need to fix this, as the courts have determined. And 

this has not been addressed in the legislation. So we have a 

huge piece of legislation here, Mr. Speaker, in Bill No. 85, but 

it’s not fixing and providing the solution for the essential 

services Act, and that’s in a sense put on the back burner by the 

Sask Party government. 

 

To me, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t seem like a sound approach 

because if you’re going to have a comprehensive piece of 

legislation that is designed to improve the lot for all workers, I 

would think, Mr. Speaker, that efforts and energies ought to be 

placed in this spot so that there could be a proper resolution that 

could be looked at in a comprehensive way. But we haven’t 

seen that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also need to look at, Mr. Speaker, I think some common 

sense changes within the large piece of legislation. In Bill No. 

85 there are components that we would support, Mr. Speaker, 

based on the common sense approach, of course. A minimum 

wage indexed to CPI [consumer price index] is a wise move, 

Mr. Speaker. I think that is a constructive thing, as well as 

sections that allow for electronic payment of wages, Mr. 

Speaker. Of course the days of everyone going to a bank teller 

with a chequebook and using cash, there are still some 

individuals who favour that mode of transaction, but most 

individuals increasingly, I should say, Mr. Speaker, 

increasingly individuals pursue to use electronic payment of 

wages or electronic payments and do more and more work 

online. So there may be some benefits there, Mr. Speaker, that 

could be positive. 

 

Also, with families of ill children, Mr. Speaker, 12 days leave is 

now described, and of course when we have families that have 

children who are ill, we want to operate from a place of 

compassion. We want to operate from a place of common sense 

and we want to, Mr. Speaker, operate from a place that allows 

these families to care for their children as best as they possibly, 

possibly can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The approach that the Sask Party has taken here hasn’t been a 

positive one, Mr. Speaker, because I think they’ve failed to start 

in a proper spot. And the proper spot, Mr. Speaker, would be 

consulting and engaging with Saskatchewan people and 

listening to what Saskatchewan people want, before plowing 

ahead. So the need for due diligence and public engagement is 

most certainly needed, and I think the Sask Party government 

needs to do that. They need to pause and allow for that proper 

consultation and listening to occur, Mr. Speaker. There also, 

Mr. Speaker, need to be changes that are motivated by the area, 

motivated by a general ethos of balance. And I’m not sure, Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite when they made these changes 

that their motivation, their desire for doing this has been one of 

balance. 

 

The changes, Mr. Speaker, around the eight-hour workday and 

the 40-hour week, I think these also do present concerns, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of balance for families, in terms of holidays, 

in terms of what people have expected. And I think that is a 

concern. 

 

I think we should also, Mr. Speaker, be looking at ways that 

sick time benefits, or sick time rights and provisions for 

workers could be strengthened and enhanced. When someone 

falls sick and is dealing with an illness, the stress of making 

ends meet, the stress of doing what is proper, Mr. Speaker, and 

allowing for the business of their family to continue, it can be a 

concern. I think that is a concern. 

 

Overtime rules, Mr. Speaker, are also a concern. And I think 

that is something, Mr. Speaker, that deserves, that warrants 

additional attention from what the Sask Party has already done. 

 

I think also, Mr. Speaker, we should be having a more thorough 

discussion right now about the regulations and what the intent 

behind some of the legislation is, and what they want to be 

doing through this legislation. I think that needs to be part of 

the discussion. 

 

I think we could also, Mr. Speaker, look for improvements to 

workplaces, workplace rights for independent contractors in 

this province. And at the beginning of my speech when I talked 

about certain groups, I think, Mr. Speaker, it was important to 

also think of independent contractors and how their 

considerations and concerns are in fact taken into consideration. 

 

There’s also the area, Mr. Speaker, with respect to financial 

reportings for unions and whether or not their members should 

decide. In my view, Mr. Speaker, the unions and organized 

labour operates in a democratic fashion, Mr. Speaker, and have 

rules of accountability to their membership. I think that’s part 

of how unions and organized labour do contribute to civil 

society and strengthening our democracy on a whole. And I 



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

think, Mr. Speaker, the decision of reporting that information 

and how that is reported is a decision that members who belong 

to a union, who pay their dues, who have the right to vote, 

attend meetings, access information, that is something that is 

existing within our existing democratic framework. 

 

Also keeping the mandatory collection of union dues, Mr. 

Speaker, I think is an important component that needs to remain 

within the legislation. Again this facilitates how these are 

collected in a way that can be done easily without more 

headaches than are needed. And it’s a simple way; it’s a 

common sense approach to doing it, in my view, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think this is something that should be looked at seriously 

in order to ensure that we are putting the best interests of the 

entire province at the front. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, applying the principles of the Rand formula 

and in not allowing for additional opting out of dues other than 

for presently applicable religious reasons, I think that is an 

important part, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important because all 

members belonging to the union have benefit from the contracts 

that are negotiated by the union. And if there’s a benefit 

through the contracts that are negotiated, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

appropriate to pay the dues, the exception being when there is 

religious grounds for that to occur. I think that is an important 

part, Mr. Speaker, because it provides the stability within the 

workplace. It provides the stability within an individual 

bargaining unit or a collective bargaining environment in order 

to ensure that things are successful. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a huge component which I think 

deserves attention in this area, and that is a much stronger 

focus, a much stronger energy is placed in the area of 

occupational health and safety and the improvements that ought 

to take place there. We think, Mr. Speaker, of the Day of 

Mourning, of workers who are fallen and have died in the 

workplace or related to their jobs, Mr. Speaker. That happens. 

And it is of course a common desire of all Saskatchewan people 

to do better. And we can do that, Mr. Speaker, by having a 

stronger and a larger discussion on that, and that should be part 

of this broader discussion of labour legislation I think, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And there’s not only . . . I mean the fatalities of course are the 

worst, but there’s also injured workers, Mr. Speaker, which 

presents a huge cost to us as a society, as families, as 

individuals when we are working. And as any MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] would know who’s dealt with 

WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] casework in their 

constituency offices, it’s a trying time. It can often be very 

tragic, and it can really change lives. So I think any discussion 

around labour legislation also needs to have a stronger focus on 

improvements to occupational health and safety. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not directly tied to the legislation, but it 

needs to be part of the broader discussion that we’re having, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is looking at the area of skills training 

and education and how we are extending opportunity to more 

and more people, how we are welcoming more and more people 

into opportunities to reach their full potential. And education is 

a huge component of that, and how we can have the proper 

partnerships with business, with educational organizations, with 

all types of organizations within the province in order to ensure 

that what we are doing is the smartest plan. So, Mr. Speaker, 

these are my remarks on Bill No. 85. It’s a hugely important 

piece of legislation. 

 

And I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the 

individuals from the community who have made the effort to 

engage with MLAs on both sides of the House to share their 

views and share their concerns about this piece of legislation. I 

think we as legislators become better and have more 

information when people make that effort and take the time to 

do that and to share information. It allows us to have a more 

balanced perspective. It allows us to be better informed and 

make smarter decisions, Mr. Speaker. And I would encourage 

all members, when given opportunities, to sit down and discuss 

this piece of legislation with individuals who would like to do 

so, that they would in fact do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to do this. This 

is a piece of legislation that we as a caucus will continue to look 

at, continue to work on, Mr. Speaker. And it’s something also 

that we’ll be spending considerable time in committee I would 

imagine as well. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 85. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Bill No. 55 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 55 — The 

Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

speak to Bill No. 55, The Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices Act. In a time where technology has made it such that 

not only are people consuming but we’re consuming in very 

different ways, purchasing products very differently than we 

used to, I think this an interesting Act in talking about some of 

the ways we ensure we protect consumers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to go straight to the minister’s second reading 

comments where he talks about, how he describes how the bill 

. . . the impact that it has. So you’ll note that Bill No. 55 will 

have an impact on 12 other pieces of legislation. I would just 

like to mention some of these bills. 

 

So the minister has talked about this Act, Bill No. 55, making 

legislation more accessible and easier to understand. So this bill 

is consolidating or rolling in other consumer protection 

legislation into this one bill, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 

interesting to note which bills that this will impact. For example 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

it will have an impact on The Auctioneers Act. For some of 

these Acts, they’ll be repealed. It’s The Auctioneers Act, The 

Cemeteries Act, 1999, The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses 

Act, The Collection Agents Act, The Consumer and Commercial 

Affairs Act, The Consumer Protection and Business Practices 

Act, The Consumer Protection Act, The Cost of Credit 

Disclosure Act, 2002, The Direct Sellers Act, The Film and 

Video Classification Act, The Funeral and Cremation Services 

Act, The Motor Dealers Act, The Sale of Goods Act, and The 

Ticket Sales Act. 

 

So this piece of legislation has a broad-reaching impact on 

already existing consumer protection legislation. The minister 

says that “. . . through regulations these licensing regimes are 

going to be all brought into the same Act resulting in 

consistency of treatment and coordination of administration.” 

 

When administration can be streamlined, that’s always a good 

thing, Mr. Speaker, but you have to make sure you don’t miss 

any of the nuances that may impact different businesses 

differently. 

 

So the minister goes on say that “The Act will allow for 

individuality of rules governing the businesses depending on 

the particular needs of the industry being licensed.” He also 

says, “. . . this legislation allows other business types to be 

brought into the licensing scheme by regulation as the need 

arises.” 

 

But I want to point out he goes on to talk about: 

 

. . . flexibility will apply to consumer contracts of which 

five types are typically regulated pursuant to The 

Consumer Protection Act. These are: Internet sales, future 

performance, personal development services, travel club, 

and remotely formed contracts. 

 

The minister says the government, when the government . . . if 

and when the “. . . government decides to regulate other types 

of contracts, the new Act will provide a simple mechanism to 

do so.” 

 

And he also assured the House in the second reading speech 

that through consultation . . . or consultation will take place 

“. . . with the affected industry groups, consumer and business 

groups, the legal profession, and the public before any 

regulations are passed.” 

 

But first of all . . . and I’ll take the minister at his word that the 

consultation piece will happen, but that’s sometimes difficult to 

do, Mr. Speaker, because this government hasn’t had a great 

track record on consultation. My colleague and the Leader of 

the Opposition just spoke to Saskatchewan Employment Act and 

that is a classic example of lack of consultation, putting things 

forward before you’ve actually spoken to people impacted. 

 

So I’d just like to flag for concern that I’m glad the minister is 

saying that he will be consulting on regulations with affected 

groups, but I would argue that it’s good to consult before you 

actually even . . . how much consultation work went into the 

actual piece of legislation in the first place, and perhaps it 

would be good to discuss with the affected people, affected 

organizations, how this Act will impact them without . . . before 

even talking about the regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s interesting, I’m thinking about some personal experiences 

around consumer protection, or one particular experience. I am 

an online shopper, Mr. Speaker. At times — pressed, harried 

schedule — sometimes I appreciate the opportunity to be able 

to shop at midnight from the comfort of my own home and my 

computer. But that opens up a whole host of questions and 

challenges. Not for me particularly, but I know more and more 

people who are relying on online shopping to get some of the 

things that they need in their lives. 

 

I know one example, actually. My daughter’s favourite clothing 

company has a great online presence and does a really great job 

online, but back in the fall we happened to be in Edmonton 

visiting some friends and she visited the store in person and 

bought an item without trying it on. She knows her size, bought 

an item, and we got back to Saskatoon and realized there was a 

major flaw for this piece of clothing. So I thought, okay, I 

contacted the store via the Internet and had a great response. I 

had my bill and a picture of the item and they were ready to 

support me and send this item back and replace it right away. 

And then they realized that I’d actually purchased the item in 

person at a store. And at that point they said, sorry, we can’t do 

anything for you. You have to go back to the store, or a store, 

and return that item there, which was a bit disappointing, Mr. 

Speaker. So just thinking about how consumers interact with 

online shopping or in this age of technology, how all that 

works. 

 

I think a good example of the need for consumer protection 

happened earlier this week, actually. I just want to pull the story 

up from my phone here. We heard a story earlier this week on 

CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] about a time-share 

resort where an individual from Saskatoon had purchased a 

time-share several years ago for $3,000 upfront, and then there 

was an annual maintenance fee of less than $500. And for this 

particular individual, it was a good buy. He could make that 

work, he and his family. And then after the financial meltdown 

in 2008 the company had gone bankrupt, and so in 2009 he saw 

an increase in his annual maintenance fees by nearly $1,000, 

Mr. Speaker. So that was almost double what he was paying. 

And then he just received a letter recently saying that this 

facility that he has, at which he has a time-share, needed to do 

28 million to 38 million in renovations. And that was going to 

be a $4,000-plus bill plus GST [goods and services tax], which 

means that this was untenable for this particular individual. 

 

And I know there’s many people who, coming up with $4,000 

unexpectedly, not in their budget, would be very, very difficult. 

And interesting hearing some of the interviews on the radio . . . 

So it’s not so simple as him just saying, I can’t pay this $4,000; 

I want out of the contract. From some of the interviews on the 

radio, there was actually a lawyer saying, you can’t just back 

out of that contract. This could have an impact. If there are 

people who can’t afford that $4,000 maintenance fee, it will 

have an impact on people’s credit ratings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I believe that some of these consumer contracts that the 

minister mentions actually cover time-shares, I think probably 

under future performance or under travel clubs possibly, Mr. 

Speaker. So consumer protection in this day and age of people 

spending . . . And when the economy is good, people spend, 



2686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

and they’ve been spending a great deal here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. And the way we spend has changed over the years 

as well. So ensuring that we have good consumer protection 

legislation is absolutely imperative. And I know that we . . . 

And consolidation of these Acts is an interesting way to do it, 

and as I said, streamlining administrative functions is good. 

 

But I know that in committee my colleagues and I will have 

further questions just to dig a little bit deeper to find out a little 

bit more about The Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices Act. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move Bill 

No. 55 to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 55, The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 56 — The Court 

of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi 

de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to rise to speak to Bill No. 56 here in these 

adjourned debates. Bill 56 is An Act to amend The Court of 

Appeal Act, 2000. 

 

So as you know, Mr. Speaker, the Court of Appeal is a very 

important court here in Saskatchewan. It’s the highest court, 

highest level of court that we have. And this court is the one 

that hears appeals both from the Court of Queen’s Bench and 

from other courts and tribunals where there is a right to appeal 

to the Court of Appeal. As you probably know, there’s a Chief 

Justice and six other judges of appeal, and the court sits both in 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

So the original bill for The Court of Appeal Act came actually 

from 1920, and it’s been revised since, and there was a new bill 

passed in 2000, The Court of Appeal Act. So it’s had a long and, 

I think, storied history here in Saskatchewan and it certainly has 

served us well as the people of Saskatchewan over the many 

decades that it’s been in existence. 

 

This bill itself is a short bill. It’s a couple of changes to The 

Court of Appeal Act, 2000. And the minister spoke to it when 

he introduced the bill, second reading on November 6th. And in 

the comments from the minister at that time, he indicated there 

was a couple of amendments here that are necessary to better 

serve justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the first change he talks about is the provision to allow 

Court of Appeal judges to participate in decisions for six 

months after leaving office on matters that they’ve heard before 

they left office. As you know, appeals can take a long period of 

time from the first time it’s on record. The panel of judges may 

hear the case, and it could be a significant number of months 

before they’re actually able to finalize their judgment on the 

appeal. And from the minister’s comments that there was 

always some difficulty about what happened when a judge 

retired, because if he just heard the case and then happened to 

retire, he was no longer able to participate in that particular 

judgment. So this appears to be setting up a form of transition 

for those situations where a judge has heard a case and chooses 

to retire and yet is still vested with the work that’s been put in 

on that particular case and he or she is able to work on that final 

judgment. 

 

The minister indicated that when a justice departs from the 

Court of Appeal, there’s challenges for the court management 

and the work of the court, especially if the remaining judges on 

the panel are unable to agree. And as I mentioned earlier, there 

are usually three judges on each appeal. So you can see what 

happens if you have a judge leave and there’s only two judges 

left. And if they don’t agree, then you can’t get a judgment and 

you have to go start from the beginning. So it’s important to 

have an odd number of judges hearing the case for that 

particular reason. 

 

And if a judge retired or departed while the judgment was being 

written, the other two judges wouldn’t be able to resolve — I 

don’t suppose flipping a coin would be a good way to do that 

— on an appeal decision. So we need to have an ability to have 

a majority of judges ruling on the final decision, so preventing 

the deadlock is clearly the aim for this particular bill. 

 

The other advantage he indicated for the court is that it would 

allow judges who have announced their retirement to fully 

participate in the work of the court and hear matters right up 

until their departure. So that’s another management aspect that 

this amendment deals with. If a judge decides to retire and he 

wants to retire in December, it allows him to keep working 

right up until his retirement so that he knows if there are 

judgements that he needs to participate in afterwards, he can do 

so. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And at this point, it would be difficult for a judge to take on any 

work prior to his retirement, knowing full well that it could 

leave that situation of deadlock in place. So I guess it’s always 

best to keep people busy and working until they retire rather 

than having them sit around twiddling their thumbs for the last 

few months of their career. And obviously our Court of Appeal 

judges are very significant people in the practice of law. 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2687 

They’re experienced and, you know, put there because of their 

wisdom and their skills as a legal counsel, and so we don’t want 

to have them sitting around for the last few months just waiting 

to retire either. These are some of the sharpest legal minds that 

we have in the province, and we certainly want them to be able 

to continue to provide that wise counsel to the courts and for 

the people of Saskatchewan as long as they’re able to. 

 

There’s another change that’s being proposed. So one other 

comment that the minister indicated is that preventing 

rehearings, which would happen when there’s a deadlock 

between the two remaining judges, will obviously benefit the 

public as well as the courts; you know, all the additional costs 

that would happen would be a significant burden for the parties 

to the appeal. And of course just the time and the time away 

from work, legal fees, and all those things are really difficult for 

the individuals involved in the appeal process. 

 

So the idea of rehearings, I think the goal the minister has stated 

is to avoid these rehearings in the future. So that would be a 

good thing to not have to have all those rehearings. Obviously I 

think the minister’s staff are well advised by the Court of 

Appeal staff and by the previous history of these rehearings to 

propose these types of amendments to The Court of Appeal Act, 

2000. 

 

He goes on to say that there still could be a situation where 

rehearings may be required but this will deal with the particular 

one that is arising when judges decide to retire for whatever 

reason. 

 

So what I’m going to do right now, Mr. Speaker, is just look a 

little bit at the bill itself. There is basically a new provision 

5.1(1) and a couple of other changes that are taking place. So 

on the new provision 5.1(1), it allows Court of Appeal judges to 

participate in the decisions for six months. And I have to find 

the English version. Here we go. So the clause basically reads: 

 

5.1(1) A judge who resigns his or her office or is 

appointed to another court or otherwise ceases to hold 

office may, within six months after the resignation, 

appointment or date that he or she otherwise ceases to 

hold office, give a decision in an appeal or matter he or 

she heard while holding office . . . 

 

And so that’s the change that’s being proposed in order to deal 

with that. 

 

There’s a couple of other changes, and they are to section 15(3) 

and 16(1). So in 15(3) basically the existing provision talks 

about three judges being a quorum of the court and the decision 

of three judges constitutes quorum and that is deemed to be the 

decision of the entire court. And the old clause used to read this 

way: 

 

15(3) . . . if an appeal . . . has been heard and is standing 

for judgment, and one or more of the judges who heard the 

appeal . . . resigns . . . dies or is absent through illness . . . 

the remaining judges may give the decision, and the 

decision is deemed to be the decision of the court. 

 

So the way this clause is set up right now, three judges 

constitute quorum; three judges can make the judgment. In the 

event one of the judges leaves as described in the clause, then 

the remaining judges will make the decision. 

 

Now they’re saying in the explanatory notes that the decision of 

the remaining members is the decision of the court but, as said 

earlier, if they can’t agree, then there’s a problem. 

 

So the new wording . . . That (3) is being repealed, and there is 

a new clause that reads as follows: “Subsection (4) applies in 

the following circumstances.” So I’ll read that in a minute: 

 

(a) an appeal or matter has been heard and is standing for 

judgment; and 

 

(b) one or more of the judges who heard the appeal . . . 

[dies or is ill, can’t give the decision or resigns]. 

 

Those are the three circumstances. And now in the new 

subsection (4) it says in those circumstances notwithstanding 

the first subsection, “. . . the remaining judges may give the 

decision, and the decision is deemed to be the decision of the 

court.” 

 

So what they’re doing is inserting the ability for the retiring 

judge to come back. So section 16(1) is the new change. The 

repeal of 16(1) is the relevant clause and probably the most 

important provision in this bill. 

 

Section 16 is the clause referring to rehearings and, as I 

described earlier, that may be in the case where the two 

remaining judges simply cannot agree. So there’s a deadlock. 

They have to have a rehearing. And originally . . . The clause 

that’s been changed here is 16(1) which said: 

 

The court shall re-hear an appeal or matter that has been 

heard and is standing for judgment if, due to the death, 

resignation or absence of two or more of the judges who 

heard the appeal or matter, only one of the judges who 

heard the appeal or matter remains. 

 

Now this is being repealed and it’s going to read as follows: 

 

(1) The court shall rehear an appeal or matter that has 

been heard and is standing for judgment if a majority of 

the judges who heard the appeal or matter: 

 

(a) die before the decision is given [are sick or resign 

their office]. 

 

So in this case it’s only the majority of judges, which allows for 

the judge who has retired or, I suppose in this case, was sick — 

certainly if he passed away, he won’t be able to provide any 

further services to the court — but in the instance where’s he’s 

ill and he’s now better, or where he’s retired and doing 

something else, but he is able in that case to rehear it. So yes, 

we don’t want to go too further than that, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of calling judges back before we avoid a rehearing. 

 

So I think what the minister indicated in his comments was that 

the six-month period is consistent with other jurisdictions like 

British Columbia, Alberta, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, 

and Labrador. So it seems to be in order. And at this point, I 

think we would ask — there’ll be questions in committee for 



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

sure — but at this point, we would ask that we move this bill to 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 

56, The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 57 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 57 — The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to stand and enter into the debate on Bill No. 57, An 

Act to amend The Condominium Property Act, 1993. And this is 

one that’s very important in terms of the housing issues that we 

face in our cities, our communities right across this province. 

And in many ways this meets a lot of concerns but I think it 

falls short, and I need to have questions for the committee. I do 

want to acknowledge the minister and thank the minister in 

terms of some of the work that’s been done in terms of 

consulting, not quite as far and deep as I would have liked to 

have seen it, but it was there. 

 

I do have to say that I have two documents in front of me, both 

from July 2011. One is the review of The Condominium 

Property Act, 1993 that was done by the legislative services of 

the public law division, Ministry of Justice, that went out to 

some of the folks that are stakeholders. And that was quite a 

thorough piece. There were some questions that weren’t quite 

asked, but of course you know that at that period of time we 

were going into an election mode. And so this may have been 

overlooked by many people because clearly that fall we had lots 

of stuff on our mind. 

 

And as well I want to say and I want to acknowledge that this 

piece of work that was done by my legislative intern, Nicole 

Hamm, in July 2011, Concerns and Emerging Issues for Condo 

Owners in Saskatchewan, this is the kind of good work that the 

interns can do for MLAs. And this was made public, and in fact 

we gave it to the ministry. I don’t know if they used it or not. 

But when we have interns, they come and they do some very 

good non-partisan research. And I really wanted to thank her 

for the work because condos are a new kind of idea in terms of 

ownership, home ownership that really many of us don’t really 

understand, and we think of these things as just apartments that 

we bought and we go from there. 

 

But I do want to say that, if I can, just to give a little brief 

history. I don’t know if you know this, Mr. Speaker, but the 

first condo in Canada was built in Edmonton in the Brentwood 

Village townhouse complex in 1967. Prior to 1967 there were 

no such thing as condos in Saskatchewan. The first high-rise 

was built in 1969 in Nepean, Ontario. And we actually put 

legislation into place in 1968, and the first condo in 

Saskatchewan or the first condo in Saskatoon was built in 

Sutherland area late 1969. A two-bedroom unit, the first condo, 

sold for $11,600, and a three-bedroom unit was $12,850 with a 

down payment of $790. Those were probably big prices in 

those days. But we’ve come a long way and this is a really 

important, important debate because it affects the people, 

particularly those owners. 

 

And what’s interesting about this, and Nicole found from her 

research, there’s two specific groups that really are impacted by 

condos and the legislation around them. Of course it’s the 

whole range of people from young adults right to seniors. But 

the two groups that really are impacted are young adults 

because it’ll be the first thing they buy, and seniors because it 

will be the last thing they buy. And as you go through their 

housing continuum of buying a house in a neighbourhood, 

raising a family, that type of thing . . . But condos are very, very 

important. And so legislation is very important that we get it 

right, that we get it right. 

 

And so this piece that is before us addresses some of those 

concerns. But I want to make sure I highlight a couple of 

concerns. And as you may know, as you may know, in my 

riding I have a lot of condos. Downtown Saskatoon are a lot of 

condos. And they are owned by both seniors, and they are 

owned by young people, and they are owned by all sorts of 

folks. So this is a big, big issue to me. 

 

And of course one of the things that happened — and this 

happened late 2006; 2007, continued a bit — was that whole 

issue around condo conversions. And this legislation goes 

further along that road to resolve that issue. But clearly that was 

something that was a bit of a perfect storm in a way, with the 

Saskatchewan economy starting to really take off, and condos, 

apartment buildings were being sold. The idea was to be 

converted. And so there were some real issues here. 

 

And of course in fact we did, as the government on this side, in 

October 2007 we did some changes to regulations to slow that 

down. The city of Saskatoon did some changes to try to slow 

that down so there’s more fairness in this. And of course 

Regina placed a moratorium on condo conversions until their 

policy was complete, and that happened in 2008. 

 

So the issues that Nicole had identified — my intern, of course 

— was the issue around particularly non-resident owners and 

condo corporation boards. And this is one that’s emerging as a 

real concern. And it was one that was brought forward to me by 

my constituents because they have some real concerns that 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

when you’re buying into a condo, particularly if you’re a 

senior, that in fact that you think you’re buying into a 

community of like-interested people, whether they be seniors or 

whatever. But people are looking for others of common interest, 

a common-interest community. 

 

And what they found was the trend has been, over the course of 

time, that there is becoming more and more tenants in the 

building, and there were not owners. And this is a real concern. 

 

It’s happening right across Canada. This is not just something 

that’s happening here in Saskatchewan or Saskatoon, but in fact 

I know in Vancouver it’s something they’re wrestling with. 

 

Well how many people in a condo building should be tenants? 

How many should be owners? It’s a very tough question. It’s a 

very tough question. And I know it’s a bit of a Pandora’s box to 

open up, because what do you do? What is the correct number? 

 

A person should be able to buy. In fact I know many of my 

friends who are close to retirement age say, I’m going to buy a 

condo now, invest in it, get a big chunk of it paid off by having 

a tenant in it, but it’s where I want to retire when I’m 75 or 

older. That’s their thinking. But if you have a condo building 

where everybody’s thinking that, that becomes a problem. It’s 

not bad when it’s one or two or three people, but it’s a problem 

when it’s 30 or 40 or 50 per cent. 

 

So this is something I think we’re going to have to wrestle with 

over the course of time. And so I would like to have seen this 

. . . This was an issue that was raised with me because people 

would go to an AGM [annual general meeting] . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are tenants in a condo bad? 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — The question is, are tenants in a condo bad? 

Not necessarily. Tenants are not bad, necessarily. But what 

happens, this is what happens, and this is the concern they 

would have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There you go. 

 

What they would do is, the complaint that I had to me was that 

they would go to the AGM, and then when it came to electing a 

president and all the positions on the condo board, they found 

out there was a shrinking pool of volunteers, a shrinking pool of 

volunteers. And the tenants would say, I’m a tenant. I’m paying 

rent. It’s not my responsibility to be a volunteer in this building. 

Whereas the owners would say, I really want to be a volunteer, 

but I can’t volunteer for everything. So that’s an issue we have 

to wrestle with. 

 

And so it’s a reality. It’s a reality. And I know the Minister of 

Housing, you know, may not think it is, but this is what seniors 

and older folks are saying because they don’t have the energy 

over the course of time, whether it’s five or ten years. You get 

more tired and you say, I can’t do all the things that I did when 

I was younger. And I think that’s a reality that we have to deal 

with. And so this is an issue that they brought up. 

 

The other issue that they brought up was the idea of having 

some sort of bylaw that they could pass so they would have the 

same age type of group in it. And of course there are issues 

around that that we have to wrestle, right? And that is around 

the Human Rights Code. Can you pass bylaws that in fact are 

age specific? And of course that’s something that we have to 

deal with. And of course issues around insurance. That’s an 

important one, and that’s one I think that has come up. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I find this a very interesting discussion 

because there are issues. And as we get further down the road 

with this, we see all different kinds of housing open. Prior, you 

know, the big thing that we saw in the ’60s too were co-op 

housing facilities, and of course we still see that happening. Of 

course the difference there is, of course, people do not own 

their individual units. And now we see — now it’s just outside 

my riding — one of the first, I think in the province, Wolf 

Willow, where it’s co-housing where it’s sort of a blend of 

co-op housing and condo living. You actually own your unit, 

but they very much live in a structured type of thing. 

 

And so anyways, these are some of the issues that the condo 

discussion talked about, condo corporation boards. That was 

very important, how they dealt with that. And this is true. The 

issue is a listing of directors for a condo corporation is not 

publicly available. This causes unit owners, renters, potential 

unit purchasers, and others difficulty when attempting to 

resolve disputes with the condo corporation. And I know our 

reality as candidates, when we want to go enter buildings, we 

can’t find out who is on the board to ask permission. We don’t 

know who the president of the condo board is. And while we 

would like to have a conversation with them, we just don’t 

know who they are. And so this will be interesting. So the 

recommendation that they had under consideration was to make 

this list available through the annual notice so there’s a listing 

of directors of the condo corporation available to the public. 

And so that’s a very important thing. 

 

Sale of unit by developers. This is one that’s very important and 

is addressed in the Act. Turnover from the developer to the 

condo board, some of the information about what was 

happening during the building of the condo. And this talks 

about agreements, warranties, plans, lists of subcontractors, 

financial records for corporation, certificates and approvals 

from government — these kind of things. So this was a concern 

that was raised in my riding because people, when they took 

over a building, it was hard to find out who actually did the 

work on the building. And where were the plans? Where were 

the warranties? And there was nothing really to force the 

developer to give the information to the condo board and 

particularly to give it in a reasonable timeline. So I’m glad to 

see that appears to have been done. As well, Mr. Speaker, 

maintenance of common property, that type of thing; parking, 

that’s always a big issue. 

 

And so what I’d like to do is talk a little bit about the legislation 

that’s before us now in terms of specifically what’s in the Act. 

And so it is interesting that they talk about building into this 

Act what they call: 

 

adding the following clause after clause (y.2): 

 

‘short-term rental management pool’ means a rental 

management agreement pursuant to which one or more 

units within the corporation will be rented out for periods 

of less than one month”; 



2690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

So there’s lots of different angles around this rental part, and I 

think this’ll be very interesting in committee when we talk 

about this. So what does this mean that if you have a building 

and you’re living in there and you find out that the condo 

beside you that used to be owned by somebody who lived in it 

on a permanent basis now is being rented out for a one-week 

time period, a two-week period, essentially you’re now living in 

a hotel? And this allows that to happen. What is that all about? 

 

What about the idea of, what happens if you have an owner in 

the condo building that owns two or three units? Or, and we 

know this is happening in downtown Saskatoon, where you 

have circumstances where condos are being purchased by 

corporations so they can be rented out to workers who are 

coming in to work. And essentially they’re residence for their 

workers, and that’s not quite the idea you had when you bought 

into that condo building. That’s not the vision that you had. So 

we’ll have some questions about what does the short-term 

rental management pool mean. 

 

The other question we have — but again we’ll have this as a 

question in committee, so the minister may want to take a look 

at Hansard later about this — is when we talked about the 

whole idea of condo conversions. And this is one of the clauses 

that will be added in: 

 

if the application relates to the conversion of existing 

premises used for apartments, flats or tenements into units 

intended for residential purposes: 

 

(i) the conversion will not reduce below the prescribed 

level the availability of rental accommodations in the 

area; 

 

So it’s two questions. What does area mean? What does area 

mean? And what does prescribed level mean? And so that’ll be 

interesting. While this seems really a very good addition, we 

have some questions about again what are the regulations in 

this. So that’s very important. And as I said earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, the idea, the dealing with the issue of when the 

developer’s finished building the building, people have moved 

in, and there was a delay or in fact sometimes not information 

given over to the condo board, that now this is part of the new 

legislation. 

 

So it talks about section 12 being amended, that now in clause 

(a) they add in manuals before warranties and guarantees. So 

some of this stuff will be very helpful for maintaining the 

property as a whole. So that’s a very good thing. 

 

So all of this work will make for some very interesting 

discussions in committee. I know that people are interested. 

Because as I said, the two largest groups within our 

communities that use condos as their homes are the younger, 

young people entering into home ownership and buying their 

first place is a condo. And they want to make sure they’re doing 

the right thing, that they’ll retain their value because what they 

want to do is move on to their next home. And hopefully it will 

be a good deal and they’re not stuck into that. And also seniors 

because it is their last home that they’ll own. And they want to 

make sure that when they leave their condo and they sell it 

again that, again, they’ll get a good return and there’ll be a 

good price on the marketplace. 

And so all these things factor into it. And whether it’s a simple 

but critical like parking, all the way to making sure there’s 

proper insurance, that of course that your neighbours are good 

people, and that you have a sense of what’s happening in your 

complex and whether, you know, I mean people can support 

what they understand, but if they don’t know what’s going on 

in the unit beside them, then it’s a bit of a problem. And so this 

is important. 

 

And as I’ve said, that legislation around condos is relatively 

new here in Saskatchewan. As I said, our first bill was passed in 

1968, with buildings shortly to follow. And so we’re learning as 

we go a bit. And of course when you have a boom like we’ve 

experienced over the last years, that we need to make sure 

housing is managed, that growth is managed in a way so that all 

along the housing continuum that we’re meeting the needs of 

the people and that we’re not looking for the easy, the easy 

ways that lead to other problems, that lead to unintended 

consequences. And we see that in other provinces, whether it’s 

Vancouver with really the huge bubble in terms of housing 

costs, or Ontario where in Toronto in particular, with their 

whole issue around condos. And if you’re in Toronto for sure 

you’ll see these condos going up left, right, and centre. And 

some of them are very tiny, but people are looking for places to 

live and they’re not left with many choices. 

 

And what our job as people who make the laws is to make sure 

that they’re fair to everyone, and that we’ve thought all of the 

angles through and there are no unintended consequences, and 

what we’ve passed is what we mean to pass. And this is why 

we’ll have lots of questions in committee on this. We think it’s 

really important to get it right. I think we’ve tackled this two or 

three times in the last six years, so I imagine it’ll be back fairly 

soon. But let’s get it right and even better this time. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this bill to 

committee, and so I would do so move. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 57, The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. To which committee will this bill be referred? 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that this bill be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2691 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 58 — The 

Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this afternoon to talk about Bill No. 58, An Act respecting 

Compensation for Injured Workers and making consequential 

amendments to certain Acts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that this bill has been 

brought forward to this legislature in response to the review of 

legislation which is mandated within The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, and that review report was received by the 

government in November of 2011. And so, Mr. Speaker, there 

are a number of issues that are dealt with in quite a long bill 

that we have here that effectively relate to that particular 

review. And so I’ll talk about some of the things that I see that 

are here that respond to the concerns that have been raised by 

both employers and employees during the consultation process. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Act is one of the pieces of 

legislation that we have in Saskatchewan that has built into it 

this automatic five-year review. And so it does give us a chance 

to respond to the changing needs of the workplace as it relates 

to compensation for injuries that workers have been involved 

with as a result of their employment. 

 

And so what we see is that there are some increases in the 

benefit levels. There’s indexation of some of these levels. 

There’s changes to the maximum wage rate that can be 

compensated for, which makes sure that people who are injured 

are not going to be in a situation where they can’t support 

themselves and their families. Also there’s some other penalties 

that are put into here to make sure everything is dealt with in a 

straightforward manner. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now there’s also a section which, basically the way the minister 

described it on November 6th when he was talking about this, 

he says: 

 

This bill provides clarity to a number of WCB’s internal 

processes. These include codifying the fair practice office 

within the legislation and clarifying the appeal process for 

claimants that disagree with the decision of the WCB 

regarding a claim for compensation. 

 

And then it says that this “. . . fair practices office has been in 

place since 2003 . . .” Now this particular fair practices office is 

effectively the internal ombudsman for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board. I think any of us who have been 

legislators for a number of years know that there continue to be 

questions raised by our constituents about the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, about The Workers’ Compensation Act, 

and that our constituency assistants and we as legislators are 

quite often dealing with particular problems that are actually 

hard to deal with because we don’t often have the information 

that we require. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that our critic on this particular file 

will want to speak after me, and he’ll go into more detail on 

some of the specific changes. But I would like to talk about 

how we can do a better job and talk about something that’s not 

in this bill and that I think should be in this bill. 

 

And what I’m referring to is an issue that has been raised by 

Saskatchewan’s Information and Privacy Commissioner on 

quite a number of occasions. I’ll be referring at length and 

probably annotating a letter that was sent by Mr. Gary Dickson, 

the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy Commissioner, to 

the Minister of the Workers’ Compensation Board on 

November 19th, 2012. And basically the point that he made 

after this bill was introduced a couple of weeks earlier was that 

there had been a major point that had been missed, and it was 

something that was raised by the committee of review in 2006, 

and it was raised again by the committee of review in 2011. 

 

And I want to talk about this for a while to have people 

understand why he has consistently raised this issue. And it’s 

not entirely clear from anything that the minister has said or any 

information that we’ve received why this particular suggestion 

hasn’t been acted on in response to these reports. 

 

So here’s the issue. Well basically the way Mr. Dickson says it 

is that the interpretation of the Workers’ Compensation Board 

of The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act 

in relation to the current workers’ compensation Act means that 

they will not provide information to the worker or to the office 

of the Information and Privacy Commissioner, so that they can 

attempt to resolve a particular issue. And in 2006 the committee 

of review effectively took the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner’s suggestion and said this should be done when 

the legislation is amended. Now that did not happen after that 

review, which the legislation I think was brought forward after 

the election of 2007. And further, in 2011 the issue was raised 

but it wasn’t as clearly recommended that this should be done 

but that it should be studied some more. 

 

But the effect for a worker is that they cannot get access to 

information from the Workers’ Compensation Board in the 

normal course of their file being dealt with. So there will be 

decisions relayed to them, whether orally or in writing, and they 

don’t have the right to go and see what the information is that is 

being used to make the decision or to have the worker who’s 

from the compensation board that’s working with them give 

them the responses that they’re getting. They can get the 

information if they file an appeal. And the appeal process is not 

that simple, and it usually involves the expense of a lawyer, and 

then you can get some of that information. 

 

But if the person goes and makes a complaint to the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner, they cannot in any way 

get access themselves to the information and they can’t 

authorize the Information and Privacy Commissioner to get that 

information. And so the suggestion is that the Act should be 

amended to make sure that matters can be resolved by 

individuals getting their own information, but also that the 

individuals can authorize the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner to get that information so that it most often 

probably could be explained to the worker who is affected. 



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

Now Mr. Dickson says that he has put this issue in his reports 

over the last number of years, and he’s also identified it as an 

issue in a number of his review reports and investigation reports 

as being the main reason why it has to go to his office and incur 

all of that extra expense. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from Mr. Dickson’s annual 

report, his last annual report. And he says under a heading: 

 

Jurisdictional issue with the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

I have now issued four different Reports with 

recommendations for WCB with respect to improved 

compliance with freedom of information protection and 

The Health Information Protection Act. 

 

And he lists the . . . it’s investigation reports F-2007-001, 

F-2009-001, F-2010-001, and Review Report F-2010-002. 

 

A fundamental problem is that WCB takes the position 

that section 171 to 171.2 of The Workers’ Compensation 

Act, 1979 are somehow paramount to the requirements of 

the freedom of information protection and that section 

4(4) of The Health Information Protection Act operates as 

an exclusion of the records in the custody or control of 

WCB from HIPA. 

 

Or The Health Information Protection Act. That’s the end of 

that paragraph. 

 

I just want to comment that basically the Workers’ 

Compensation Board and obviously their legal advisers are 

preventing the worker from seeing the information, but also 

preventing an independent officer of this legislature, whose job 

is to deal with particular issues, preventing them from having 

any access to the records to see what may have been revealed or 

not revealed. 

 

Now continuing with the quotation from his letter, or from his 

annual report: 

 

Our office receives a significant number of requests for 

review and complaints involving WCB; 44 WCB related 

files have been opened since July 2003. We also receive 

numerous inquiries about WCB which do not result in a 

file being opened. 

 

In recent years, we have issued two Investigation Reports 

involving a breach of privacy on the part of WCB: 

 

Investigation Report F-2009-001 — the Commissioner 

[that’s the Information and Privacy Commissioner] 

determined that WCB disclosed the complainant’s 

personal information to an independent claims advisor 

without authority and that WCB failed to satisfy its 

obligations under section 27 of The Freedom of 

Information and Protection Act to ensure that the 

complainant’s personal information in its possession 

was accurate and complete. 

 

So I’ll stop quoting and I’ll make some comments about this. 

That investigation report concluded that WCB — because they 

don’t think the rules apply to them — has basically given 

personal information about a worker to somebody who the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner says shouldn’t have 

that information. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a fundamental question that this 

legislature has to protect. And that’s why I’m going to spend 

some time on this, because I think that there’s an opportunity 

here for the minister to fix this particular problem and do it in a 

way that responds to almost, well about eight years worth of 

recommendations and discussion. And if there’s no intention to 

fix it — and obviously we’ll have some discussion in 

committee about this — then we need to have very clearly on 

the record why the WCB is flying in the face of the rules that 

every other institution and organization in our province has to 

respond to. 

 

So I’ll go back now to this 2011-2012 annual report: 

 

Investigation Report F-2007-001 — the Commissioner 

found that WCB disclosed to the complainant’s employer 

more personal information and personal health 

information than was necessary. We further found that 

WCB failed to adequately safeguard the complainant’s 

information when it sent copies of the individual’s 

personal information and personal health information to 

the complainant by ordinary mail, which was not received 

by the complainant and could not be accounted for. 

 

And then I’ll stop quoting from the report. 

 

So here we have a situation where a worker, unbeknownst to 

the worker, but he finds out later that WCB has been sending 

his personal information and personal health information to the 

employer without his or her consent. And on top of that, 

they’ve sent it in a way that’s not traceable and in fact it didn’t 

go where it was supposed to go. Nobody knows where it went. 

And so it becomes an issue around the process within WCB, 

their disregard for personal information of workers that are 

involved in the system. And once again, it’s a reason why this 

legislation needs to be amended to give the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner the ability to monitor what’s happening 

at Workers’ Compensation. 

 

Now I’ll continue back in the report of 2011-2012: 

 

Overall, the complaints and concerns we hear regarding 

WCB include the following: 

 

WCB demands personal health information that is not 

relevant to the compensable injury; 

 

WCB shares more information about an injury with the 

employer than is necessary or relevant; and 

 

WCB does not let claimants see their own case 

management files unless and until an appealable issue 

has been identified, and even then may not allow the 

claimant to view their entire file. 

 

We are also concerned about WCB’s position that the 

OIPC does not have jurisdiction in many cases that 

involve WCB. As noted earlier, WCB claims that an 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

injured worker’s access to their personal 

information/personal health information is solely 

governed by section 171.1 of The Workers’ Compensation 

Act, 1979 and that . . . [the freedom of information and 

protection Act] thus has no application. 

 

Not only have we set out our contrary interpretation and 

each of our Investigation Reports but we also have made 

submissions to the 2006 Workers’ Compensation Act 

Committee of Review and to the 2011 Workers’ 

Compensation Act Committee of Review. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll step back out from this report again. Mr. 

Speaker, the Information and Privacy Commissioner has 

attempted to resolve issues for quite a number of people — I 

think he said 43, 44 files that have been opened plus also 

requests for information that have been received — and they 

haven’t been able to have the Workers’ Compensation Board 

accept the fact that they’re part of the provincial system and 

have rejected any ability for them to get involved. 

 

So I’ll continue with the report. Continuing with the annual 

report of 2011-12, the commissioner continues: 

 

In the case of the 2006 Committee of Review, the 

committee appeared to accept our recommendations. In 

fact it addressed our concerns as follows: 

 

And now I’ll quote from the committee of review report in 

2006. 

 

Currently, there is a difference over the extent to which 

sections 171 to 171.2 are paramount over The Freedom 

of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. This 

difference contains the seeds for much dispute and 

costly litigation, which should be forestalled. 

 

The Committee can find no compelling public policy 

purpose or basis for the Board to continue to be exempt 

from, or have a special position with respect to, the 

legislation and the administration protecting information 

or personal health information that applies generally in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Committee recognizes the unique mandate and 

decision-making role of the Board in the administration 

of justice, but does not consider the Board’s mandate 

and role to be so unique or special that the law and 

remedies that apply to other administrative agencies and 

public bodies should not apply to the Board. 

 

Recommendation: 

Amend the Act to specify the Board is subject to The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

The Board collects, compiles and uses extensive 

personal health information. There is a regime in The 

Health Information Protection Act that addresses the 

protection of this information while preserving access 

and sharing of the information by “trustees” for 

diagnosis, treatment and care, which the Board involves 

itself in through the Early Intervention Program and 

other case management endeavours. 

 

The general rules and processes in many parts of The 

Health Information Protection Act apply to the Board, 

but it is exempt from Parts II (Rights of the Individual), 

IV (Limits on Collection, Use and Disclosure of 

Personal Health Information . . .) and V (Access of 

Individuals to Personal Health Information). 

 

The Committee has concluded there is no overriding 

purpose or reason that the Board should be exempt from 

these parts. 

 

Recommendation: 

Repeal the exemption The Workers’ Compensation Act, 

1979 has from Parts II, IV and V of The Health 

Information and Protection Act. 

 

Once these recommendations are enacted, the Board 

will have to review and adopt new processes and 

procedures for the collection, use and disclosure of 

personal information that will respond to the 

submissions the committee received. 

 

Now that’s the end of those recommendations, and I’m stepping 

out of the report now from the 2006 committee of review. Now 

I’m going to get back into Mr. Dickson’s most recent annual 

report and he says: 

 

The Saskatchewan government has, to my knowledge, 

never addressed those recommendations from the 2006 

Committee of Review so the difficulties with WCB have 

continued unabated to this date. 

 

A new Committee of Review was struck in 2011 to 

undertake a further statutory review of The Workers 

Compensation Act, 1979. In The Workers Compensation 

Act Committee Of Review, Final Report, 2011, the 

committee observed as follows:  

 

And I’m quoting from the report. 

 

We firmly believe that the operational efficiency of 

WCB and the perception of WCB by stakeholders and 

the public will greatly improve if freer access to files 

and information is provided to all relevant parties. 

Access to information is a hallmark of a free and 

democratic society. 

 

The Committee examined the WCB’s relationship to 

FOIP and HIPA and heard opposing opinions on what 

should be done. The Committee reviewed these 

opinions but was not able to conduct a thorough legal 

analysis. We suggest that future Committees examine 

this issue further. 

 

So that’s a quote right from their 2011 report. And then now 

Mr. Dickson makes a comment and goes back into the report. 

He says: 

 

In the discussion of Recommendation 21, the 2011 

Committee of Review commented as follows: 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

It should also be noted that sometimes the right time to 

gain access to a file or information may not be 

connected to the appeal process. Access to files should 

be restrained only by privacy legislation and should not 

be limited to having an appeal in process. We are 

concerned that many unnecessary appeals are filed and 

much unnecessary work generated when the issue could 

have been easily and quickly settled by access to files 

and information. 

 

Claimants should always have access to their complete 

files. 

 

Recommendation 52 in the 2011 Report is as follows: 

 

All workers and employers have timely access to files 

without the need to file an appeal. A good rationale such 

as privacy legislation must be provided for any access 

that is denied. 

 

I’ll continue then quoting from Mr. Dickson’s letter: 

 

Since my statutory mandate does not permit me to seek a 

trial of an issue at the Court of Queen’s Bench to resolve 

this matter once and for all, injured workers in 

Saskatchewan are left in the unsatisfactory position of 

being able to appeal to our office but they are denied 

redress since WCB insists that our office has no 

jurisdiction to require compliance with The Health 

Information Protection Act and the freedom of 

information and privacy Act by WCB. 

 

Quoting Mr. Dickson again, he says: 

 

I have met with the Chairman of WCB and the Minister 

formerly responsible for The Workers’ Compensation Act, 

1979 but this has not resulted in any change in the 

approach taken by WCB. I am mindful that an aggrieved 

applicant has the right to initiate an appeal de novo in the 

Court of Queen’s Bench however the cost of doing so will 

be seen by many citizens as prohibitive. 

 

To the best of our knowledge, in every other Canadian 

jurisdiction except for the Yukon, the provincial workers’ 

compensation scheme is subject to oversight by the 

provincial Information and Privacy Commissioner, similar 

to all other provincial public bodies in those jurisdictions. 

Saskatchewan is anomalous. The problem is that there are 

more than 370,000 Saskatchewan workers eligible to 

make a claim under The Workers’ Compensation Act, 

1979 and in 2011 there were 39,689 claims reported to 

WCB. I submit that this is far too many citizens to leave 

unprotected and disenfranchised when it comes to their 

full information rights. 

 

And that’s the end of the quote from the annual report. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go back and emphasize what 

this committee of review that the minister put in place in 

response to the legislation — and this is the 2011 committee of 

review — it stated very clearly “Access to files should be 

restrained only by privacy legislation and should not be limited 

to having an appeal in process.” 

Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about individuals who are suffering 

already. We know the people that come to us in our 

constituency offices, who we see other places in our 

communities, are hurting. I mean they don’t want to be on 

workers’ compensation. They want to get back to work. And 

they’re given bits of information that they don’t believe or they 

don’t understand, and they’re not given access to their files. 

 

The committee of review has recommended to the minister and, 

as far as I can see, there’s been no response to this 

recommendation in Bill 58. And there’s no reason why there’s 

no response. There’s no mention in the minister’s remarks in 

this legislature about this particular issue. 

 

My suggestion would be to the minister that he go back to his 

officials and see if there’s not some way that an amendment can 

be brought forward in committee so that this particular issue 

can be corrected. I don’t see, I haven’t seen any rationale for 

the basically the prevention of access to information to the 

workers that is part of the system that we have now. 

 

Times change, as we all know. And as patients, as workers on 

workers’ compensation we all have much more access to the 

information about ourselves. And that’s part of, you know, a 

major discussion obviously around electronic health records, 

which is happening within the health system. But when the only 

way you can get the personal information about you and about 

your injury which affects you as an individual is to go to the 

Court of Queen’s Bench with an application, which is going to 

cost you quite a bit of money for a lawyer. That’s wrong. 

 

And the ministers can do something about it. He can make the 

quite reasonable changes that have been suggested by Mr. 

Dickson, and we can do it I think without much difficulty in the 

next few weeks so that this can be part of the bill when it goes 

forward. 

 

As we know, this bill comes back every five years. And so the 

last time it was here was in 2008. Now we’ve got it in 2013. 

And so my suggestion and I guess my plea to the minister 

would be that on this particular point he have some proposed 

amendments prepared so that we can review them in the 

committee. 

 

And practically it’s quite a simple amendment. All it would say 

is that The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 

Act effectively trumps The Workers’ Compensation Act and the 

attitudes of the officials at Workers’ Compensation, and that it 

gives the power to the Information and Privacy Commissioner 

to assist people who are hurting and are having trouble in this 

whole system. It would also apply to The Health Information 

Protection Act that that provincial legislation, which applies to 

every other institution, every other person in the province, 

would also apply to the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re in a situation where we can make what is 

actually quite a simple change which will be of positive benefit 

to a whole number of people who are already caught in the 

system. But it’ll also I think require more accountability, more 

transparency, from the people who are dealing with these 

injured workers in our province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there’s an opportunity here for the 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

minister to fix this particular problem and do it now rather than 

wait for the next review, which is five years from now. With 

that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 58, The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 59 — The 

Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill No. 59, The 

Animal Identification Act. And just a few comments to make on 

this. It’s a fairly basic bill. What we see from the minister’s 

comments is that really his intention is to devolve some of the 

responsibilities that government used to have to the industry 

itself. And in his comments when this bill was introduced on 

November 13th, he indicated that it’s his view that brand 

inspection legislation needed to be updated. And so in its 

current form it’s not flexible enough to allow industry to 

control the delivery of services that they need. 

 

So the proposed bill in his view will add provisions so it would 

allow for the delivery of brand inspection services by parties 

outside of government. And I guess one of the main concerns 

we have with this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is whether or not 

this is an appropriate move because inspection is typically 

something that should be a function of the public service and a 

function of a government-controlled oversight. When you allow 

industries to internally inspect, there could be problems and 

that’s, I guess, one of the main issues that we have with this 

particular bill. And so we’re certainly going to look carefully to 

that as this rolls along. 

 

There’s a number of amendments that are being made, changes 

that are being made to The Animal Identification Act that’s 

being amended, and different definitions that are being changed 

and different provisions in the regulations as well. Also there’s 

some new sections being added: responsibilities and powers of 

the minister — so we see those kinds of things happening — 

and animal identification inspection administration agreements. 

 

So the Act purports to provide for an agreement between the 

minister and the industry itself to make these changes, and it’s 

actually moving to a third party system and away from the 

government. That’s something that we have to watch and make 

sure that the industry itself has the capacity to do the delivery of 

the program, for one thing. 

The minister announced in his comments that he has created an 

advisory committee to review this, and he’s met with them a 

number of times. And based on those discussions, he’s 

indicated that this is something that the stakeholders are looking 

for. So obviously the industry is looking for this. It’s something 

they want. He had different organizations in the committee to 

review. And they’re looking at brand inspection models in 

various provinces and even in the United States as well, in 

North Dakota. And they’re supposed to make some 

recommendations. 

 

He anticipates that these recommendations will be . . . He was 

hoping they would come in by early 2013, but he’s indicated 

recently that they actually won’t be happening now until this 

summer. So we need to see that as well. And it would be 

beneficial to have an opportunity to look at those comments 

before we comment on this proposed bill, but it looks like it’s 

not going to happen that way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we’ll 

just have to watch and wait as that goes along. 

 

As he said, brand inspection is very important to the producers 

in our province, and it certainly is. The industry is evolving, 

and so we understand that the service of brand inspection must 

also evolve. And so his goal is “. . . to ensure there’s no 

obstacles to industry when a new system is ready for 

implementation.” I think our goal would be similar, but we 

want to make sure that the needs of the individual producers are 

being met as well. So we’ll have to just kind of watch as this 

goes through. 

 

There’s not a whole lot of changes being proposed in the bill 

itself, and it’s basically an enabling type of legislation so that 

these third party agreements can be instituted. So as the 

explanatory notes indicate, there’s some new definitions that 

are required so it will enable inspection services by a third 

party. Currently that’s controlled by the government. 

 

And the new section . . . Or 2.1 is being amended, and what it 

does is allow the minister to remain responsible for all matters 

related to animal identification and inspection and a number of 

things there. And the existing 2.2 allows the minister to make 

agreements with a third party and clarifies the elements that an 

agreement with a third party must include. 

 

So in section 2.3, we can see that this subsection connects the 

authorities in the Act and its regulations to the agreement. It 

outlines what happens when an agreement is established 

between the minister and a third party, and they allow the 

agreement to be modified to different sectors, regions, and 

persons or category of persons as long as they’re specified in 

the agreement. 

 

So let’s just take a little closer look at 2.3 in the Act. It’s a fairly 

long section and it’s one that appears . . . 2.2 and 2.3 are really 

the meat of the Act and the amendments that are being 

proposed, these two new sections. So in 2.2, this is the 

reference to the animal identification inspection administration 

agreement and what this happens is it has to be approved by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. So it requires executive 

approval, and it will allow the minister to enter into an 

agreement with any person. So presumably the minister will 

work with the industry to make those changes and to ensure that 

they are acceptable from a government perspective. Now this is 



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

a broad provision. 

 

In 2.2(2) the minister can actually delegate his powers and the 

regulations in the agreement. So it allows him to delegate all his 

powers with respect to inspections of animal identification 

marks or any category of inspections of animal identification 

marks that are going to be listed in the agreement. So it’s 

basically a devolution of his power to that third party. Again 

it’s not something I think that we would heartily endorse. We’re 

going to be curious about how it evolves and whether this is 

going to work or not. 

 

Now there’s a number of things that must be in the animal 

identification inspection administration agreement, and there’s 

a list here of several things that must be in there. First of all it 

has to specify what powers and duties are in fact being 

delegated and it says there are outcomes that must be achieved 

by the person receiving the delegation. There also has to be an 

acceptance by the person who is accepting the delegation. They 

have to agree to exercise those powers. So you can’t just give 

somebody delegation without them agreeing to take on those 

powers and responsibilities. 

 

There’s a number of reporting requirements in clause 2.2(3)(d). 

So there are certain reporting requirements that must be there. 

And also there is a requirement that they provide the minister, 

within a period after the end of the year, an annual report. So 

again there appears to be proper reporting and transparencies 

built and accountabilities built into what has to be in the 

agreement. 

 

There’s also the requirement for records. So they have to do 

proper records management. And there’s a requirement for, that 

they report to the government in: 

 

. . . any matters with respect to the exercise by it of the 

powers and fulfilment by it of the duties delegated to the 

person; 

 

[and] the requirement that the person carry adequate 

insurance [as well]. 

 

There also has to be an indemnification and that’s something 

you’ll often see in any of these types of agreements, is the 

indemnification itself and obligations of the parties if the 

agreement is terminated. 

 

So it also goes on to say that the period of the agreement and 

the procedure for the review has to be in there. So again it’s 

building in the transparencies and accountabilities that are 

necessary. 

 

Something else you often see in these types of agreements is: 

 

the settlement of disputes; 

 

[and] the liability of the person arising of the person’s 

carrying out of the provisions of the agreement. 

 

The terms and conditions also have to be imposed on that 

person. And then always the catch-all, any other prescribed 

matters. So that’s what has to be in this new agreement once the 

minister decides to delegate the authority to a third party. 

There are other things we find in section 2.3, and in there is 

matters arising from entering into an animal identification 

inspection administration agreement. 

 

So this is what comes out of these agreements. Notwithstanding 

any other part of the Act, what we see is that “. . . the minister 

and a person enter into an animal identification inspection 

administration agreement.” 

 

There should be a reference in the specified provisions to an 

inspector, and if there is, it’s deemed to be a reference to an 

inspector appointed by the person. So again, the person that’s 

being delegated to will deal directly with the inspectors. 

 

And it goes on to talk about a reference to the minister, duties 

imposed by the specified provisions on the minister, all the 

people who are required in the specified provisions to pay to the 

minister the fees that will be required. And the person can 

exercise any powers that it has been given, including the power 

to cancel or suspend documents, licence, or approval issued 

pursuant to the Act. 

 

Finally there’s three other provisions that are indicated in this 

section. These are matters arising from entering into the 

agreement. For example, all the applications that are supposed 

to be made to the minister are now made to this person or the 

inspector if the person designates them to do that. And any 

licence issued by the minister will remain in force from 

previously. And every prohibition or notice issued by the 

minister or an inspector that is in place the day this comes into 

effect can be dealt with by the person. So there’s an automatic 

delegation to that person of things that had previously been 

done. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think at this point there is not a 

whole lot more that we would like to speak to on this bill, and I 

think we’re ready to ask the minister and his people questions 

in committee. So at this point I would like to move Bill No. 59 

to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 59, The 

Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred to? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 60 — The 

Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to get into the debate on The Animal Products 

Act that’s before us now, Bill No. 60. It’s an important piece of 

legislation of course when we’ve seen things go drastically 

wrong in our food systems, our meat systems at the different 

food processing plants. We know what a drastic impact that can 

have on our consumers as people worry about the challenges of 

safety. And this is an important thing. It’s hugely important. 

 

And so when we have legislation before us like the bill today, 

we need to make sure that we get it right. And it sounds like the 

minister has been working very hard on that, and in fact often 

comments have been made about how he has consulted 

extensively. It’s too bad that his seatmate wouldn’t consult as 

much as he does but that can be a challenge, I know. So we 

only wish that . . . But I know and I don’t want to make light. 

This is a hugely important, hugely important Act. 

 

And so I think that this is one . . . As I say, when we’ve seen 

situations that happened in Brooks, that we want to make sure 

that our food systems have integrity and have respect, and 

people know. And this is important though, no matter what, we 

debate the bills fully and completely, fully and completely, 

fully and completely. And so this is a critical piece of 

legislation before us. People have to have confidence in the 

products that are before them, particularly animal products, that 

they are inspected. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And it’s interesting as I read through the minister’s comments. 

And I have to say, the minister’s comments for a piece of 

legislation that is only — how many pages is it? — eight pages, 

eight pages and he has more to say about that piece of 

legislation than his seatmate did about a piece of legislation 

that’s 180 pages. And so I was expecting many more pages 

from the Minister of Labour. But I guess I’m missing that. But 

this is very good work, very good work here because we know 

how important it is. 

 

But as I read through this, the discussion, the minister talks 

about how the Canadian Food Inspection Agency typically 

would make the inspection services to the facilities that we 

have that are registered for meat inspection, that do meat 

slaughter and processing, but that they are intending to 

withdraw these services by December 31st of this year. And so 

it’s critical that we get this in place and that we work through it. 

 

So he talks about how the animal Act needs to be updated. In its 

current form, it doesn’t provide the authority for third party 

delivery of inspection services, and we need to make sure that’s 

available. We would prefer and we think, we believe actually 

on this side of the House that the best inspection is really done 

by government-employed inspectors. That’s critical. So we 

would disagree with the minister on that part. But it does need 

to be inspected. That’s critical. That’s the first line. It’s 

important that it gets done right and gets done properly, that the 

whole chain along the system is that we have confidence that 

it’s being inspected, and that’s very important. 

 

So we have concerns about the third party aspect of it that, if 

that does happen, that there is a reporting process and that 

there’s some way to hold these folks accountable. It’s 

interesting. The CFIA [Canadian Food Inspection Agency] has 

given two years notice of their withdrawal of service. And so if 

this happens with the third party, we will be very interested and 

we will be watching that closely because again it gets back to 

that confidence in the system. 

 

And clearly people don’t really think too much about it until 

something . . . a crisis happens, a crisis like Brooks where you 

have huge facilities. And of course we all think about the big, 

big plant, but it’s one that recognizes that when things go 

wrong, they go horribly wrong. And again, also I believe it was 

Maple Leaf in Toronto was the other food inspection. So this is 

important work. 

 

So it talks about being amended to allow for a new brand 

inspection delivery model in Saskatchewan. And this is 

important that this gets done. He talks about how this was a 

federal decision that they would pull out and they had no input 

into it. And of course that is really too bad. That really is too 

bad, and that we should have been stronger on that, but we need 

to develop a new provincial meat inspection system to go 

forward. 

 

And so apparently they’ve been consulting extensively with the 

affected meat processors, and I understand that there’s 12 

provincially registered facilities in the province and they’ve all 

been engaged to date. And of course they all would appreciate 

how important this piece of legislation is. And so when we 

think about this, it’s very important and it goes right through. 

 

Now it would be interesting . . . I don’t know if the minister has 

consulted with consumers about this. He’s probably consulted 

with the ranchers and the producers, the food processing plants, 

but has there been a consultation with consumers? They would 

be very interested in this. And this is why we, as I go back, that 

it’s just very, very unfortunate and it’s too bad. And of course 

we do see the federal government . . . We’ve had this 

conversation about the cuts to food inspection, the number of 

food inspectors’ positions that have been cut by the federal 

government, and clearly this is the outcome of that. That now 

we’re having to think about a third party delivery system of 

inspections. So that’s a big issue. 

 

So another major initiative under this bill that he talks about is 

the flexibility it needs to move forward with the marketing 

assurance mechanism. So he talks about having, enabling 

industry-led fund producer marketing assurance funds, that this 

would happen so they could collect the fees from the industry to 

go into this fund. And it would help, be used to compensate 

producers when livestock buyers default on payments. And he 

gives an example as recently as G & M Livestock in Manitoba 

where apparently they must have sold some of their cattle to a 

buyer, and the buyer must have for some reason defaulted on 



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

payment. And of course that is really tough, really tough. And 

so that’s something that must be addressed. 

 

And so then he goes on and talks about the assurance fund and 

how allowing the industry the option of running their own 

program if they so choose. And again he’s talking about how 

it’s important that we make sure that legislation allows the 

producers to protect their most important investment, and that’s 

their animals. And so, Mr. Speaker, it seems relatively 

straightforward, but I think it’s one that again that we would 

have many questions in committee just because, as I say, when 

things go horribly wrong, and we’ve had a couple of 

experiences in the last few years with . . . We’ve talked about 

the Maple Leaf plant in Toronto and of course the Brooks plant 

in Alberta, the XL plant in Brooks. And it’s important that we 

do all that we can as lawmakers to ensure that there’s quality 

assurance in our products we buy, particularly meat, that can be 

so deadly, so deadly if things go wrong. 

 

And I know it’s hard for people. When we saw the pictures, the 

videos, the news coming out from the XL plant of the meat that 

was contaminated, and in fact we found out about it because of 

things that were . . . the inspection that was happening in the 

States. We need to do all that we can here in Saskatchewan to 

make sure that we have our confidence in the system. 

 

Now the minister would talk about making sure we do stuff, all 

that we can, to protect the most important investments the 

producer has, and that’s their animals. But I would also say that 

another important element of that is the customer, the 

consumer. I mean if there’s no consumer, there’s no point in 

having the animal, is there? You know, if nobody’s going to 

buy the meat products, then why, why, why go to all this 

length? So this is an important link between the two. This is an 

important link between the consumer having confidence in the 

products that we raise here in Saskatchewan and we produce 

here in Saskatchewan, and then also as well what we produce as 

ranchers or livestock producers. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s critical that we ask questions 

but as I said earlier, it seems the minister has consulted about 

this. It’s been two years since we first heard about this, and I 

think that some of the basic work has been done. But I’m not 

sure; I’m not confident. And we will be asking those questions 

about that in terms of, are there any stones left unturned? And 

so at that point, Mr. Speaker, I’d be very happy to move Bill 

No. 60, an Act to amend bill products Act, I’d be very happy to 

move that to committee. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 60, The 

Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. And while I’m on my feet I would 

like to ask the members to perhaps be a little quieter as we can 

hear it across the province. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 61 — The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 61, An Act to amend The Railway Act. 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes people in Saskatchewan don’t realize 

that we require railway legislation because many people 

understand that the federal legislation governing our national 

railways often trumps anything that we try to do as a province. 

But as will be shown and as has been discussed previously, this 

legislation relates to what we would call shortline railways in 

Saskatchewan, in other words, railways that are wholly 

contained within the bounds of the province of Saskatchewan. 

And we’re all pleased to see that there have been a number of 

shortline railways that have been encouraged to grow in the 

province, with I think last summer the 13th one starting into 

operation. 

 

Now this particular legislation is an amendment, so it’s not very 

long. And it directly relates to how the sections of what are 

often part of the national railway system are acquired by 

corporations or communities to set up shortline railways. And 

so what we have, and I know that when the minister spoke to 

this on November 7th he had quite a short speech, and I think 

that was an accurate way to do it because from the 

government’s perspective it’s setting out quite a simple thing. 

But effectively what’s been happening over a few decades now 

as the national railway systems divest themselves of some of 

their branch lines, is that it’s been quite difficult to assess the 

value of these branch lines and also figure out the rules around 

how they should be acquired. 

 

And so what we’re looking at today is a change around those 

rules about how segments of rail can be acquired by interested 

people, I guess, is basically . . . So in this particular legislation, 

the new section 22.1 defines interested person, and that 

definition includes a person, so that’s as an individual or as a 

corporation, who has an interest in buying, leasing, or acquiring 

a railway line or part of a railway line. 

 

Now this legislation is in place because quite often the national 

railway or international railway lines would just as soon 

dismantle and remove the rail lines from the system totally. 

And the reason for that is obvious. It’s that they prefer to have 

terminals on some of the larger lines and effectively require the 

people who are delivering goods for use of the railways that 

they would come to these centres. And so we have across the 

province effectively seen the elimination of the small-town 

elevator which was the traditional method of getting grain into 

the railway system. And what this legislation does is says that 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

there should be some fair rules around how this would work. 

 

And one of the difficulties — and I suppose it was because it 

was part of the national, more powerful railway system setting 

up the rules — was a rule that, sure, a community or 

organization could buy a rail line but they couldn’t determine 

the net salvage value of the rail line, which was used in 

determining the price, until after they had made a firm offer. 

And what the minister is proposing here, which seems to be 

reasonable, is that it effectively provides more balance for the 

person or the organization that wants to buy the rail line by 

saying that they can reject an offer that they might have made if 

the net salvage value that they eventually find out about is 

different than what they expected. And so this process is one 

that I think makes sense in light of what’s happening here, and 

it effectively provides more balance in the bargaining between 

the buyer and the seller. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now when we are working on this type of legislation, we have 

to recognize that it’s another piece of the changing landscape, 

changing history of Saskatchewan. And we have all seen, those 

of us who are similar age to me, how the landscape has changed 

as small towns have changed. I know that quite a few years ago 

now, probably in 1996 or ’97 when I was the attorney general 

and minister of Justice, that we were asked in Justice to provide 

some legal advice around the issue of the sale and removal of 

small-town elevators. And it became quite clear that it was 

actually a jurisdictional constitutional issue that made it very 

hard for the province to step in and try to protect those 

particular icons of the prairie. And as we now know, there 

aren’t that many left, and they are in many communities being 

preserved, but there’s still some of them that are being 

removed. 

 

One of the factors was that in small towns, as they had less and 

less commercial activity in the small towns, was that they had 

really very few businesses to put their local town tax rates on. 

And as a result, the elevators ended up taking a little bigger and 

bigger hit each year. 

 

So some of the first reaction to that was to go to the RM [rural 

municipality] next to the town and say, well how about let’s 

build a new one over here, and you give us a 10- or 20-year tax 

deal. So that was some of the first change that happened. 

 

But at the same time as that was happening, the size and length 

of trains could be included, and it became less efficient to go 

and pick up four or five cars in a small town and go to the next 

town and pick up another four or five cars. And so we got much 

larger what we call inland terminals. And those inland terminals 

effectively took the business from 20, 30, or 40 towns where 

the traditional grain delivery system had been. 

 

And so you ended up having a combination of federal 

legislation, the inability of provincial legislation to respond to it 

very well because of this special jurisdiction of the federal 

government over railways, and you ended up also with changes 

within the industry itself. And so we had the changes that 

happened with the Wheat Pool going to Viterra, with other of 

the grain companies combining, and eventually there became 

less grain companies, less something that we traditionally 

knew, but more bulk transfer companies. And so the net result 

is now we have one of the world’s largest bulk transfer 

companies as a major actor in our provincial delivery system, 

which means that they understand how to move heavy items of 

all sorts and provides efficiencies within the system. But it 

certainly changes how grain is delivered. 

 

Now the protections that are in this particular legislation relate 

to keeping some of the smaller pieces that make sense of the 

branch delivery systems. And as we move forward with this 

legislation, I think it makes sense to do it, but it also is a 

recognition that some of the more efficient ways of transporting 

heavy products, primarily grains, have changed and are causing 

lots of difficulties for our other transportation systems, 

primarily the highway system, that we have. 

 

It’s also quite interesting to note that, you know, not that many 

years ago we would have been surprised to have as much crude 

oil being transported by train as we do now. But it also then 

reflects the fact that there’s a change in, you know, how we do 

in how we move heavy items within our community. But 

practically this particular legislation will balance the bargaining 

that happens around the sale of the shortline railways. It makes 

sense that we should do that. 

 

Now I know that some of my colleagues still want to speak to 

this legislation, so I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 62 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise on Bill 

No. 62, An Act to amend The Parks Act. And this particular 

legislation sets out some of the changes that happen. And as a 

former minister of Environment in charge of parks, I know that 

there’s a continual review of the boundaries of the parks that 

related to the improvement in our land titles system, our ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], which 

meant that they were often finding errors in the description in 

the legislation as it relates to the parks. And I think that some of 

that is taking place in this legislation as well as some 

adjustments to deal with use by park neighbours. 

 

And so when we look at this legislation, the first section relates 

to the Steele Narrows Provincial Park up in the northwest part 

of the province by Makwa Lake. And this is making sure that 

land that everybody assumed was in the park is actually in the 

park. But there are some places where the roads have been built 

where pieces of the park are, as the parks people call, 

marooned. They’re separate from the park, and they really don’t 



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

add anything to the park, and those pieces can then be taken out 

and exchanged for other land or sold. And so I think what’s 

happening here is that there’s a fairly equivalent addition and 

exchange of land so that there’s a small net gain in Steele 

Narrows Park of .03 hectares of land. We know that’s not very 

much. 

 

There’s also an amendment I guess in the next section, which is 

section 5, which relates to the Anglin-Emma Lakes Provincial 

Park. And this is actually the creation of a new park in the 

province. And so therefore there has to be quite a detailed 

description of all of the land that’s included. That’s further 

complicated by the area where this land is located because it’s 

in a very important recreational area for the province just south 

of Prince Albert National Park. And so we’re pleased to have 

this new park created, and what this particular legislation does 

is to make sure that all of the boundaries are as clear as is 

presently known. I wouldn’t be totally surprised if we won’t in 

a few years get some corrections on these, but that’s just the 

nature of this kind of work. 

 

And then we go on to the next section, where there’s an 

amendment related to Danielson Provincial Park. And 

Danielson Provincial Park is the provincial park right by the 

Gardiner dam on Lake Diefenbaker. And there are some 

changes being made here to add land that’s native prairie at the 

same time as releasing some land which is in that area for 

creation of a subdivision. And it’s land that looks kind of 

natural now, but during the huge earthmoving project which 

was the Gardiner dam and Lake Diefenbaker project, much of 

this land was disturbed. And so it’s really not natural prairie or 

anything other natural about it other than it’s on the edge of the 

lake. And it’s my understanding that there’s some interest in 

increasing the recreational potential for that part of Lake 

Diefenbaker, and so this amendment will facilitate that. 

 

This is in my home territory where my grandparents’ farm was, 

and so I know that in the ’50s actually there was discussion 

about building the dam right on our farm land. This is about I 

think 6 miles upriver from where our farm was, and so I know 

the area well. There are some very beautiful spots that would 

add more recreation possibilities on Lake Diefenbaker, and it’s 

a question of how that’s done, whether it’s done within the 

provincial park system or as a separate sale of land and a piece 

of private area. The other interesting thing about this part, this 

is very close to where the world record trout have been caught 

in Lake Diefenbaker. And so there’s probably a lot of interest in 

people who are fishers that they would like to get access in this 

particular area. 

 

So we have those changes that have been made that increase the 

size of Danielson Provincial Park but remove some land from 

the park to allow for the further development. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the only other change here that is in this 

legislation reflects some of the rules around what the 

enforcement officers can do related to wildlife attractants. And 

it’s effectively dealing with those kinds of things where there 

are nuisance bears. And we know that there are many times in 

our parks where there are substantially more bears, and it gives 

the enforcement officers the ability to step in and assess where 

certain products, whether it’s garbage or whether it’s food 

products or whatever is stored to make sure that it doesn’t 

create a further security risk for the people using the park. 

 

I know that in the neighbourhood of Greenwater park in 

Saskatchewan that there are many bears around that area, and 

they are most of the time not a problem. But if they become a 

nuisance, it’s a big issue for the parks officials and for the 

neighbours of the parks. My nephew has worked as an 

environment officer with the specific job of dealing with 

nuisance bears, and it’s quite an interesting line of work, but it’s 

also one that takes resources that could be used to better use in 

other activities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that this legislation appears to 

accomplish what it’s set out to do, but I know that at least one 

of my colleagues wants to make some further comments about 

parts of the legislation, so I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried 

 

[16:45] 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 63 — The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the government House, or excuse 

me, the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise and speak to Bill No. 63 which is An Act 

respecting Regional Parks and making consequential 

amendments to other Acts. And just to start off, just a couple of 

comments about the importance of regional parks. 

 

I think in many peoples’ lives and certainly in my life, the 

regional park was the place where we all took our swimming 

lessons when we were kids. The regional park that was closest 

to my home in Lafleche was Thomson Lake Regional Park And 

Thomson Lake Regional Park is an interesting park because it 

is part of a PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration] 

dam of the Wood River. And the Wood River was dammed in 

1961. It was a PFRA project, and a fair bit of farm land was 

actually flooded as a result of that. But the whole goal was to 

provide for irrigation, which was what the PFRA was all about 

in those days, creating some water reservoirs for irrigation 

purposes. And it’s still being used for that purpose to this day. 

 

But once you have a lake in a rural area, people are going to 

want to use it for recreational purposes. So a regional park 

authority was established, and the Thomson Lake Regional 

Park was created. We certainly took our swimming lessons 

there in the summers, and you know, we would be very, very 

cold in early July. I remember just shivering so hard that you 

thought your bones were going to fall apart, but you managed 

to survive. 



March 13, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

A few years later they added a swimming pool, so there’s now a 

beautiful swimming pool there. There’s picnic areas. There’s 

lots of campsites. And more interestingly, there was a great golf 

course that developed at Thomson Lake, and I know my family 

enjoys it very much and use it a lot. And then the cottage lot 

developments started up, and all of a sudden there’s a number 

of people that have little cottages, and then soon they got more 

complex and more beautiful and more home-like. 

 

And now there are actually a lot of people living at Thomson 

Lake Regional Park. And it’s got a well-run organization and 

certainly has the support of all the surrounding communities: 

Lafleche, Gravelbourg, even Assiniboia, as far east as 

Assiniboia, and Meyronne, and Woodrow, and Glentworth. 

And a number of communities use Thomson Lake Regional 

Park for their summer activities and their recreational activities. 

 

So it’s great fun to think about some of the fun times we had 

there boating, skiing — that’s where I learned to water ski — 

and generally just have a lot of fun when we were out there. So 

clearly the regional parks have had a significant impact on all 

kinds of people in this province, and their importance can never 

be underestimated. 

 

The minister indicated in his comments when the bill was 

introduced last November on second reading that the goal of 

this bill is, “ . . . to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of 

regional parks governance and to provide additional clarity to 

the regional park authorities that rely on this legislation.” 

There’s a number of changes that are being proposed in this 

legislation, and I guess two of the main components that I will 

speak to is the new part II of this new Act. Most of part III and 

part IV are really reflected in the previous Act in part V, part VI 

as well. So those are sort of . . . They’ve been tuned up a little 

bit, Mr. Speaker, but there are no significant changes there. 

 

The biggest change is in part II which is the administration of 

the Act. And as I was looking at the way this is being 

structured, I had an incredible sense of déjà vu, Mr. Speaker, 

and I wasn’t sure what was causing that. And then I looked 

back. Earlier today I spoke a little bit on Bill 59, which is The 

Animal Identification Amendment Act, and what I’ve discovered 

is it’s almost word for word, clauses that are mirrored between, 

if you can imagine, the regional parks authority Act and The 

Animal Identification Amendment Act. And it’s almost uncanny 

the similarities between the two major changes in these two 

bills. 

 

The essence of the major changes that we are seeing is that we 

have an identification of what the powers and responsibilities of 

the minister are, and that happens in both of these Acts. And 

then we have another section that deals with these 

administration agreements, and not only the administration 

agreements but the matters that arise from these administration 

agreements. And I went to quite a bit of detail on the last bill 

about the essence of that administration agreement, and as I was 

looking through this one, it occurred to me that this is exactly 

the same clause. 

 

What I do find kind of curious, Mr. Speaker, is the differences 

in language between these two, the two clauses, and the 

subtleties of the differences. And what I suspect is that, well, 

we see a wish on the part of this government to devolve 

governmental responsibilities down to local authorities. In the 

case of The Animal Identification Act, it’s the devolution to the 

industry itself where they’re now going to be responsible for 

animal identification. And in this case, as the minister indicated 

in his opening comments, the goal is to devolve responsibility 

and administration down to the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

Association. 

 

And again, I see it’s just another example of this government’s 

general view and attitude that it should not be looking after 

some of these matters that government has typically looked 

after. I’m not sure that that’s a positive change, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think there are things that need to be examined very 

carefully when governments devolve responsibilities and 

authorities down to local authorities. 

 

And the way the minister described that in his comments back 

in November was that he wanted to introduce in the legislation 

an authority to delegate his powers down to the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association through this formal, what we hear 

is an administration agreement. So there’s definitely a pattern 

here in terms of the types of devolution this government is 

interested in. 

 

And he goes on to describe the role of the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association, so that here we have a provincial 

body that’s well-established. And as we look at the history of 

the regional parks, you can see that it used to be each park had a 

direct relationship with the government, and there would be 

grants and capital maintenance grants provided to each 

individual park. So the idea of the Saskatchewan Regional 

Parks Association came out of that, and since the 1990s the 

provincial association has been playing more and more of a role 

in the administration of the grants and the capital grants and the 

maintenance grants. 

 

So according to the minister, he indicates he has worked closely 

with the Regional Parks Association and that they have been 

asking for changes to the bill. I’m not sure if they were actually 

looking for this sort of devolution of administration because it’s 

so uncannily like the devolution of administration for The 

Animal Identification Act. So I can’t imagine the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association and the Cattlemen’s Association 

talking ahead of time together and proposing the same type of 

administration agreement. I think this is a top-down imposition 

of these types of agreements on these organizations. However, I 

think the devil will be in the details and obviously in the level 

of support that this government provides to the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association. 

 

The other thing, I think, that we found somewhat interesting in 

this bill was the definition of organization. And I need to find it 

in the old bill, the change from the old bill, where there’s a new 

definition in the new bill of organization. And it says again it 

can be a person or a body or a non-profit corporation. So it 

appears that the government can not only delegate all these 

authorities and responsibilities to the Regional Parks 

Association, Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association, it 

could also delegate it to an individual. So one wonders if 

there’s an ability here for delegating authorities to an individual 

to run a regional park and what kind . . . what that would mean. 

Is that a form of privatization? Will parks be allowed to be run 

by individuals? 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2013 

According to the definition of organization that we find in the 

new Act, it reads as follows. This is section 2(d), and it says: 

 

“organization” means: 

 

(i) a person or body that has as one of his, her or its 

purposes to develop regional parks, to better the 

community, to enhance the well-being of Canadians or 

to improve the environment. 

 

So that goes well beyond the traditional arrangement of having 

parks run by municipalities or local government organizations. 

So I would like to question the minister, and I think these are 

some of the questions we’ll have when this bill is put into the 

committee structure and examined from that level. 

 

So he identified in his comments that the area that’s being 

addressed is a: 

 

. . . formal recognition of community and non-profit 

organizations in the establishment and operation of 

regional park authorities, where previously only 

municipalities had this formal recognition. 

 

I think this change goes a little beyond what he has described in 

his comments. 

 

The other thing we see as a change from the previous Act is in 

section 3 where the purpose of the Act, municipalities are 

basically taken right out of the definition that used to be there. 

 

The purposes of this Act are the following: section 3(b), to 

assist local government agencies in establishing regional parks. 

What’s been removed from that clause is it used to say, to assist 

municipalities, local government agencies, and organizations in 

establishing and operating regional parks. So one has to wonder 

why operating has been removed or added, and municipalities 

are now added and organizations are added. So again, those are 

the types of questions I think we’re going to want to have a 

look at in committee. 

 

The minister also indicated that the fourth goal that he’s 

looking at is just clarity throughout the legislation, removing 

out-of-date and redundant references. And he made a comment 

that many of the existing sections of the Act have been moved 

to the regulations or policy or deleted. And if you look through 

it, you can see there is a number of regulatory provisions found 

near the end of the Act, section 30, and that used to be section 

24 in the previous Act. 

 

Section 24 in the previous Act only listed seven regulatory 

authorities, and now that’s been expanded to 12 regulatory 

provisions. And so I think the first few haven’t changed a 

whole lot, but there’s some in there that are the general 

catch-all which provides quite a bit of leeway for the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to pass regulations for things that aren’t 

provided for in the Act. And as I’ve often commented here, Mr. 

Speaker, those are of concern when we don’t have an 

opportunity for the public or the opposition to take a look at 

those regulations before they’re passed. 

 

So for example, one of the things that’s now found within the 

regulations is regarding regional park bylaws, so prescribing the 

process for making regional park bylaws. This is no longer 

within the Act and it’s been moved out to the regulatory sphere. 

So that’s something we’ll be watching for sure. 

 

And then respecting grants, so we now have something within 

the regulatory sphere that says, this is section 30(i), “respecting 

the grants provided to regional park authorities, including 

eligibility for that assistance.” 

 

That was previously reflected in section (f) of the old Act, but 

this specifically provides for grants. 

 

Other things that are in there is when regional park authorities 

can dispense with an auditor. That’s something that’s new and 

that’s found in section 30(j). 

 

So I think what we’ll do, Mr. Speaker, is there are other of my 

colleagues that are going to want to speak to this bill. The intent 

I think is clear, is to devolve responsibility from the 

government outward. We see a trend with this government, as I 

indicated. The same trend is almost word for word being 

imposed on The Animal Identification Amendment Act. 

 

And these are things that I think as the opposition we want to 

take a very careful look at. So when it comes to the committee 

stage, we’re going to be asking those questions and try and get 

a sense of why there’s this repeating pattern of devolution of 

authority and what the serious impact of that will be on the 

local groups that have to carry on. We see what happens with 

the universities when they’re given a lot of responsibility and 

the government then yanks the funding that they’ve promised 

them. 

 

So those are things that we’ll watch, and at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 59. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being 5 o’clock, this House 

stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2673 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2673 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2673 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2673 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2673 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2012 Prince Albert Citizen of the Year 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2673 

 Saskatchewan Cookbook Wins Gourmand Award 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2674 

 Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2674 

 Saskatoon’s Western Development Museum Wins Reader’s Choice Award 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2674 

 Battlefords Farm Family of the Year 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2675 

 Canadian Challenge Sled Dog Champion 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2675 

 Perspectives on Pipeline 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2675 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Highway Access and Land Acquisition 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2675 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2675 

 Building Northern Roads 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2677 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 

 Consultation With Northern Trappers 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2678 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2678 

 Student Population Increases and Support for Education 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2679 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2679 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Rural Physician Incentive Program 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2680 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2680 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2680 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2680 

 Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2684 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2686 

 Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2686 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2688 

 Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2688 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2690 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2691 

 Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2695 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2696 



 

 Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2697 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2698 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2698 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2699 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2700 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


