




















































Hansard: April 09, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 43A  TUESDAY, APRIL 9, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3103 

 April 9, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, through you and to you to my colleagues, I request 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to my 

colleagues for that leave. It’s a pleasure to introduce you to 

some very special guests who have joined us today in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a number of ambassadors 

come through the province of Saskatchewan already early on in 

this session and certainly in the fall session. I think it speaks to 

a great deal . . . I hope it speaks to a great deal of interest from 

the international community into what’s going on in the 

province and what’s going to continue to happen here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But today joining us in your gallery is His Excellency Werner 

Wnendt, the ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany to 

Canada. Accompanying the ambassador today is Ms. Barbara 

Hoggard-Lulay of Saskatoon, whom we met I think yesterday, 

is the honorary consul for Germany, Mr. Speaker. We welcome 

her back. Also Melinda Carter and Laurie Hutton, two officials 

from the government’s protocol office, have joined us as well. 

Ambassador Wnendt is in Saskatchewan this week to meet with 

government representatives, members of our business 

community, and University of Saskatchewan officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the ambassador’s first visit to the province. 

We want to assure him though that usually things are a little bit 

different in April weather-wise, and that it’s actually possible 

to, if you’re interested, to enjoy the outdoors to a greater extent 

than we might be able to in this particular week of April, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’re pleased he could visit the province because of the strong 

and historic ties between Germany, the people of Germany and 

our province. Immigrants, as we noted yesterday, from 

Germany settled this province in great numbers, Mr. Speaker. 

Their hard work and determination helped lay the foundation 

for the province itself, for the prosperity that we enjoy today. 

Mr. Speaker, fully 30 per cent of our population claims German 

heritage, and the number is growing. In the last five years, 

almost 800 German immigrants have come to our province to 

build a life here and we’re very glad they have chose to come to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan also has strong commercial relationships, ties 

with Germany. Exports from our province have averaged about 

$40 million annually, mainly agricultural products: legumes, 

oilseeds, wheat. And German goods have come the other way 

as well, Mr. Speaker, a number of different goods, probably the 

highest profile of which would be cars. And there seems to be 

more and more BMWs and Mercedes in Saskatchewan today, 

also a sign of perhaps some economic opportunity that exists 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Germans are also investing in Saskatchewan. Not 

long ago we had a chance to welcome K+S to the legislature. 

They of course are planning and developing the first new 

potash mine in our province in about 40 years. And so we want 

to, through the ambassador, thank the people of Germany for 

the ties that bind our province and our country and theirs. We 

want to thank them for being great customers of things that we 

produce here and we want to also thank them for the investment 

that’s coming into our resource sector from their country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 

me in welcoming His Excellency to the legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Premier in welcoming Ambassador Wnendt to 

Saskatchewan today, as well as Ms. Barbara Hoggard-Lulay. 

 

I enjoyed the conversation we had this morning, talking about 

some of the history and the relationship between Saskatchewan 

and Germany. And so I wish them all the best as they carry on 

their discussions here in the province over the next day or so. 

And I wish the ambassador all the best, as he is still fairly early 

on in his term here in Canada, and I hope that it is a memorable 

time in his career within the diplomatic service for his country. 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these two 

important individuals to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of the Assembly I would like to 

introduce the mayor of Tisdale, His Worship Al Jellicoe, and 

Perry Trusty who is the director of economic development for 

the town of Tisdale. And I would like to welcome them to their 

Assembly. 

 

And with them, Mr. Speaker, is a Chinese delegation who came 

in looking to have the possibility of putting a biomass power 

plant over in Tisdale. We have Mr. — and if you’d just give a 

wave when I say your name — Mr. Ma Cheng Guo who is the 

CEO [chief executive officer] of Heilongjiang Double Boiler 

Company; Mr. Jacky Yang who is a coordinator there; and Ms. 

Cathy Ge, manager of the international projects. So we’d also 

like to welcome them to this Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 



3104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

join with the member from Carrot River to welcome these 

guests to our Assembly, business leaders from China. I hope 

you enjoy your visit. Welcome to your Assembly. 

 

And I also welcome His Worship Mayor Jellicoe from Tisdale 

as well as Mr. Perry Trusty, economic development officer. 

Thank you so much for the work each of you do to our province 

in our region, in the Northeast. And of course there’s such great 

opportunities through that region, and they’re being fulfilled by 

work of individuals like yourselves. So I welcome the mayor of 

Tisdale, Perry Trusty, and business leaders from China here 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I request leave for an extended 

introduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to introduce some of 

Saskatchewan’s long-serving volunteer crop reporters who are 

seated in your gallery. They are here today to be recognized for 

their commitment and service to the agriculture industry in 

Saskatchewan. These crop reporters have reached significant 

milestones of 25, 30, and 35 years of service. Each week for at 

least 30 weeks a year, these individuals have collected 

information for the ministry. From seeding to harvest, they 

provide valuable reports about crop development and progress 

and precipitation in their rural municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their work delivers a timely and accurate crop 

report for all of the producers in the province. I want to 

recognize and thank these individuals for their dedication to the 

Saskatchewan crop reporting service. I would ask the crop 

reporters and their spouses to stand as I announce their names. 

 

The 30-year recipients are Murray Janis, RM [rural 

municipality] of Glen Bain and his wife, Penny, who could not 

be here today; Keith Stacey, RM of Moose Range, and his wife, 

Eunice. The 35-year recipients are Glen and Elizabeth 

MacKenzie, RM of Pinto Creek; Dave Ehman, RM of Craik, 

and his wife, Irene. 

 

There are some crop reporters and spouses who were not able to 

attend today: 25-year award recipient Campbell Smith, RM of 

Shamrock, and his wife, Mearl; and 30-year award recipients 

Lawrence Beckie, RM of McCraney, and his wife, Margaret; 

George Fast, RM of Rosemount, and his wife, Mildred; 35-year 

award recipient, Cecil and Mary Reimer, RM of Barrier Valley. 

I would ask all members to join me in recognizing these crop 

reporters for their valuable volunteer service to the province 

and welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 

behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to extend 

congratulations to those of you with these significant 

milestones in your career and for the many, many, many years 

of service to the people of Saskatchewan. Your work is 

valuable and critical to the success of the farming industry here 

in the province. So on behalf of the official opposition, I too 

would like to welcome you to your legislature and congratulate 

you on a job well done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I have the honour of introducing some 

very important guests from Habitat for Humanity Canada with 

us today. Joining us today are the president and CEO, Kevin 

Marshman, and vice-president of government relations and 

advocacy, Jason Kuzminski. 

 

President Marshman is somewhat new to his position. In fact I 

believe he became the president on March the 11th of this year. 

And I want to congratulate him on his new role. And Jason was 

born and raised and educated right here in Saskatchewan, so to 

you I would like to say, welcome home. 

 

I am also pleased that we have a number of volunteers who 

willingly donate their time and their energy to Habitat for 

Humanity. First of all everybody knows Dennis Coutts. 

Welcome to your legislature. We have Barb Cox-Lloyd, 

executive director for Habitat for Humanity in Saskatoon; 

Rowena Eddy, the Chair of the board of directors on Habitat on 

the Border, Lloydminster. We have Vivian Pengelly, the 

executive director of Habitat on the Border of Lloydminster; 

Morris Sawchuk, the board of directors Habitat for Humanity, 

Prince Albert. We have a Moose Jaw representative, 

Dominguez . . . I guess are not here. We have Laurie Renton, 

the past Chair of Habitat for Humanity, Yorkton here as well. 

 

In the member’s statement later, we’ll be elaborating on the 

great work that Habitat for Humanity does. But personally, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to thank Habitat for Humanity for the 

wonderful work they do right across Saskatchewan and right 

across Canada. The strong partnership we have here in 

Saskatchewan is bringing real, lasting benefits for the 

hard-working people of our province and the communities. And 

I’d ask that all members join me in welcoming these dedicated 

individuals from Habitat for Humanity into this legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join the minister in recognizing the folks from Habitat for 

Humanity and the folks right across Canada and the good work 

they do, and the folks here in the province. And I can’t see Barb 

from Saskatoon — she’s around the corner — but they do 

spectacular work in helping out people who are in real need of 

shelter. And their work is admirable, and we want to 

acknowledge that good work. So I join the minister in 

welcoming them to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3105 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to rise today to introduce to you and through you to 

all members of the Assembly, two guests that are joining us in 

your gallery. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, Ms. Kim Camboia is a patient adviser from 

Saskatoon. Kim’s daughter Aleina has cystic fibrosis, and Kim 

has participated in several lean improvement events in the 

Saskatoon Health Region. And she’ll as well be participating in 

this week’s health quality summit here in Regina, and we look 

forward to her continued work in quality improvement in the 

patient experience. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, joining her in your gallery as well is Dr. 

Corrine Jabs who is head of obstetrics and gynecology here at 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. She as well will be 

speaking at the Health Quality Council about an innovative 

scheduling option called pooled referrals. Mr. Speaker, since 

offering pooled referrals, Dr. Jabs and her colleagues have cut 

wait times for their patients by as much as 50 per cent. And we 

thank Dr. Jabs, Mr. Speaker, for her involvement and her 

leadership in quality improvement and continuous 

improvement. And I’d ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the members I’d 

like to introduce a long-time family friend who’s seated in your 

gallery, Eddie Gadette. Eddie lives here in Regina but farms out 

in the, I guess you’d say Riceton-Lewvan area, which most 

people wouldn’t know where that was, but happens to farm 

very, very close to where we had our farm. Eddie became a 

very good friend many, many years ago when his truck used to 

pull into the P&H [Parrish & Heimbecker] in Lewvan where he 

delivered an awful lot of loads of grain to my dad who was a 

grain buyer at that time. So he has been a good family friend 

and helped at the farm for sure. We worked back and forth a 

little bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like all members to welcome Eddie, 

for the first time, to his Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join in with the Minister of Social Services to welcome one of 

the Habitat people here today, Ms. Laurie Renton from 

Yorkton. Laurie does much above and beyond Habitat. She’s 

very involved in business and in so many areas of the 

community, it would take a long time to describe. I’d just like 

all members to help me in welcoming Laurie Renton to her 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on cellphone coverage. And the 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, including the neighbouring communities in 

each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Turnor Lake. And I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. We know 

since the Act was introduced in December, literally hundreds of 

hours of study and comparison have been carried out in the 

interest of due diligence. And there is no labour relations crisis 

to fix and no necessity to rush through this omnibus bill that 

will likely govern workplace relations for decades to come. 

And if Bill 85 does become the new consolidation of labour 

laws in the province, working people, particularly young 

workers, immigrant workers, and other vulnerable workers, will 

suffer from a hasty watering down of our current labour 

standards which set the mandatory minimums for all 

Saskatchewan workers. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Public Relations Campaign 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party spin 

machine is at it again. Once more we have the Saskatchewan 

Party government using public money for political spin and 

putting politicians ahead of people when it comes to spending. 

 

Earlier this year we found out that the Premier spent around 

100,000 taxpayer dollars on advertisements telling taxpayers 

the government is low on taxpayer dollars. The ads warned that 

everyone would have to live with some cutbacks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we learned that the Sask Party government 

spent another $210,000 on another PR [public relations] and 



3106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

spin advertising campaign — $210,000 of taxpayers’ money, 

Mr. Speaker. The campaign aims at telling students and citizens 

how great the government is when it comes to post-secondary 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this adds insult to injury. Post-secondary students 

are having their tuition jacked up again this year. Classes and 

programs are being cut. Wait-lists persist. Sessional lecturers 

have been laid off, and universities are facing unprecedented 

debt levels. 

 

This government does not have a comprehensive, sustainable, 

smart growth plan for Saskatchewan post-secondary education. 

What do we have instead? A $210,000 manipulative PR 

campaign paid for by the very students and families who 

deserve better. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Today marks one of the most important military engagements 

in Canadian history. On April the 9th, 1917, at 5:30 a.m., the 

Canadian Corps undertook a mission to secure a strategic 

7-kilometre area in France known as Vimy Ridge. 

 

Canadian soldiers fought for Vimy Ridge for four days, but this 

was not without a price. There were more than 10,600 

casualties. Of those, approximately 3,600 sacrificed their lives. 

Mr. Speaker, as we know, brave Canadian troops captured 

Vimy Ridge and this was hailed as the first Allied success in 

the war. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 96 years ago to this day Canadian troops selflessly 

put their lives on the line at Vimy Ridge to ensure our freedom, 

and it is imperative that all Canadians continue to remember 

this. That is why I wish to encourage all Canadians to 

remember the sacrifice and bravery during the battle at Vimy 

Ridge. It’s especially important to encourage young Canadians 

to preserve the memory of those who serve Canada by 

defending our values of peace, freedom, and democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

commemorating and extending gratitude to all of those who 

fought to successfully secure Vimy Ridge. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Equal Pay Day 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is Equal Pay 

Day. In Saskatchewan, women on average earn $3.57 less an 

hour than men. We’re one of the provinces with the largest gap 

in average wages between men and women. Women are twice 

as likely to be engaged in low-waged work and more likely to 

be working part-time. For women working full-time in Canada, 

they are making on average 76 per cent of what men earn. 

 

These differences in wages contribute to what is known as the 

feminization of poverty. Women are more likely to be poor, and 

these factors increase if women face additional barriers due to 

discrimination because of Métis or First Nations identity, living 

with a disability, or being a lone parent. 

 

Addressing the gender wage gap is a complex problem but 

there are a few common sense solutions that have been 

demonstrated to be effective. Unions are one path to pay 

equality for women. Women working full-time in unions are 

paid 95 per cent of what their male colleagues are paid. 

Affordable, accessible, and publicly funded child care can also 

be a ramp to equality for women, allowing them the freedom to 

work or pursue education while paying child care workers a 

living wage. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government has stubbornly refused to address either of these 

two solutions. 

 

Bill 85 is being pushed through without adequate consultation 

and will undermine women’s rights in the workplace and 

ultimately impact their right to pay equity. This government 

also refuses to address current challenges with child care 

subsidies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask members of the House to join with me in 

recognizing Equal Pay Day, and I challenge my colleagues to 

work towards the addressing the gender wage gap in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Government Partners With Habitat for Humanity 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today I’m pleased to rise in the House to share some 

great news about wonderful work that Habitat for Humanity is 

doing in the partnership with our government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a home represents security, a sense of belonging, 

and a place where you can become proud, connected members 

of our community. However some families need help achieving 

this goal. Habitat for Humanity steps in by helping to build 

homes for families who could not otherwise afford them. 

 

Like Habitat for Humanity, Mr. Speaker, our government 

believes that everybody deserves to have a home. This morning 

the Minister of Social Services and Habitat for Humanity 

celebrated $2 million in additional support that was just 

announced in this year’s budget. This $2 million is double the 

support provided to Habitat last year and leads the country in 

percentage increased. Most importantly, this funding will help 

another 40 families realize the home ownership dream. 

 

I’m also proud to announce that Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation is providing $600,000 in funding to Habitat 

through the Summit Action Fund. Mr. Speaker, this funding 

will allow Habitat to purchase and develop land in Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert to build another 39 to 49 units for 

deserving families across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Habitat for Humanity for the 

difference they make in the lives of Saskatchewan families. 

Thank you very much. 

 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3107 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Melfort Supports Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

recognize the city of Melfort and surrounding area on their 

second annual STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 

benefit gala. One hundred and seventy-eight people attended 

this and had a fabulous meal as well as a silent and live auction. 

And once again the people of the Melfort constituency stood 

out with their generosity and enthusiasm and raised $30,000 for 

STARS. 

 

Melissa Kreutzweiser of Naicam was a guest speaker at the 

benefit, recalling her son’s experience, her son Austin’s 

experience with the lifesaving rescue by STARS after he was in 

a terrifying head-on collision in northern Alberta. When he 

woke up that day, the day of the accident, he said to his mom, 

something bad is going to happen. And I am so pleased to tell 

you today that after six years, five years he was there, he was 

healthy, and he was strong. 

 

On the fundraising side, following a unique Melfort tradition, 

Councillor Glenn George donated a brand new $50 bill to the 

auctioneer. The auctioneer then took that $50 bill and auctioned 

it off. Now Glenn is a good person. He’s a good friend, but he’s 

not a rock star. And yet the bidding hit $200. It hit 300, 400, 

500, and it ended up at $700 for a $50 bill. That’s amazing 

generosity. 

 

I would like the House to join with me in thanking the Melfort 

support STARS committee and the Melfort constituency for 

once again hosting a very successful event. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Three Lakes Girls’ Avengers Win Basketball Silver 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to rise 

in this Assembly today to share a recent sports story from my 

hometown. Mr. Speaker, it’s about the Three Lakes School 1A 

girls’ basketball team. Last month the Three Lakes Avengers 

competed in the annual Hoopla basketball tournament in 

Saskatoon which featured the top high school basketball teams 

from across the province. 

 

The team, coached by Trevor Otsig, was seeded fifth going into 

the tournament, but upset number one ranked Regina 78-74 in 

the semifinal, putting them in the gold medal game. The 

Avengers came home with a silver medal after being narrowly 

defeated by Kenaston in a hard-fought game. This is an 

impressive feat for this group of girls, Mr. Speaker, as they 

were a younger team this year and really held their own against 

the older teams. In the last seven years the Avengers have 

qualified to play at Hoopla five times, winning four silver 

medals and a bronze. The Avengers hope to bring home the 

gold for the first time next year. I’d like all members to join me 

in congratulating the Three Lakes Avengers on a great season 

and another successful Hoopla tournament. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

Social Media Accounts 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 

talks a lot about elevating the level of political discourse in 

Saskatchewan, but like Dwain Lingenfelter, he says one thing 

but does another. 

 

Recently someone started a Twitter account and a Tumblr 

account called — and I can’t actually say the word because it’s 

unparliamentary — Bleep Sask Party MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] Say. Like many things on the Internet, 

both of these accounts were being run anonymously, but every 

once in a while someone messes up and gives up who is really 

running these anonymous accounts. 

 

That’s what happened last week when an NDP [New 

Democratic Party] caucus staffer accidentally tweeted a link to 

Bleep Sask Party MLAs Say from her own personal account. 

She immediately realized her mistake, deleted this tweet, and 

then one minute later sent the exact same tweet from the Bleep 

Sask Party MLAs Say account. But the damage was already 

done. 

 

Not only is Bleep Sask Party MLAs Say being run out of the 

NDP caucus office, it’s also being done with the support of 

everyone from the chief of staff on down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the NDP likes to talk about 

transparency and accountability. If the NDP wants to run a 

Twitter account called Bleep Sask Party MLAs Say out of their 

caucus office, they should at least be transparent about it. 

 

Will the Leader of the Opposition practise what he preaches? 

Does he approve of these anonymous accounts being run out of 

his caucus office? I guess we’re going to find out. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Quality of Care for Seniors 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Several months ago, 

the daughter of a woman in long-term care wrote a letter to the 

Sask Party government about conditions she observes regularly 

in her mother’s care facility. The letter said, “I’ve seen too 

many instances of other residents falling, being left on toilets 

unattended for hours, and calls for help going largely 

unresponded to.” 

 

My question to the Premier: does he think that such poor 

quality of care is acceptable for our province’s seniors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We want the best 

care for our seniors, whether they’re in institutions that we have 

around the province in long-term care facilities or whether 

they’re being taken care of by front-line professionals, perhaps 

through home care initiatives. 

 

We want the best for patients right across the system. We 

launched, early on in our government’s term, the patient-first 



3108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

initiative. Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of work to do, Mr. 

Speaker, when we became government in 2007. We needed the 

right complement of front-line workers in the first place. We 

were short, according to the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 

1,000 nurses, and so we began there. And I’m happy to report 

to the House that we do now have over 1,000 more nurses 

working. We were short doctors. We now have more doctors 

working. Mr. Speaker, we needed new facilities in long-term 

care — 13 under construction today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s always more that can be done. And not knowing the 

specific details of the case that’s being raised, something that 

I’d be prepared to look into, I’m also prepared to stand for the 

record of this government in terms of health care, 

acknowledging that there’s more work to be done but that very 

important investments have been made in people that provide 

the care and the facilities where the care is given. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The woman who 

wrote the letter to the Sask Party government has also told us 

that her mother has been denied much-needed baths. And SEIU 

[Service Employees International Union] West has confirmed 

that in some cases residents have missed their tub bath for three 

to four weeks because of chronic understaffing in the facility, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact all of these concerns about quality of care are a result of 

inadequate staffing levels in health care, Mr. Speaker: seniors 

falling, seniors being left on toilets unattended for hours, 

seniors’ calls for help not being responded to properly, and 

seniors missing their baths, Mr. Speaker, in some instances for 

up to three to four weeks, all because of significant 

understaffing. The letter the government received from the 

concerned daughter of the woman in long-term care says, “The 

level of care provided, given the current caregiver ratio at 

Sunset, is dangerously inadequate.” 

 

My question to the Premier: does he agree that we have to do 

much better in terms of seniors’ care, or is he satisfied with the 

situation of seniors missing much-needed baths for periods of 

three to four weeks? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you have heard ministers on 

this side of the House, you’ve heard this government say 

repeatedly, because it’s true, that we should always be seeking 

to improve care for people in the system, for all patients, and 

especially for seniors, Mr. Speaker.  

 

We have seen action from this side of the House with respect to 

seniors’ care in the current budget, a home care pilot project, 

one I think that the hon. member supports. You’ve seen from 

this government the actual construction of new long-term care 

beds, after 1,600-plus or in that range were closed by members 

opposite when they sat on this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, 

you’ve seen this side of the House make extensive investments 

in front-line personnel so we have the right complement, not 

just of nurses, not just of doctors, but of others that provide the 

care. 

 

We would be concerned about any individual case that’s raised 

as depicted by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s questions. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we do have a record — a record of caring for 

seniors. And it’s not just in health care. It’s also in the 

low-income seniors’ assistance plan that for 16 years was 

ignored by members opposite, and now on this side of the 

House has been increased I think in almost every single budget 

we’ve introduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more work to be done, but we stand by 

our record, both for seniors and for patients right across the 

health care system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Carrie Klassen is the woman that 

wrote the letter to government, and she visits her mother in a 

care facility here in Regina every day. She has joined with us in 

the gallery today, Mr. Speaker, because she wants to see 

improvements to the level of care for her mother and the level 

of care for many other Saskatchewan seniors. Here’s what else 

Carrie had to say in her letter to the government: “In many 

ways what I have witnessed as a concerned family member is 

heartbreaking. I see other needy residents who I fear do not 

have an active advocate on their side fighting for resources to 

help them.” 

 

My question to the Premier: why is the situation so 

heartbreaking for Carrie and her family, and what does he have 

to say to the many families or to the many individuals in care, 

Mr. Speaker, who don’t have a strong advocate like Carrie 

fighting on their behalf for resources? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

This is certainly an area that we take very seriously as a 

government, and certainly leaders within the health sector take 

this issue of quality improvement and continuous improvement 

within the health care system very seriously, Mr. Speaker. We 

are not satisfied when we hear stories like this, Mr. Speaker, 

and experiences from our patients, particularly our seniors. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve embarked upon a journey 

of continuous improvement within the health care system. 

 

In fact just this week alone in Regina, over 600 health care 

providers, leaders, administrators, and patient representatives 

will be meeting in the city of Regina to discuss continuous 

improvement within the health care system so we can get to the 

point where we not just reduce, Mr. Speaker, but eliminate 

defects within the system, within the health care system. And 

certainly I’d be very pleased to meet after question period and 

hear first-hand the concerns that the Leader of the Opposition is 

raising. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first time we’ve 

heard about concerns in care facilities for seniors. It was last 

December that the Provincial Auditor released a report citing 

problems with care for seniors, including in some instances the 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3109 

absence of hand soap for seniors. And we’ve heard personal 

stories, Mr. Speaker, about how inadequate staffing levels are 

affecting the level of care that seniors are receiving here in 

Saskatchewan: issues with seniors falling, issues with seniors 

being left on toilets unattended for hours, issues like seniors’ 

calls for help not being responded to as they need to be, and 

issues like baths not being provided for periods of weeks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As Carrie Klassen’s letter to the Sask Party government said, 

“Decisions regarding levels of care come back to the priorities 

of politicians.” Mr. Speaker, I’ve been very clear. We need to 

do so much better in the province when it comes to care for 

seniors. These types of stories are unacceptable. 

 

My question to the Premier: why has the Sask Party 

government failed to make care for our seniors a top priority? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think that the record would show, particularly with this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, that we’re seeing record levels invested into 

regional health authorities to be able to provide care for all 

residents, all patients, clients of our system, Mr. Speaker, 

including seniors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of capital, we know that more work 

needs to be done, but we’ve invested significant dollars to take 

care of an infrastructure capital deficit that was left by the 

members opposite when it comes particularly to seniors’ care, 

Mr. Speaker. As well, we’re looking at new and innovative 

ways to deliver care to seniors and piloting that here within 

Regina and hope to see success with that program and be able 

to deliver it beyond. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we do take these concerns seriously. That’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, it was this government that put in place 

within the Office of the Provincial Ombudsman the ability to 

look into specifically to health care cases, something which 

wasn’t offered to members opposite. But I’m certainly willing 

to look further at the concerns that have been raised by the 

Leader of the Opposition and the member that’s joining us in 

the gallery. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Workplace Fatalities 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today’s Workers’ 

Compensation Board annual report shows the province is 

moving in the wrong direction when it comes to workplace 

fatalities. In 2012 WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] 

recorded 60 fatalities across the province in every age group, in 

every sector. Mr. Speaker, this is the highest number of 

fatalities at workplaces in our province in over 30 years. Mr. 

Speaker, obviously the province needs to do more to make sure 

when people go to work, their jobs are safe. 

 

To the minister: why does the province have the highest 

number of workplace fatalities in over 30 years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every 

workplace death is a tragedy, not just for the worker, but for the 

workplace and for the family members of the worker. The 

number of fatalities that we see in our province is a reminder to 

all of us that we need to be vigilant in our workplaces. Our 

hearts go out to the family and friends of people that are killed 

in the workplace, and I think I can offer condolences on behalf 

of all members in the House. One of the worst and saddest days 

in the legislature is the Day of Mourning where we read out the 

names of the people who lost their lives in the workplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can provide some context for the information 

that we have regarding workplace fatalities, but I want to point 

out to the House and to the public that even one workplace 

fatality is too much and by putting the numbers in context 

should not be seen as an excuse. 

 

We have 19 of the fatalities are due to exposure. This is due to 

long-term exposure to asbestos; often that took place many 

decades ago. We have created a mandatory asbestos registry, 

and I thank the members opposite for their participation in that. 

People will know that buildings which contain asbestos, where 

it is in the buildings. We have 10 motor vehicle and airplane 

fatalities. We formed an all-party committee to study 

traffic-related accidents and appointed the member from P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Carlton to be the Legislative Secretary in that 

area. We’ve done other things as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the number of deaths in this last 

year is not only the highest in the last 30 years, it’s nearly 

double the number of fatalities from last year. And the report 

spells out the problem clearly. It says, and I quote, 

“Saskatchewan holds the frightening position of being second 

worst in Canada for workplace injuries and has the highest 

number of overall injuries outside the workplace.” 

 

When the fatalities increase and the WCB misses its target for 

total injury rate, there is a glaring problem in safety in our work 

sites across our province. To the minister: what has been the 

measurable impact of Mission: Zero if the rate of fatalities is 

increasing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

opposite that Mission: Zero is part of the workplace safety 

program done by Workers’ Compensation Board. It has worked 

with workers and with employers to have plans in place, 

protocols in place to drive down the injury rate. Although we 

are the second highest in the country, our numbers have on 

injuries dropped down, and we’ve had a significant drop in our 

lost-time injuries. And I say that not to take away from the 

fatalities that are there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was mentioning earlier some of the numbers, 

and I will provide a few more. We had, as part of that 60, 15 of 

them were people that died from heart attacks at work. That’s 

an increase from five at work. We know that we need to do 



3110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

more work with the overall health of all of our citizens. 

 

In addition to that, we’ve reviewed and updated the legislation 

regarding OHS [occupational health and safety], which is now 

part of Bill 85. I would like to ask the members opposite to 

support that legislation when it goes through. 

 

We’ve provided better protection for late-night retail workers. 

We use video cameras. We’ve got safe cash handling 

procedures. We have a check-in system and personal 

emergency transmitters. We have taken a great deal of progress 

in that area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These are real people 

who’ve lost their lives at work. It’s a real tragedy for the 

province, and the stats are alarming. WCB said there were five 

youth fatalities, all of which were killed by a motor vehicle 

accident in the workplace. A quarter of the fatalities happen on 

construction sites. And, Mr. Speaker, WCB said 14 of the 

fatalities were related to asbestos exposure. 

 

Clearly the province needs to take real action, real action to 

lower these fatalities. What is the minister’s plan to make 

Mission: Zero more than just a commercial? What’s the plan to 

lower the number of fatalities in our workplaces, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I will go on with some of 

the stats. At 2.79 per cent, the time-loss injury rate is at its 

lowest rate level in 20 years. We’ve added three additional 

OHS workers. We’ve increased safety and prevention costs 

from 18.2 million in 2011 to 19.8 in 2012. Safety association 

funding has increased 15.6 per cent to $8.9 million. OHS has 

increased to 9.5 million from 9.2 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of work left to do in this area, and 

it’s incredibly discouraging to see numbers that are going the 

wrong way. Mr. Speaker, we share the concerns of the members 

opposite, and I’m sure of every workplace. And a lot of the 

employers have talked to us, want to work harder to do a better 

job in that area as well. Even one is one too many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the province needs actions to 

prevent workplace fatalities, not just commercials telling people 

to be safe at work. Mr. Speaker, the government has an 

opportunity in front of them today. They could be boosting up, 

strengthening the occupational health and safety provisions in 

the provincial labour laws, but we’re seeing a watering down 

about other workplace legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has the government not taken workplace 

safety as seriously as it seems to be caring about rewriting 100 

years of workplace laws? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re taking great steps to 

try and increase the number of fines, to increase the fine limits, 

to increase the number of prosecutions, and to ramp up 

prosecution. Workplace safety is more than just enforcement. 

It’s a matter of education. It’s a matter of training. It’s a shared 

responsibility. 

 

I’d like to make a quote from the member opposite, when we 

both attended a College of Law event on March 2nd. The 

member opposite said: 

 

I agree totally with the minister in terms of occupational 

health and safety. It’s one that we should just really do as 

much as we can. It was one that as a government we too 

struggled with and we hoped we could do much more. So 

I believe we should talk about it specifically and it’s really 

something we can get behind. 

 

I look forward to the member’s support as we go through 

committee on Bill 85, and in particular the safety requirements 

that are in that piece of legislation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company Bus Routes 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, today STC [Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company] releases its annual report, and that 

report shows the Sask Party has cut routes to rural 

communities. Mr. Speaker, the people along these routes are 

already feeling the effects of being cut off. In Gravelbourg, the 

town council has written to the Highway Traffic Board to stop 

the shutting down of that service. They know it will have many 

negative effects on its seniors, on health care, on businesses, 

and on the environment. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, why would the Sask Party shut down STC routes 

to rural Saskatchewan when those local communities rely on 

those services so much? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, STC provides a excellent service around the province. 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we know that the subsidy for 

STC has increased significantly over the last number of years. 

Roughly about $1 million was the subsidy for STC a little over 

10 years ago. This year we’re going to see a subsidy of 9.2 

million in operating and about a subsidy of 2.3 for capital. That 

makes a total of $11.5 million will be going into a subsidy to 

STC. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we always need to continue to 

look at efficiencies and look at the routes that are being 

delivered throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. When we 

identified, an STC board had identified three routes that were 

seeing a usage rate of roughly about one to two passengers per 

trip, Mr. Speaker, it would only be responsible for the STC 

board as well as the government to look at such routes and see 

whether elimination would help the bottom line. We do know 

that these eliminations will help the bottom line by well over 

$300,000 annually. 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3111 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, many concerned residents 

believe the Sask Party government just isn’t listening. In 

Frontier, residents use STC to ship quilts they make for cancer 

patients. As a charity, they rely on the affordable shipping STC 

provides to transport these quilts. Now, without STC parcel 

services, their cost of shipping will go up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the chairperson of the charity wrote to The 

Southwest Booster newspaper. She said, “This bus provides 

extremely important functions to the community that have no 

other public transportation . . .” 

 

Why are rural residents being penalized by the Sask Party 

government’s decision to shut down STC routes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly realize that 

by discontinuing these three routes, there may be some impact 

on residents in those areas. But on the side of courier service, 

Mr. Speaker, we realize that courier service is offered 

throughout the province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, of communities 

of 100 population or more, we service about 250 of those 

through STC. Two hundred and fifty communities around the 

province do not have STC service but also have courier service. 

Mr. Speaker, we believe the private sector will pick up the void 

left by the STC courier service and be able to deliver whatever 

parcels to or from those communities that are needed to be 

transported. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it curious that the members have such a 

concern about the three routes that we are shutting down, 

depending on what the Highway Traffic Board rules, but had no 

problem when they shut down 13 routes in the 1990s, Mr. 

Speaker. Talk about backing away from rural Saskatchewan — 

that’s exactly what the NDP did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, rural residents are very 

concerned about the STC cuts. Another writer says, “Depriving 

this service to these surrounding towns and villages is another 

step to the demise of these rural Saskatchewan towns and 

villages.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, more and more people are discovering that the 

Sask Party takes rural and northern residents for granted. The 

Sask Party shuts down the transportation service that rural 

people rely on for travel, for health care, and for business 

growth. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does the government have 

any other surprise to rural Saskatchewan? How many other 

routes will be cut? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the subsidy is 

increasing. We realize that to operate a public transportation 

system throughout the province, as do public transportation 

systems in Regina and Saskatoon, need major subsidies. So 

does STC. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a bottomless 

pit. This year the subsidy is $11.5 million. We’re asking the 

board, and they’ve followed through, to look at efficiencies. 

And those efficiencies have been found, roughly about 

$300,000 saving in the next number of years annually, by 

closing these three routes down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a long cry from what the NDP did when 

they shut down — talk about surprise — 52 hospitals in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not to mention 13 busing routes 

and service centres. Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no lessons from the 

members opposite when it comes to rural Saskatchewan and the 

respect for rural Saskatchewan that those members had none of. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Testing Standards 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education has 

now spent weeks unable to properly answer why the Sask Party 

government is putting testing ahead of teaching. He also hasn’t 

been able to explain properly what the results of the testing will 

be used for. Yesterday he finally acknowledged to reporters that 

the $5.9 million the Sask Party government plans to spend on 

standardized testing isn’t even including the costs for 

implementation and, Mr. Speaker, $5.9 million simply for the 

computer system. 

 

My question to the Premier: what are the actual costs of 

implementing standardized testing, and will the school boards 

be expected to pick up the tab? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to hear 

members opposite now not refuting the fact that there is a lot of 

evidence in province today about the benefits of 

standards-based testing, Mr. Speaker, because there most 

assuredly is. 

 

There are four very good examples of what has already been 

achieved in divisions with respect to standards-based testing. 

There is the literacy project in my division, Chinook School 

Division, Mr. Speaker, that’s seen grade-level reading at 63 per 

cent four years ago now at over 80 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And 

resources were found for that — to the credit of Chinook, not 

from government actually — from the school division. School 

divisions have identified opportunities to improve results for 

students by listening to teachers, by supporting teachers, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

member’s yelling from his seat. He should listen. We want to 

see those kinds of results for the rest of the province. 

 

Members opposite are ideologically opposed to any basic 

improvement in these kinds of results if it involves the words 

standards-based testing, Mr. Speaker. We don’t share their 

ideology. We’re going to put a priority in the classroom and 

students in this province, and, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be properly 

resourced. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



3112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know one of the huge needs in 

the education system here in Saskatchewan is to close the 

Aboriginal achievement gap for education, Mr. Speaker. But 

what do we see from the Sask Party? We see a plan, Mr. 

Speaker, to spend $5.9 million on a computer program for 

standardized testing. Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, in the budget we 

see only $3 million earmarked for the response to the task force 

that will be coming forward soon with respect to Aboriginal 

education and employment here in Saskatchewan. $5.9 million 

for a computer system, Mr. Speaker, while only $3 million to 

address one of the biggest challenges, one of the biggest 

opportunities that we have here in the province. 

 

That’s not about ideology, Mr. Speaker. That is about a lack of 

common sense. Saskatchewan people know where resources 

should be placed. They should be placed in the classroom in 

order to close the gaps that we have here in Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the Premier: why $5.9 million for a computer 

system on standardized testing while he only has $3 million to 

address the recommendations that will be coming forward from 

the task force? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, one of the most important 

populations or groups of students that we want to improve, in 

terms of their education results as a result of standards-based 

initiative on the part of the government, is First Nations 

students. That’s what the hon. member is missing completely. 

Student achievement is very much about Aboriginal students in 

the province. And there are many, as the member would know, 

I would hope he would know, that are off-reserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that investment in student 

achievement — which is for all students and where we need to 

do more work on behalf of our young Aboriginal students — in 

addition to that is another $3 million we’ve identified in the 

budget, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the joint task force with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations to improve 

outcomes for First Nations students. Mr. Speaker, this is exactly 

the direction the government’s going to take. 

 

But the hon. member likes to say, well you’re doing student 

achievement over here. That’s only for non-Aboriginal 

students. Is that the hon. member’s position? Of course it isn’t. 

It’s for all students in the province. 

 

We want better literacy results for them. We want better 

numeracy results for them. And in addition to that, we’ll put 

another $3 million to the JTF [joint task force] for First Nations 

students in this province. Rather than talking about it like 

members opposite did, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to act. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Student Loan Forgiveness for Nurses and Nurse 

Practitioners Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

privilege to rise in the House today to talk about another step 

our government is taking in our commitment to addressing the 

health care needs of rural Saskatchewan as well as helping to 

ensure post-secondary education is affordable for students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the rural family physician 

recruitment incentive program already announced in March of 

this year, the Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote 

Health announced earlier today the Saskatchewan student loan 

forgiveness program for nurses and nurse practitioners to 

encourage nurses and nurse practitioners to work in rural and 

underserved communities. In conjunction with the federal 

government’s loan forgiveness program for nurses, we are now 

offering student loan forgiveness up to $20,000 for nurses and 

nurse practitioners who choose to practise in communities with 

populations of 10,000 or less for five years. They will be 

eligible for forgiveness of up to $4,000 per year of 

Saskatchewan student loans for five years. 

 

We will also continue to work with the federal government to 

ensure health professionals who choose to practise in rural 

communities can also benefit from the federal program, which 

will forgive federal student loan debt to ensure maximum 

benefit for our students. This program will be available to 

nurses who start in a designated community on or after April 1, 

2012 and are fully employed for a full year with a minimum of 

400 hours in that community. They are also able to work in 

multiple designated communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was a promise we made in the election 

platform, and we are very excited to add this new incentive to 

the long list of supports we have provided to students to make 

post-secondary education more affordable — a list which 

includes record investments in post-secondary institutions; loan 

forgiveness for doctors; the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship; the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 

savings; the graduate retention program, which is the most 

aggressive youth retention program in the country; and now 

loan forgiveness for nurses and nurse practitioners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe this exciting new incentive will help 

address the growing demand for health care professionals in 

rural communities and help students cover the cost of 

post-secondary education. This is good news, Mr. Speaker, for 

rural Saskatchewan, and good news for nurses. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d, off 

the top, thank the minister for forwarding a copy of the 

comments he just made just before question period. 

 

Again we look at this as sort of a glass half full and a glass half 

empty at the same time situation, Mr. Speaker. The specific 

measures themselves should be helpful. We look forward to 

discussing with stakeholder representations for nurses, for nurse 

practitioners particularly how this might increase the supply of 

practitioners in rural and remote communities. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, we look at this on the other side of the 

equation in terms of a system that, when this budget works its 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3113 

way through the system, becomes less affordable when that 

opening price in terms of getting through the door in the first 

place for these educational opportunities becomes higher. And 

in terms of the program offerings themselves, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re hearing different things in terms of the way the 

opportunities that are deployed throughout the province are 

being affected by this budget and by the various hard decisions 

that have to be made by the respective post-secondary 

education institutions. 

 

So again, on the one hand it looks to be a good measure, Mr. 

Speaker. On the other hand, as various decisions that this 

government has made and the impact that they have on the 

sector and on students that would be very happy to avail 

themselves of these opportunities, to see how those impacts 

work their way through the system, we’ll see if this measures 

up as unqualified good news, Mr. Speaker, or whether or not 

it’s sort of got the legs cut out from underneath it as other 

decisions that this government has made work their way 

through the system and work their impact on students’ lives. 

 

So we’ll be watching very closely, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be 

consulting broadly with the community and certainly talking to 

nurses and nurse practitioners and the students that desire to 

take advantage of those opportunities. With that, Mr. Speaker, I 

would conclude my remarks. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order 

the answers to questions 236 to 273. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

236 to 273 inclusive. 

 

Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What is your point of order? I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

on a point of order. It’s come to our attention that a social 

media site called Tumblr has recently had a new account 

opened up. I won’t contaminate the House with the actual title 

of the account but we can say that it’s called Bleep Sask Party 

MLAs Say. 

 

This account references a number of quotations from 

government members. The author of this account was seeking 

to remain anonymous and used the pseudonym of Horse 

Doctor. Unfortunately for Horse Doctor, a mistake was made in 

which she revealed her true identity by accidentally posting a 

comment on the account under her real name. This comment 

was immediately deleted and reposted one minute later under 

the name of Horse Doctor. This post was identical to that 

posted before under the name of Deanna Ogle. 

 

My understanding is that Deanna Ogle is a staff member of the 

Leader of the Opposition. The question I put before you is the 

content of one post in particular. This post references and 

quotes in a negative fashion statements made by Mr. Speaker in 

his role as Speaker. I would refer Mr. Speaker to Beauchesne’s, 

6th Edition on page 21, section 71, in which it is stated that 

“The Speaker should be protected against reflections on his or 

her actions.” The section goes on to reference cases in which 

commentators commented negatively on rulings or actions of 

the Speaker in his role as Speaker. These are rulings in which it 

has been held that such actions are a breach of the Speaker’s 

prerogatives and by extension those of the House. 

 

I would submit that the actions and comments of the staff 

member of the Leader of the Opposition rise to this level and 

the point of order should be well taken. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

certainly want to take these comments very seriously and do a 

full investigation to ensure that the actions of our staff are 

reviewed, and we’d certainly assist Mr. Speaker in any way he 

deems necessary to investigate this matter. 

 

The Speaker: — Ladies and gentlemen, this issue should 

normally be raised as a point of privilege, not as a point of 

order, as it brings disrepute on the entire membership of the 

House as represented by the Speaker. If the member who raised 

this point of order wishes to bring it forward tomorrow in the 

normal manner as a point of privilege, he may do so and the 

House will then give it due consideration. So the point of order 

itself is not well taken. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. That’s the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 61 — The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate this afternoon as it relates to Bill 

No. 61, An Act to amend The Railway Act. I’ve read through, 

I’ve taken time to read through the comments of the minister 

and the stated intention of this piece of legislation, which seems 

to be giving local communities a fair process to acquire 

railways that have been abandoned by rail lines. And certainly 



3114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

in principle that’s something that we’re supportive of. 

 

I think in many ways when we look at the gaps that are being 

filled by local communities and by shortline rails, which have 

brought together communities and producers and business 

communities all across our province and pooled together their 

resources and put together viable plans, it’s an important piece 

of economic activity that’s going on within the province. Those 

shortlines play a very valuable role in linking producers and our 

product to markets, doing so in an efficient, effective, 

affordable way and are doing so in the absence of meaningful 

actions from a federal government, and at times despite the 

actions of a provincial government, certainly picking up the 

slack from big rail that often don’t have the interests of 

producers and our local communities in mind. 

 

When I think of, whether it’s Last Mountain Railway or Torch 

River shortline or Great Sand Hills or Carlton Trail — there are 

so many of these shortlines that operate across this province — 

I think of those local leaders that have ensured good 

governance of those shortlines, ensured services are provided to 

producers within the area, and to ensure that economic benefits 

are there for local communities. 

 

I certainly support actions and legislation that support those 

shortlines and the meaningful work that they do. And looking at 

the current challenges that have been stated by the minister in 

reading the minister’s statements to this House, it’s highlighted 

that the process right now would appear to be less than fair — a 

circumstance where local municipalities and local individuals, 

area leaders are forced to be making decisions as it relates to 

acquisition and purchase of the rail line that’s being abandoned 

by the rail companies. They’re having to do that without full 

information before them such as the very important information 

as the actual cost to the community or to individuals who are 

participating. And certainly strengthening this process, making 

sure that it’s transparent, making sure that what’s referred to as 

the net salvage value is able to be related to the area, to the 

municipalities, to those interested parties at the earliest stage is 

something that’s very important. 

 

So I guess in short I highlight the importance of our shortlines 

to our province and to our communities. They’re picking up the 

gap and the slack where other levels of government have failed 

to do so and where big rail has failed to recognize the needs of 

our communities. I also would like to mention that we should 

be mindful of Bill C-52 right now that’s before the House of 

Commons. And this is a piece of legislation that was framed 

around strengthening provisions and fairness for shippers, but it 

needs to be improved from where it is right now. The bill that’s 

before the House of Commons is one without teeth, one without 

the proper supports that should be there, and I know there’s a 

strong voice from shippers, from producers in Saskatchewan to 

ensure that adequate teeth and making sure that that mechanism 

is there to represent the best interests of producers, of shippers 

here in this province. 

 

When we think of shipping, when we think of the impact on our 

producers, our farmers all through Saskatchewan, this is a big 

issue and one that requires government’s attention, one that 

seems to be a bit of an afterthought far too often for federal and 

provincial governments present. And when I look at the 

challenges that are faced I think of, in our province, the 

importance of making sure that our producers can get their 

product to market in an affordable way, in a way that doesn’t 

undermine their bottom line. And I recognize that we have a lot 

of competition to get product on to those rails, Mr. Speaker, 

whether it’s through our mineral extraction industry or whether 

it’s through energy and resources, and we need to make sure 

that government is playing its role to stand up for the producers 

and shippers in our province to ensure they’re able to get their 

product to market and make sure that they’re doing so in a way 

that doesn’t . . . that’s fair to them. And that, as I say, isn’t 

constant inflationary pressures that are really undermining the 

hard-earned bottom line of so many operations all through our 

province. 

 

I read just a little while ago an agreement that was entered into 

by Canpotex, representing our potash producers, into a 10-year 

agreement with CN [Canadian National]. I believe this was 

multi-billions of dollars. I believe it was about $10 billion, if I 

recall correctly, Mr. Speaker. Now that’s a big commitment 

that’s made. I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, who is acting in the 

interests of producers to make sure that our producers, our 

farmers, our shippers are able to get their product to market and 

able to make sure that their rights are protected through this 

process. And it seems that we should be providing better 

attention as to the supports and fairness required to those 

shippers. 

 

So as I say, the importance of shortlines to Saskatchewan is 

invaluable. I commend all those individuals that have stepped 

forward, put some skin in the game, organized structures that 

have provided services to their local communities whether it’s 

in the Northeast up through Arborfield with Torch River, 

whether it’s down in the Southeast in the Great Sand Hills 

region, or up throughout the side of the lake there with the Last 

Mountain shortline, Mr. Speaker, and so many other rail 

companies that have not only received the investment and good 

stewardship of the community, but also good governance of the 

community and have picked up the slack where big rail has 

failed local communities and has picked up the slack where 

federal governments and at times provincial governments 

haven’t been there to properly support our producers. 

 

I also bring attention, and I hope it’s on the radar of that 

Agriculture minister and that government, Bill C-52 that’s 

before the House of Commons, a piece of legislation that in title 

speaks about fairness to producers and shippers, something that 

we fully support. But the reality of the way that legislation has 

come to the floor of the Assembly and the contents of it aren’t 

adequate to protect the best interests of producers and are far 

too slanted in the interests of big rail and provide the shippers 

no reciprocal processes or powers to ensure that their interests 

are supported. 

 

I understand that in some cases we’ve had week-long delays for 

trains that were supposed to arrive at elevators, and when they 

then did finally arrive a week later, in many ways unannounced, 

they also applied penalties when those individuals weren’t 

ready to load. 

 

So we need to do a better job in making sure we’re addressing 

the transportation needs of our producers, our shippers, our 

farmers all across Saskatchewan. This piece of legislation may 

be an improvement, and if so certainly it’ll be something that 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3115 

we’ll support. Certainly the current divestment process of a rail 

line or abandonment process of a rail line is less than fair, as I 

analyzed the words from the minister. And certainly we’ll be 

supporting improvements that strengthen provisions and 

provide fairness to local communities and ensure the services of 

rail to communities all across Saskatchewan. 

 

So with that being said, we have a lot of consultation to do with 

this piece of legislation with our 13 shortline rail lines all 

through Saskatchewan, with producers all across the province, 

with municipalities to understand that . . . to make sure we fully 

understand how these abandonment provisions enhance their 

ability to be involved in projects and to be able to step forward 

in an informed way to pick up the slack where big rail has 

failed communities. 

 

And we’ll be doing that sort of analysis, certainly bringing that 

back to the floor of this Assembly or to committee, and doing 

all we can to, as I say, continue to push this government and our 

federal government who has truly failed the interests of 

producers all across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

inflationary pressures of transportation, something that is rather 

critical when we look to the future of agriculture in our 

province. 

 

With that being said, Mr. Speaker, we have more consultations 

to do, more questions to bring to the floor of this Assembly, and 

more information we look forward to receiving from that 

government and that minister as it relates to the intentions with 

this piece of legislation. 

 

Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. At this point in time I’m 

done offering my comments for Bill No. 61, An Act to amend 

The Railway Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure that Bill No. 61, The Railway 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 89 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 89 — The 

Creative Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and make some comments about Bill No. 89, An Act 

respecting Creative Saskatchewan. 

 

This piece of legislation is a brand new piece of legislation in a 

form that has just arrived now this spring, and it creates a new 

agency. And there are so many positive things about the 

creative industries in Saskatchewan, about the people who are 

artists and writers and musicians and composers and poets — 

all of these people — and the work that they can do in the 

province, that this particular legislation is part of an overall 

picture. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Unfortunately the surprise decision by the Premier last year to 

axe the film employment tax credit and effectively chase the 

film industry out of Saskatchewan clouds what could be a 

pretty positive statement here. I think that we know that we’ve 

asked quite a few times for the Premier to reconsider his 

decision. One of his colleagues in Canada, in New Brunswick, 

after nine months did reconsider the decision that they had 

made about their film employment tax credit and returned the 

tax credit to the province of New Brunswick so that they could 

be competitive, their industry could be competitive right across 

the country. But, Mr. Speaker, that has not happened here. So 

we have this backdrop of a surprise of fair amount of shock in 

the film industry which includes probably all of the industries 

that are referenced in this particular piece of legislation, and 

subsequently there were some meetings around this particular 

legislation, but it always had a bit of a bad taste as the meetings 

proceeded because of the Premier’s decision a year ago. 

 

And so when we look at this legislation, unfortunately we have 

to start off maybe with a little bit of . . . out of a hole in the 

ground or in a place where we’re wary about what’s here. Now 

that’s unfortunate because I think if this legislation had been 

introduced as a complement or as an assistance to the overall 

arts and creative people in the province, there would be many 

positive things here. 

 

But let’s take a look at this legislation and see what it does. 

Basically the legislation sets up a corporation. Usually section 3 

in an Act sets out what the corporation is going to do, but here 

they do it in section 3 and 4. So section 3 just says “Creative 

Saskatchewan is established as a corporation.” Presumably 

that’s to make sure that it can operate on its own and do any 

things that it needs to do. 

 

And then when you go into the next section, that’s where you 

get into the heart of what the purpose of this agency will be. 

And I think it’s important that we take a look at what these 

purposes are. First purpose, section 4(a) is to basically say the 

agency is “to facilitate the expansion of a business environment 

advantageous to the growth of the creative industry . . .” Now I 

know right off the bat that definition has some troubles because 

I don’t think there is a single creative industry. I think there are 

many creative activities, many industry. It means work. It 

means many activities that are taking place. And so that when 

the term here is to talk about a single creative industry, I think it 

misses the point. It also is there “to facilitate . . . growth of new 

employment, investment and production opportunities in 

Saskatchewan . . .” 



3116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

In Saskatchewan we’ve had 65 years of an Arts Board which I 

think has a big role in providing that type of work. I think we 

have assurances from the minister and from the Premier that 

this isn’t something that’s going to replace the Arts Board and 

its important role in the community. But we need to be very 

careful about how this particular legislation is drafted because if 

that becomes the next surprise in this area, it will not be good 

for the province or the people of the province and, even more 

specifically, the artists and composers and musicians and 

writers who live in our province. 

 

So then we go to the second subsection, 4(b). And it says the 

purpose of this new corporation is “to encourage and support 

innovation, invention and excellence in the creative industry by 

stimulating creative production, format innovation and new 

models of collaboration among sectors of the creative industry.” 

That’s seemingly a good, positive statement. But once again, 

given the atmosphere around the introduction of this legislation, 

I know I am wary, and I know many people in the community 

are wary about what is actually intended with this particular 

comment. 

 

Then we go on to section 4(c). And this corporation, one of its 

purposes is “to assist in the promotion and marketing of 

Saskatchewan’s creative industry and its respective products.” 

And I think this particular clause is relatively clear. We as 

Saskatchewan people are proud of the artists, of the musicians, 

of all of the people who create as part of who they are. And this 

agency I think can have a good role in promoting and marketing 

the work that these people have done and also marketing 

Saskatchewan and Canada, for that matter. 

 

Next we go on to section 4(d). Another purpose of the agency is 

“to administer financial assistance, other programs and 

initiatives that may be assigned to it by an Act or by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not totally certain what this is. 

Hopefully what it means is that there will be more money 

available that can be given to the agency to provide assistance 

to meet some of the items mentioned above, but this clause 

forces me to ask the question of whether it will be used as a 

way to pull in or take away funding that’s now going through to 

the Arts Board and to agencies or through various of the lottery 

funds, and that we need to be watching this particular purpose 

of the agency very carefully. 

 

We go on to section 4(e) and this says that the purpose of this 

corporation is “to facilitate the gathering and analysis of 

information, research and technological development in the 

creative industry.” 

 

That I think can be a positive thing but we have to be careful 

that this agency isn’t being created to take away that role from 

other of the institutions we have in the province, including 

some of our post-secondary learning institutions or some of the 

individuals who do this as part of their own personal consulting 

kinds of work. But I think that facilitate is a key point to make 

sure that we have the intellectual capacity, the intellectual 

property here in the province that allows us to be competitive 

and also allows us to fulfill the goal of promoting 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Then we go on, and basically this section 4(f) which is another 

purpose of this corporation is to increase recognition of the 

creative industries, I would think would be better, “as a vital 

element of Saskatchewan’s economy and cultural identity.” I 

think we all agree with that. I think we have to recognize that 

this isn’t a single monolithic kind of group of people. It’s a 

multi-varied and very vibrant growing group, a broad group of 

people. 

 

Then we go on to section 4(g) which it lists as another purpose 

of this corporation is to enable co-operation between the 

persons and entities within the creative industries — once again 

I would say not industry — and between the public and private 

sectors to encourage development of creative industries. And I 

think co-operation and working together is always a good goal, 

and so that is I think a good purpose for this particular 

legislation. 

 

Then finally listing the purposes here under 4(h). This 

corporation is “to undertake any other activities or functions 

assigned by the Lieutenant Governor in Council.” And I think 

that once again if this had been introduced in a slightly different 

environment, a slightly different time rather than in the time 

when there was a surprise destruction of the film industry, we 

would have less concern about a clause like that. So there we 

have the purposes. 

 

And then when you go into section 5 of this legislation. Then it 

sets out all of the powers that the agency has. And I think 

practically those powers are the powers that any corporation 

created by the Crown would have, and they’re expanded and 

adjusted and changed. We see that this agency will have the 

power to purchase property or sell property up to a value of 

250,000 without obtaining an order in council. That I think 

reflects some change on behalf of the government in the sense 

of the limit. But it’s within the realistic valuations of property 

in the present time. 

 

So it’s clear that this agency is going to be an agent of the 

Crown, and that’s I think a positive step in setting it up. Head 

office, we don’t know where it will be located, but clearly it’ll 

be somewhere in Saskatchewan. And we’ll obviously hear 

about that as this whole activity continues. 

 

Ultimately the agency is responsible to the minister as set out in 

section 8. I think it is quite clear that this is a directive Crown 

agency. It’s one that’s going to take directions directly from the 

minister. We don’t often see this kind of a clause in legislation 

that sets up independent boards. But section 8(1) says, “The 

agency is responsible to the minister for the fulfilment of its 

purposes and the exercise of its powers pursuant to this Act.” 

That’s relatively straightforward. 

 

But then when you go to subsection (2) of section 8, it says: 

 

The minister may give directions that must be followed by 

the agency, the board or both in exercising their powers 

and fulfilling their duties and purposes pursuant to this 

Act and the regulations. 

 

So effectively what we have here is a power given to the 

minister to direct this agency to do whatever presumably the 

minister or the Premier wants it to do. 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3117 

That’s, I guess, the right of the government to propose that type 

of thing. But it once again plays into this sense of fear and 

sense of wariness about the introduction of this kind of a bill in 

the light of the decisions by the Premier to effectively wipe out 

the film industry as he did last year. Now a lot of those kinds of 

concerns could have been alleviated and maybe still could be 

alleviated if the Premier followed his colleague the Premier of 

New Brunswick and changed his mind, admitted he’d made a 

mistake and would go back and see what we can do to rebuild 

an industry, the film industry here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So then part III of the legislation, which includes the rules 

around the boards and the officers and the meetings and the 

powers of the board and the CEOs — all of those things are 

relatively straightforward with most of the things that we might 

have question about to be decided by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council, in other words, by regulations and by the Premier 

and by the cabinet. So they’ve taken some pretty standard 

clauses. 

 

And when we get into part IV, the financial matters and all of 

the things that relate to that, once again it’s relatively 

straightforward and there don’t appear to be any issues around 

how that has been done. It’s very clear when we get into Part V 

that there’s Crown immunity. In other words, the government 

or the people who are working in this particular agency can’t be 

sued by anybody if there’s any problem with some of the things 

that they’ve done. That’s a bit interesting for an agency that 

may be involved in some commercial activities that are 

relatively high-risk when it’s promotion of concerts or other 

things like that, if that’s what kind of activity they get involved 

in. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So we have legislation that sets up a new agency in this kind of 

world or in this context of concern around what exactly are the 

intentions of the Premier and what are the intentions of this 

government as it relates to the arts because of some of the 

surprise decisions that have been made. Usually I like to put the 

best construction on things that are done and say let’s work 

with this to make it be something that’s positive. And I think 

that there are opportunities for that to be done. 

 

But I would suggest that as this legislation is being developed 

and brought forward it should emphasize the fact that there is 

not just one single monolithic creative industry. It’s a whole 

number of industries that can work together. I think the 

language in the Act that talks about co-operation between all of 

these groups should be encouraged or is part of the purpose of 

the legislation. I think that’s more in line with how the people 

in these fields of endeavour operate, and I think that should be 

what is encouraged. 

 

I know that it’s legislation that I hope can be welcomed by 

groups in Saskatchewan in various areas, and we will be 

watching very carefully as it is being developed. We want to 

make sure that some of the institutions and some of the 

methods of supporting the arts in Saskatchewan that have been 

developed through trial and error over many years, that those 

are not damaged in any way by what is put forward in this 

legislation. Now I know quite a number of my colleagues are 

interested in speaking to this legislation and so, Mr. Speaker, at 

this point I will adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport that Bill No. 89, The Creative Saskatchewan 

Act, be now read a second time . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Wrong one? Adjournment, okay. The member has moved 

adjournment of the House. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

. . . Excuse me . . . adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adjourn the debate on Bill 89, just to make it 

clear? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 62 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on the 

debate on Bill No. 62, the parks amendment Act, 2012. And 

there’s about four areas that minister makes reference to and the 

Act that they’re amending gives certain powers. And I’ll start 

out with the one area, and it’s making one of our parks, I guess, 

bigger; taking some smaller parks and putting them into one 

bigger one, whether it’s Emma and Anglin Lake. And I think 

that’s what the intent of that system was to do. So they’re going 

to be making a park and that’s what we think the provisions are. 

 

So if you look at the numbers, it’ll be about 16 010 hectares 

versus it was about 12 000 before. It’s taking in a number of 

parks and putting them into, I guess, a bigger area for protection 

with the regional parks, and providing to make a new park. 

Now this is good and I realize that in some of the comments 

that the minister makes, he talks about making sure that he’s 

consulted with First Nations and the Métis. And I don’t know 

what has happened exactly, who they talked to. It doesn’t 

identify which individuals. Were they from First Nations in the 

area where they were? Were they Métis groups? Did they talk 

to the municipalities? Did they talk to the rural people living in 

that area? Did they talk to the people that will be impacted? I 

don’t know exactly who they talked to, but he makes reference 

to two years of doing some work. And I don’t have any 

information available to me, or any of their reports that says 

clearly that work was done, so I have just to take it for that 

process and we hope was done correctly and right. 

 

But I know that we have an opportunity, when we go from here 

and we go into committee, to ask individuals out there if they 

have concerns. And I will make an effort of doing that, 

checking with some of the First Nations and the Métis 

organizations. And if they’re comfortable with what the 

government is proposing and with the amendments to making a 

regional park, I guess, taking it from 12 000 hectares to 16 000 

hectares, seeing if they’re okay with the provision. 

 

So in there it gives some background information. It talks about 

some of the groups, organizations they consulted with. And we 

know our parks and our provincial parks, regional parks, 



3118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

whether they’re federal, provincial, regional, we’ve got a record 

number of visitors to them. And maybe that’s to do with the 

cost of leaving our province and the beauty that we have to 

offer in the province. And we’re going to get into talking about 

visitors that come from out of province and some of the 

protection. We’ll talk about that. That’s also one of the parts of 

the amendment this bill talks about. 

 

But at this point we know that many people go to Emma Lake, 

Anglin Lake, and those areas where this park is being proposed 

as a new park. And we’ll see what exactly is in there. Will they 

be having lots for lease, whether they’ll be 99 years, will they 

be . . . how will they be handling that? And who will have 

access to that? And I’m curious about that, and we’re going to 

ask these questions in committee because we need to ask those. 

Exactly how many lots will be provided? Will there be lots that 

clearly are available and how many will be available? So we’re 

going to work out those details in committee and we’ll get to 

ask those questions. 

 

So that area is very clearly . . . How many lots? What’s the 

size? And how much will be lake front? So there’s going to be a 

lot of questions that we’ll have, and I know in committee we 

have that opportunity. But this is the opportunity for us to start 

some questions and just to make some opening comments and 

some brief comments. And I know people have a lot of issues 

they want to discuss, and these ones might be some of the area. 

 

The other area they’re looking at doing is moving some of the 

boundaries in one regional park and making some adjustments 

to the mapping. And that’s clear in here. And I know we’ll get 

some details. We don’t know exactly what it is. We have very 

brief comments from the minister about that. He gives a little 

bit of description, but again we have to ask those questions for 

the individuals in that area. And they have an opportunity to 

contact ourselves as the opposition. And if they have concerns, 

and we will monitor that and try to see.  

 

And we encourage anyone listening in or people who have 

concerns to bring them forward. Because we’ve seen what 

happens when government and the minister, they do things in 

secrecy, whether it’s selling off regional parks. And we’ve 

seen, you know, LeRoy is a prime example of that where we 

had a regional park being sold off with the public not knowing 

about it. And you know, a secret deal, and oh, oh, everyone had 

to be so quiet about this. And they were quietly doing it, and 

that is not the way to do business with the good people of our 

province and the good people that are taking care of our 

regional parks. That is not one way of handling it. 

 

And whether a provincial park, whether it’s a regional park, 

people expect government to do the right thing and to make 

sure that they consult and they talk with the people that will be 

impacted. And truly in LeRoy we’ve seen that did not happen 

by the public meetings, by the way they tried to cover all that 

up. And I don’t know where that is, and maybe more 

information needs to come forward and we can find that out. 

 

But that just goes to show you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you 

have a government who’s willing to and a minister who’s 

willing to approve sale of a regional park the way that one was 

handled. And it was handled very terrible. It truly was not 

handled in the way it should have been handled. And if there 

were concerns raised in a way that, you know, the regional park 

might have had some concerns. And if it’s about funding, it’s 

about infrastructure, there was challenges that, you know, might 

be coming out of that. 

 

But I think there was jobs. There was opportunities for people 

that need to have that opportunity to talk about the issues facing 

them. And that did not happen in LeRoy. So we want to be 

clear when we’re doing anything that we’re making changes to 

and giving government more power and a minister more power, 

you want to be cautious on what you’re doing. And I think we 

want to make sure is it the right power because we’ve seen the 

way this government acts when we give them the power. And 

we have an opportunity to debate the bills and we have 

opportunity to bring the concerns. And we do that. 

 

When our citizens of our province who we represent ask us to 

bring the concerns forward, we have an obligation to do that. 

And we do that. And I think that clearly, as Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition, we do that. And we try to bring that stuff and 

concerns — whether it’s a question, whether it’s an issue about 

a regional park, whether it’s mapping, boundaries — there’s so 

many different things that affect Saskatchewan people. And 

they have a right to be consulted. They have a right to feel like 

they have their say, their input into the process. And 

unfortunately the government, the Sask Party government has 

not done that. 

 

And their track record when it comes to consulting and talking 

with community members — they make a decision, they go 

ahead and do what they want to do, and then they want 

Saskatchewan people to just accept this. Trust us; this is good 

for you. Well Saskatchewan people are truly waking up and 

they’re very concerned. And I think they’re going to send a 

message to the Sask Party who think — and have taken so 

many people of our province for granted — it’s a trust thing. 

And you get elected in and you’re asked to trust. And at the end 

of the day if you’re not going to do that, the people will come 

back. And I think the Sask Party’s going to see that in the next 

election. They’re going to see what they’ve done and what their 

track record is and it will be them that will be evaluated by the 

people that do the voting in our province, that elect the 

government. So we’ll see. I’m not sure by what I’m hearing. 

 

And you know, I’ve always said this, and you know, some of 

the challenges the people are seeing. So we’ll see exactly where 

that goes and if you’ve consulted and if you’ve not. So when 

we go into this bill, and I have talked about two areas that we 

wanted to talk about. One was expanding a new park. One is 

mapping of boundary. 

 

But they talk about, which is I think interesting, and it’s about 

safety. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is about safety for people 

visiting our parks. Whether it’s a regional park, provincial park, 

federal park, you want to make sure that people, when it comes 

to wildlife, when it comes to safety, that education provisions, 

and they talk about it in here. They want to educate the visitors, 

making sure that, whether it’s videos, whether it’s our staff who 

facilitate the regional parks, provincial parks, explaining to 

people visiting about, you know, the dos and don’ts when it 

comes to dealing with wildlife and safety for themselves and 

their families. We want to make sure people use our parks and 

are using them in record numbers. And that’s good. And that’s 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3119 

very good to see. And we want families, and not only people 

from the province but from out of province, to come to our 

beautiful province to enjoy what we have. 

 

But we want to make sure, we want to make sure that our parks 

are protected, the waters are protected. And we see some of the 

lack of environmental protection that this government, Sask 

Party government, has not done. Oh they talk about it in their 

brochures and they talk about their targets. But they don’t touch 

their targets. They don’t meet them. They’re just something 

they want to talk about. It’s just like their billboards whenever 

they want to spread something, and they spend money on that 

when it isn’t. 

 

But I just want to show that area where they say one thing and 

do another thing. And unfortunately that isn’t what people have 

voted for and haven’t asked. And that’s no different than it’s, 

you know, three more MLAs with millions to taxpayers. Those 

are some of the challenges that people in our province see and 

feel. 

 

But having said that, clearly this provision allows more 

education to make sure that our visitors are protected whether 

they’re from out of province. And I just want to go back on it 

because it is important because you know, you look at the 

wildlife and whether it’s, you know, bears, whatever it is, 

whether it’s coyotes, fox, whether it’s wolf, whatever it is in an 

area, whether it’s big game, whether it’s moose, elk, we have a 

lot of game that go around our parks. And you can see the parks 

and they’re attracted to that. 

 

And you have a lot of people coming in. And of course bears 

want to have access to the baskets of food. I mean we know 

that. And if you leave garbage out, there’s certain things that 

will attract animals to your campsite. And you know, I think 

making sure that we educate the public . . . And there might be 

people that are a first time coming to a park to visit our 

province, and we want to make sure that they’re educated and 

that. So I think this is a good start to educate and you’re going 

to put some money to make sure, or some resources to make 

sure we’re educating people that are visiting our parks to 

provide them with safety. And I think truly that is a good thing. 

We’ll see exactly where it goes, how far it’s going to go, and is 

it staffing. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But again we go back to looking at that. If you have record 

number of people coming into our province and visiting our 

parks, and there’s ways that people reserve and I know that 

there’s areas where we’ve asked some questions of government 

at the cost of, you know, people reserving campsites and there’s 

a new way of doing it. Government has come with a new way, 

and we have to make sure who’s receiving those dollars. You 

know, is it insiders, is it good friends? So we want to make sure 

you’re clear on who’s getting it. And some of those questions I 

know we’ll be asking in committee because you see the large 

budget and this is just part of it. We’ll ask some of those in 

estimates, you know, and that’s another area where we’ll go. 

 

So when you’re talking about the parks and safety and we want 

to make sure clearly that people who visit our parks have the 

education, but we have to make sure that we have the staff 

available and it’s important that we have the resources. And if 

we’re going to take in a lot of dollars into government coffers 

to provide parks . . . And that’s good. Don’t get me wrong. You 

know, it’s good to see people coming to our beautiful province. 

We’ve said that and we support that. But we want to make sure 

that we have the staff and the resources to provide the service 

that people expect and come to. 

 

And you know, there are challenges. And sometimes you’ll see 

some of the parks. And I’ve seen some of the maintenance and, 

you know, you have a staff who try to do the best job they can 

and sometimes when you have a small staff and some of the 

regional parks and some of the provincial parks, there are 

challenges that people are facing. And people that work in 

there, they do the excellent job that they can do. They’re 

front-line workers, but they need more resources and sometimes 

the government, in its decisions, don’t see the parks as a 

priority when it comes to funding them and staffing them and 

making sure the services are . . . And I mean whether it’s 

government employees who work in our provincial parks or 

regional parks, however the involvement, government funding, 

money goes into that. 

 

We want to ensure that people have an opportunity at a job and 

those that are impacted, but we also want to make sure that staff 

is available and the government makes sure that those 

departments are staffed properly, that the services that people 

come to expect in our beautiful province are there, whether it’s 

the services that they use for the shower houses, whether the 

washroom facilities, whether it’s any of the wood, all the 

different things that people come to expect when they come to a 

park. And you know, we’ve been known as to have some of the 

most beautiful areas. It’s clear people expect certain quality of, 

I guess, of visiting our parks, and they want to make sure that 

that continues, and we want to make sure that continues. So we 

have concerns about that. That’s one area that we can go on. 

 

The other area is government has made some movements, and I 

said that again, with moving some of the boundaries for one of 

the park area, and that’s the fourth amendment that they’re 

talking about in here. And it’s moving the boundary. And my 

understanding, and I think we’ll get more of these answers from 

the minister in committee, but it’s from a highway where 

they’re going to go over that. So we’re going to look at that. 

And the member made a few comments about that, but I think 

in committee we’ll have to make sure we find out exactly the 

details, what’s going on, and we get an opportunity to do that. 

So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will conclude my 

comments on Bill 62. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Cumberland has . . . The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the member that Bill No. 56, The Regional Parks 

Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 



3120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 

shall this bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that this bill be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This bill stands 

referred to the standing committee on intergovernment agency 

and justice. 

 

Bill No. 90 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 90 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to enter into this debate, and it’s a 

relatively new one. The minister in fact just spoke a few days 

ago in terms of the — in fact just yesterday — in terms of his 

second reading speech. 

 

And so clearly we just got this package before us and we’re 

studying this as best we can. We do have some preliminary 

concerns and I do want to make some comments as we go 

through because I think, as we see, this province is growing and 

we’re actually seeing many of these bills. Actually it was 

interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because last night I was 

saying this is like déjà vu all over again because many of the 

concerns we see in The Municipal Board Act that we had before 

us and a couple of other ones that deal with the issues of 

municipalities and whether . . . and urban municipalities 

working together. We were talking about boundaries and 

annexation, that type of process, and powers of the Municipal 

Board. 

 

So clearly this is an issue that this government is wrestling with 

and yet here is one more, one more piece of the puzzle that the 

minister has brought forward. So as a package, and I think 

we’re going to have to take a look at these as a suite of, or tools 

in a tool kit that they have for dealing with the issues that are 

coming from the situation of, that are facing many 

municipalities around what happens when growth is happening 

at such a rate that it’s forcing pressures on these municipalities 

to either annex or change the boundaries or develop other areas. 

And today the minister, or yesterday the minister asked us to 

consider Bill No. 90, The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, that really talks at length about the idea of 

regional planning authorities. And so I’ll go through and talk 

about some of these concerns. And I’ll review his speech, and I 

think that it’s a fairly lengthy one and there’s many points that 

he’s trying to raise, but there’s many concerns that we do have 

in it. 

 

He talks about the provincial growth plan, speaks of the need 

for municipalities to work together and overcome the 

challenges of growth — and clearly that’s something that we 

can all get behind — and how the municipal sector has a key 

role in playing that, in the sustainable growth, and that’s very 

important, especially when it comes to providing services and 

infrastructure for commercial, industrial, residential 

development, that’s for sure. But what happens when things 

happen in high growth areas? What happens if they go off the 

rails a bit and where you’re expecting people to co-operate a 

little more and things aren’t working out the way that they kind 

of thought they would? And he talks about that. He says, and I 

quote, “In most cases, Mr. Speaker, local councils find ways to 

co-operate with their neighbours and solve the issues and 

problems they encounter in a collaborative . . . [way].” 

 

And he goes, sometimes it does not occur, “. . . and we see this 

most often in high-growth areas and in particular around our 

cities where the challenges of economic growth are felt most 

acutely.” And I guess we can understand that because the 

pressures are greater. If it’s a slow-growth area and things 

aren’t moving very quickly, you have time to work out those 

issues. So you have the time pressure and the pressure of people 

knocking on your door and demanding action, and we need to 

do something about that. 

 

So he talks about the “intent of Bill 90 is to facilitate planning 

for growth and to overcome [these] difficulties . . .” And it will 

introduce: 

 

. . . amendments to The Planning and Development Act, 

2007 that will enable the province to respond when 

required in instances where relations between 

municipalities have deteriorated to the point that growth 

and planning . . . is being seriously compromised. 

 

So you have that circumstance. And actually, as I said, that it 

seems to me that we’ve dealt with two or three bills that speak 

specifically to this issue of when that co-operation is not there. 

He does go on to say that in fact many times it is there, and he 

says, and I quote: 

 

I don’t want to give you the impression that the situation 

with respect to intermunicipal co-operation is dire. In fact 

there are great examples of voluntary regional planning all 

around Saskatchewan: 158 municipalities, both urban and 

rural, participating in 22 groups . . . [and that they’ve] 

received funding through the planning for growth program 

. . . 

 

So they can work together. And that’s exactly what they want 

to do, but sometimes they don’t and that’s where we really have 

a problem. That’s where things go off the tracks and something 

has to happen. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was reading through this 

and I thought, so in the other speeches that the minister has 

given, it’s been very clear that there has been a high level of 

consultation. And I’m not sure in this case there has been, with 

Bill 90. And if I’m wrong, that’ll be a question that we’ll 

definitely ask in committee: who did you consult with, and 

what were the outcomes of that? 

 

Most ministers in most speeches . . . In fact it’s a bit of a 

checklist: where have you consulted, and if you have, be sure to 

highlight it. Now we always have questions about that because 

we think it’s important to consult. Have you talked to anybody 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3121 

about the bill? And in this case, the minister does not talk about 

that so we can assume that he hasn’t talked to anybody because 

this government, if they have talked to anybody, you bet we 

hear about it. Because they will tell us they’ve done a full 

consultation, they’ve spent a lot of energy and resources. Even 

if they’ve talked to one person, they will say it’s been a full 

consultative process, the best that they could possibly do. 

 

So I can assume that they didn’t talk to anybody. They didn’t 

talk to anybody about this. Maybe they have. I just find it 

passing strange that they have not mentioned that. They’ve not 

mentioned that they’ve talked to SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] or they’ve talked to SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. It’d be 

very curious to know the position of SARM on this and very 

curious to know the position of SUMA on this. And I’ll explain 

why later because I think that we have some questions for sure. 

 

We understand the difficult spot that when co-operation at the 

table disappears, what do you do? But I think what you’ve got 

to do is make sure you have everybody agreeing, everybody 

agreeing on a process of how we go forward. If this is one side 

or one part of the partnership saying this is how we’re going to 

go forward, I’ve got some deep concerns here. I’ve got some 

real deep concerns. And so I find it passing strange that there 

has been no mention of consultation in the minister’s speech, 

and that will be a question. 

 

So this is what he talks about, the plan of how we go forward in 

terms of amending The Planning and Development Act, 2007 

and really, effectively how do you have a regional planning 

authority? He talks about what regional planning authorities 

have the authority to do. They can establish procedures for the 

conduct of its business and administration, the appointment of 

any consultants or employees, technical advisory committees, 

but they must follow the provisions of The Planning and 

Development Act. And most importantly a regional planning 

authority is responsible for a regional plan for the 

municipalities involved. 

 

And I think that would only make sense that if the title of your 

working group is regional planning authority, you should be 

expected to come up with a regional plan. What else are you 

expected to do? I think that well I stated the obvious, that we 

want to make sure the regional plan is effective. And we’ll talk 

a bit about that when I review the plan or the actual legislation 

and the explanatory notes. 

 

So he talks about some of the key differences between Bill 90 

and the existing legislation. One of the differences he says is 

that once the regional plan is approved, all municipalities 

included in the regional plan will be required to confirm its 

local official community plan and zoning bylaw are in 

compliance with the regional plan and that they will be 

responsible for adjusting their official community plans and 

zoning bylaws to be consistent with the regional plan as 

necessary. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So this is really important because the minister will have the 

ability then to effectively determine that there will be a regional 

planning authority. So this is really critical, Mr. Speaker, and I 

want to make sure I quote him directly. He says: 

 

We’re looking to municipalities to establish a coordinated 

approach to development. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the few cases where it may be 

necessary, we’re prepared to act to ensure the success of 

the plan . . . by providing direction to cities and 

surrounding . . . municipalities to work together and build 

capacity for supporting business investment in their 

region. 

 

So that they then, Mr. Speaker, effectively are saying that they 

are going to . . . The minister will enforce and determine that 

there will be a regional planning authority and that all things 

flow from that. And so I think that’s pretty significant, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Essentially he’s calling for the abilities to . . . 

for the regional plan and that the affected municipalities and 

cities must follow that. And they’ve had no consultation that we 

know of to this effect. And it sounds like it’s a last measure, but 

we have some concerns about how this may play out. 

 

So we have concerns. And I just want to review his speech to 

make sure that we have everything that’s important. One of the 

other concerns or the significant parts that he talks about, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the budget. The current budget establishes a 

regional planning authority program that provides $250,000 in 

new funding to support the creation of regional planning 

authorities. Now they may think that’s a lot of money, and that 

may be in this world of supporting authorities, but I’m not sure 

it is. You can spend $250,000 very quickly when you’re talking 

about technical advisers, talking about consultants, that type of 

thing. It can go pretty darn quick. 

 

What is interesting is that, “Matching funds from the 

municipalities will be required, and it will be up to the 

municipalities involved to determine how the costs will be 

distributed.” And so if they’re planning to get some of the 

$250,000 . . . Well this is interesting. From the way it looks is if 

the minister decides that they’re going to set up the planning 

authority, regional planning authority X, and they’re going to 

spend 100,000 on it, and it’s going to involve five 

municipalities — A, B, C, D, E — each of them are required to 

match, the five of them will be required to match the 100,000. 

So it might cost them $20,000 each. I’m not sure. 

 

But that’s an interesting thing when the minister himself has 

decided that there will be a regional planning authority, and 

he’s only going to pay for half of it. I think that’s . . . I don’t 

know how well that’s going to sit. I’m not sure how well that’s 

going to sit when it’s enforced. So we have some real concerns 

about it. 

 

But I do want to take a minute and review some of the parts of 

the bill. And of course this is An Act to amend The Planning 

and Development Act. And you know one of the things that 

we’re missing so much in the new legislation is often there 

would be a subtitle or a short title that would give some sort of 

hint about what the bill is all about. And in this case it doesn’t 

say that at all. It doesn’t give any sort of clue about why is this 

bill necessary. What’s it about, you know? To aid in planning in 

high-growth areas in our province, to help . . . I think it’s 

something that they should have been thinking about. 



3122 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

One of the good things I do want to say about this bill, but I’m 

not sure because as we go later on we’ll see that it doesn’t 

necessarily carry out, but the new section 8. And I’m not sure 

the differences between this and the old one, so it might be 

pretty much the same. I’m not sure. But I’ll read it because I 

think it’s important: “Consistency with land use policies and 

statements of provincial interest.” I always look for this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I think it’s critical that when we talk about 

planning and land use policies that we talk about provincial 

issue interests. 

 

8 Every district plan, official community plan, regional 

plan, subdivision bylaw or zoning bylaw adopted or 

amended pursuant to this Act must be consistent with the 

provincial land use policies and statements of provincial 

interest mentioned in section 7”. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is key. I think there are, and I 

don’t have them in front of me, I think there’s either 10 or 14, 

10 to 14 provincial interests. And they range from water use. 

They range for environmental standards. They talk about 

Aboriginal concerns. They talk about cultural concerns — all of 

those things that we think are important criteria when we come 

to having good, solid, sustainable land use plans and 

community plans. 

 

So I’m glad to see that they’ve got this included, but I will say 

later on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I noticed that it’s not brought 

up again. This is the one place where it’s brought up. So 

whether they feel that’s all they need to do — and maybe that’s 

all they need to do — but I am concerned that . . . I would like 

to see more attention to this particular thing. So it’s a concern. 

 

I want to also talk about the “New Division 4 of Part VI” and 

power to establish regional planning authorities. And the 

subsection is 119.1(1): 

 

If the minister considers it to be appropriate to do so, or at 

the request of a municipality or municipalities to be 

included in a proposed regional planning area, the minister 

may, . . . order, establish a regional planning authority as a 

body corporate for a regional planning area that is 

specified in the order. 

 

So there you go. I’m always amazed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 

short a phrase can be: “ If the minister considers it to be 

appropriate to do so . . .” There’s no other language about why 

the minister might think something is appropriate to do a 

certain action. It just says, “If the minister considers it to be 

appropriate to do so . . .” he may create this regional planning 

area. I’m saying he because the current minister is a gentleman, 

and just to keep the gender issue fair. But I do want to flag that. 

I would think you should have more, more detail on what it 

means in terms of the language appropriate. 

 

Last night we talked about the issue of the secretary being the 

gatekeeper — when that person felt that a form was filled out 

sufficiently, then they would let it go to the next step. In this 

case, all the minister has to do is consider it appropriate to do 

so. Then there you go. You are off to the races, and you have a 

regional planning authority, and you just hope the minister 

hasn’t attached a price tag to it because you may also be paying. 

The only good news is in that case, they don’t have very much 

money set aside, so it won’t cost you very much money. 

 

But at any rate, this to me seems to be a very thin clause, and I 

would have liked to have seen more reasons why. And it might 

have been: if the following circumstances exist then the 

minister may consider it to be appropriate to do so. But there is 

absolutely no sort of comeback to this. It’s totally up to the 

minister’s discretion. So we have some concern about that. 

 

And then this is what’s interesting too: 

 

“Power to direct funding 

 

119.2(1) Subject to any order or directives of Treasury 

Board, the minister may: 

 

(a) determine the amount of funding for the regional 

planning authority to be provided by the Government 

of Saskatchewan in any fiscal year of the Government 

of Saskatchewan; and 

 

It continues on. And then this (2) is that “The included 

municipalities in a regional planning area shall provide any 

funding required by the regional planning authority in addition 

to the funding mentioned in clause (1)(a) . . .” 

 

So the minister then, as well as not only providing the funding 

say, shall direct the local municipalities to support that action. 

And I just worry about that. That seems to be . . . Not only are 

you being told to participate, but you’re told to pay to 

participate. And I think that again I’m not sure if there was 

consultation on that and people would say that’s a reasonable 

thing to do. You know, as I’ve said, I’ve not read in the 

minister’s remarks there was any consultation about this. And I 

think that would be a question. 

 

I’d talk about the composition of a regional planning authority. 

It talks about how the minister may, by order, appoint the 

following persons. And you know, I found this interesting, that 

one member from each of the included municipalities, one or 

more from the Government of Saskatchewan, and any other 

person the minister is satisfied to have an interest or expertise 

pertaining to community planning. So I think that’s an 

interesting aspect that that’s not set out; that’s not solid. 

 

And I also think that, you know, there is a section in here about 

other duties of a regional planning authority, and: 

 

If an appeal from a decision of a municipality is normally 

heard by a Development Appeals Board and if that 

decision has been made by a regional planning authority, 

an appeal . . . must be made instead to the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. 

 

Which we had talked about last night, how they are 

reinvigorating the Municipal Board to do more of this stuff. But 

some of the other appeal processes aren’t going to the 

Municipal Board, so we want to know more about the 

Municipal Board. And that will be part . . . As we say, there 

seems to be a real set of tools, legislative tools that are coming 

forward here, and this is like the third or fourth or fifth one. I 

don’t have a list in front of me, but there’s a lot of municipal 

bills before us this year. 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3123 

So we have some real, real concerns about this. I want to say, as 

I said earlier, I was happy to see that there was some reference 

to the provincial statement of interest because it talks about 

some of the very key things that we do in this province and how 

we think our communities should be planned and how our land 

should be used. 

 

But when we talk about the regional plan and section 8, “A 

regional plan may contain statements of policy with respect to 

. . .” a whole set of other items. And it talks about the 

coordination of approaches for stewardship of environmentally 

sensitive land. It may talk about that. It may talk about matters 

dealing with significant transportation and municipal 

infrastructure within the regional planning area. But it doesn’t 

talk about provincial interests. And I just want to make sure that 

there should be really a checklist, a checklist that if the 

provincial statement of interests apply, then they should be 

addressed in here. So I’m worried about that, and we will have 

questions about that as well. Yes. 

 

And this is where a dispute resolution, when it talks about that, 

and it doesn’t mention in that section the Municipal Board, 

which I think might be a place. And it would be interesting to 

hear why isn’t the SMB [Saskatchewan Municipal Board] 

involved in the dispute resolution aspect of it because it seemed 

that we’re expanding some of the duties of it in other bills, that 

maybe that would be an appropriate area to go. 

 

So I want to also take a look at explanatory notes because there 

were parts in there that I found very interesting that when I flip 

back to this, that really I guess, you know, not only are they . . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find this an interesting bill. We just have 

to have . . . When we get into committee, this is going to be a 

very interesting one because I’ve just got to know if any of the 

SUMA or SARM folks, how they feel about this process. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And I do understand that in many ways it’s a last step because 

you’re talking about groups that aren’t co-operating together. 

It’s not for the everyday situation, but it is interesting how 

they’ve set that out. So not only does the minister get to decide 

whether there’s going to be a regional planning authority, and 

the only criteria is he figures if that person the minister figures 

is appropriate, that’s all the criteria it’s appropriate to do. And 

then he also gets to decide how much money is going to be 

spent by the authority. Then he also gets to decide how many 

people are going to be on the board. And then it also gives the 

minister, once they’ve set up the board . . . And the board, 

sounds like if it’s dysfunctional, the minister has the authority 

to adopt the regional plan on behalf of an included municipality 

if that municipality fails to adopt that regional plan. 

 

So this is laying out quite a line of actions for the minister. And 

I’m not sure if this is similar to other times in our history where 

the minister of Municipal Affairs has had to be so draconian, 

may be the word, so extreme in the behaviour of saying, this is 

how you will behave. I am interested to see how this plays out 

in reality. And you know, we have only so many cities, and we 

have only so many RMs, so I mean I think that this is going to 

be an interesting process to see how this will play out. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said we just got the second 

reading speeches yesterday. We will talk a lot about this. We’ll 

take a lot of time to examine this. And we’ll talk to a few 

people and say, so what do you think? Is this the best way to go 

forward? Clearly the government has put forward several bills 

along this line, and so we do have some concerns that we’ve 

identified. We do understand the challenges of growth in 

Saskatchewan, but we’ve got to do it in a way that people feel 

that they’ve been heard, they’ve been valued, you know. And 

it’s not growth at any cost, not growth at any cost, but that we 

can have smart growth. 

 

And I think my colleague from Athabasca spoke about smart 

growth. And I know he talks about that an awful lot when we 

talk about these kind of bills. But it’s not about drastic growth 

or growth at any cost. I don’t think anybody wants to see that. 

And so when we see this kind of legislation before us, I think 

we have a lot of questions about what does this really, what 

does this really mean? And clearly, you know, when we have 

disputes or circumstances where people are not co-operating, I 

think you need to look at deeper reasons. Why is that? And if 

you just put a Band Aid over it, it will bubble up and it will 

percolate up somewhere else. And so we do have some 

concerns about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that I know — I am very confident actually — that 

many of my colleagues will want to speak to this bill at length. 

So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that we adjourn 

second reading on Bill No. 90, An Act to amend The Planning 

and Development Act, 2007. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member has 

moved a motion of adjournment on debate. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 63 — The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 

on the debate on Bill No. 63, I want to open up, I guess, some 

opening comments before I get into the details of this, of the 

bill and what I guess what the minister is proposing here. And 

we’ve seen the way, the handling of the previous regional park. 

And this one, it talks about looking at amending and the 

regional park. And that’s some areas of I think for some out 

there . . . And I’m going to think about LeRoy. And I’m going 

to talk about LeRoy regional park because this legislation could 

impact LeRoy clearly.  

 

And I think the handling and the way the minister handled that 

file and the issues that were raised not only from staff of LeRoy 

regional park, probably concerns of residents, and questions 

about the process and the way that whole LeRoy regional park 

was handled, and what groups were involved in the discussions, 



3124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

what partners, with the regional park, with the municipalities? 

Was the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association — I know 

there’s an organization represents them — what involvement 

and what did they know about this? And clearly, you know, did 

those organizations, did the municipalities, did the staff, did the 

communities that utilize that regional park in LeRoy, were any 

of them consulted or talked to in any way? And who was let in 

on this deal? 

 

And that was the start from day one, came off clearly, the way 

the handling and the minister handled that whole file, I think 

clearly with the concerns that was raised has . . . Well it makes 

us want to really stop and have a look at what he’s proposing or 

what it will be proposed by these changes. And just seeing the 

way the LeRoy regional park was handled by his department 

and as him being the minister and just the secret deal that was 

made there or potentially muzzled anyone from talking about it, 

I think that’s the wrong approach. And clearly from people that 

responded to us and that I talked to, and I know they had 

meetings. They had an opportunity to when they finally, they 

had . . . The communities came together in a public meeting to 

discuss the issues and the handling of, the government’s 

handling. And you know, the minister has to take the 

responsibility for this LeRoy regional park and that deal he was 

approving. He gave his blessing, his approval to that secret deal 

that nobody else . . . And when you have a deal like that, you 

wonder, who was all involved? 

 

And you know, it was a company I believe out of BC [British 

Columbia] at the time was told they could buy the LeRoy 

regional park. Now there might have been reasons why LeRoy 

regional park was being offered to that company. We don’t 

know whether it’s growth, whether there . . . what was going 

on. But I do know from the people that I talked to and the 

concerns that were in the meeting and what I got in local media, 

whether letters, phone calls, people responding, the way it was 

handled and the secrecy that it was handled was not right, was 

not fair to the people that are the shareholders and, you know, 

stakeholders in that community and who utilized that regional 

park and who volunteered on, whether it’s the boards, whether 

. . . and those that travelled from all over the region to use that 

park. 

 

And you look at a park like that, and I think LeRoy has a pool. 

And as they move on, and you have a regional park who 

develops a park so that community members can utilize the 

park. And some of the parks, the regional parks, you’ll see, they 

do an amazing job. I mean if you look at the way the 

maintenance is done, the infrastructure, and there are 

challenges. And I know LeRoy had its challenges and they 

talked about that. It was cost and stuff, but we never ever did 

get all the details. How much the regional park . . . And I think 

we’ll do that, and we’ll get a chance in committee to ask some 

of those questions and try to get from the minister exactly what 

went on and why he approved such a deal. 

 

And having said that, I know there’s been a lot of concern 

raised from LeRoy and that whole . . . I think, you know, it’s 

the first time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there was ever a 

regional park that a minister approved the sale of, and the 

current Minister of Parks approved that. And that’s not only 

alarming to I think the provincial association — it should be — 

but to the regional parks. And where are they willing to go? 

And that’s the concern, just how far. And you see a government 

whose I guess secret agenda and certain connections with 

certain people, insiders get special treatment. Some offers being 

only certain individuals find out about the sale. Whether that’s 

by word of mouth, I’m not sure how they’re getting that out to 

. . . [inaudible] . . . the insiders. And their friends and buddies 

and whatever, supporters, they get offered certain deals — 

sweetheart deals, we call them — and others don’t. 

 

And when you look at LeRoy regional park and clearly that 

whole . . . watching that, the whole events as they uncovered 

themselves where people weren’t aware of it, nobody had a 

clue. So many people had no idea that that deal was being done 

in secrecy and all this. Interesting that it wasn’t government 

asking for it. It wasn’t LeRoy regional park asking for the 

secrecy is what we’re being told. It was the company buying 

this who wanted it done in secrecy. And that just doesn’t cut it, 

and that doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It truly 

doesn’t. Like why would you not share this with people that are 

impacted? And it goes to show a trust. And I talk about that. 

 

People elect a government that they want to trust and a 

government that looks after their assets, looks after the public 

dollars, looks after our Crowns — and there’s many provisions 

— look after our regional parks, our provincial parks. They 

look at the assets that our province has. And I know when you 

look at regional parks . . . And I know government puts in 

money, and whether that’s for infrastructure or operations, there 

are some deals that go on. And you know, I don’t know every 

single deal that government does and track every dollar, not like 

the government does or the minister has at his disposal with the 

staffing. And he does have that. I mean we would have to do 

that through questions, you know, and that type of thing, 

whether it’s written questions or from the House here. 

 

But having said that, that LeRoy deal has made so many people 

pay attention to what’s going on and the file. And now, you 

know, I’m not sure exactly whatever happened with that whole 

deal. The government was ready to allow that to happen. The 

minister approved it, and we need to look into that. And there’s 

more questions that need to come out of that. Where is that deal 

now? Did that deal go through? Did it fall through? Has the 

regional park taken over? And that’s what we’re hearing. And I 

think that needs to be clarified. What happened? What 

happened to that sweetheart deal, the secrecy deal that the 

minister said they couldn’t share with the public, they couldn’t 

share with individuals? 

 

And that’s where you see a minister who has certain powers, 

how he handled it. And that’s really concerning to a lot of 

people about the way the minister handled this file. And it goes 

to talking about giving him certain powers or removing powers 

from him and giving them to a regional college. That’s the 

scary part of it. It’s concerning when you see, whether we’re 

giving powers to . . . and more powers to a minister, or you’re 

giving it to the region, we have to make sure what powers are 

we turning over and are we clear on it, and who’s requested 

this? Who’s asked for this? 

 

And I think . . . You want to talk about a region giving them 

powers, and I mean the minister talks about that, and we’ll have 

to go through this in committee and find out exactly, detail 

upon detail. Well I mean we’ll get to do that. I understand that. 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3125 

We get a chance here to make some opening comments about 

this, and I will go through this bill as we’re talking, just certain 

items. But I think it was important to share, when you see 

government saying, and a minister and his department, giving 

away certain powers or the minister taking certain powers or 

the ministry having certain powers over organizations, over 

people, over the authority to allow assets to be sold off of a 

regional park that belonged to everyone. Those are our assets as 

a province. 

 

And that’s the first time from my understanding, and I’ve asked 

this that anyone was aware that a regional park was approved, 

and the minister was so quick to approve it in secrecy. And that 

was the concern. So it’s the way and the handling of this whole 

LeRoy deal. So it comes back to this. Now you have provisions 

in here where you’re asking the minister, or he’s asking to 

move certain powers. And I don’t care if those powers are 

going to him, to his ministry, or to the regional park. There are 

certain provisions. 

 

What and who have they contacted? And he talks about, he’s 

worked with the associations. And you know my colleagues 

previous have talked about government always saying whether 

they talked to one person or they went through that process of 

consulting. And then later on you find out, whoa, just because 

you consulted with one person or you sent a letter out or you 

called a meeting and, you know, depending on who you made 

sure was available or who had access to that information about 

the meetings . . . 

 

And that goes to show you again about the secrecy and the 

handlings, the way government handles the issues. And that’s 

the concerns that we see and I think people are expressing. 

They’re very concerned about the handling and the way 

government has been handling things. And there are other 

secret deals and some of the challenges that people see. And 

you know, that whole deal at LeRoy, and I mean there was an 

outcry from the community, and even though the community, 

the community brought forward their concerns and the public 

meetings that they had and the frustration . . . And of course the 

company came that was proposing to buy this in the secret deal, 

and officials were there. They wanted to do this very quietly. 

 

The concern that people had at that public meeting, and they 

expressed that from the floor and the concerns and I mean with 

the media. People were blindsided. People had no clue that their 

regional park was being sold off, this little deal, and why. And 

they were asking why, and they wanted clarification. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And it was all made to sound like, oh, no, this is going to be a 

good deal. It’s great. This company’s going to do it. And that’s 

the understanding they were told. There were certain things 

would be taken care of. And to this day I don’t believe . . . that 

that deal now has fallen through. We don’t know what’s going 

on with it. I mean I’ve heard a report and I think there’s even 

been some talk about that that deal didn’t go through. And I 

mean that’s another area where we need to find out and get the 

details. And I believe, if I’m correct, that that deal fell through. 

Now we don’t know why. And maybe it’s good. Maybe it’s 

good that the regional park is going to be retained by the 

organization. 

Now is it a lack of dollars? Is it that the regional parks and the 

municipalities that partner to provide this service, recreation to 

families who are in the area, and are there challenges? Yes. And 

is it about dollars? And sometimes that is about the dollars. 

 

But I think at the end of the day people want to make sure that 

the government shares the plan that will impact them. And the 

government has an obligation, and I talk about the trusting and, 

you know, the Sask Party has been elected in a number of seats 

in our province. And that’s good. Good for them. The people 

gave you the trust. And we’re going to work hard on our side. 

We’re going to work very hard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to gain. 

 

And some of the actions of the Sask Party clearly has shown 

people in our province, people in our province that yes, you put 

the trust. Don’t take that for granted. And I’ve said that many 

times in this House and I explain this when we’re debating 

bills, about the trust. But they can sit there and they can make 

their . . . There’s talk about being humble. They should be a 

little bit humble and not always attacking the way they want to 

attack. But that’s all right. They figure that they have the 

so-called power and they have . . . 

 

But they’re taking many rural people for granted. They’re 

taking urban people for granted. They’re taking First Nations 

and Métis people for granted and they’re taking many citizens 

and our youth for granted, and they will pay a price. And our 

teachers for granted and our students for granted. And we’ve 

expressed that time and time again. 

 

So when you have legislation and bills that are bringing 

forward by a government, any time they give themselves more 

power or they take power away or they give power, you have to 

wonder why. Now if it’s just changes that we’re talking about, 

simple, whether it’s a name change, there’s certain things that 

go on. And we call it housekeeping items that you might clear 

up. And that’s fine. That’s fine to do that kind of work. 

 

And you look, we look at some of the legislation that this 

government has changed and willing . . . And I mean, my 

colleagues talk about the labour, Bill 85. That’s a concern to so 

many, that this government’s bullheadedness is just going to 

bulldoze away with what it wants to do. And it doesn’t have the 

respect that they have from the people out there because they’re 

not being consulted. When you take people for granted and you 

just, you know, bulldoze what you want and your ideas and you 

tell people, well this is what it is, and then you say, well we’ll 

consult you after. That’s too late. And so many times under this 

government and the years that they’ve been there . . . The Sask 

Party has been there for too many years to be honest, and 

people are talking about it. 

 

There’s supporters out there that supported them, that have said 

to me, I supported them in the past election but I will not for 

several reasons. And they talk about that. And I remind the 

Sask Party, I remind that just . . . Yes, be as arrogant as you 

want from over there. Make your comments. That’s fine. You 

know, one stone in your backpack every day, every day you 

start — different organizations, individuals — and you start not 

consulting, and you take things for granted, and you take the 

people of our province for granted. You will pay a price. You 

will pay a price. Numbers always go up and down. Your 

numbers were where they’re at, and we’ll see where they go. 



3126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

But going back to this, I want to use that as an example because 

it’s not listening, and that’s what we’re saying. This 

government does not listen. And here’s why they don’t listen. 

They don’t listen. And that’s okay. They can sit there and have 

all the fun they want with it, take it for granted. Let them take 

the people of our good province for granted. You will pay a 

price for that one day. You will pay a price. 

 

Now having said that, you know, we look at individual bills and 

this one. There’s about four areas that they’re looking at 

changing, and I just want to kind of maybe go through some of 

that. Now the powers I’ve talked about in this bill, clearly we’re 

giving more power to a regional park than taking away from 

them. They want clarification. The minister and his ministry, 

the regional parks want to be very clear. 

 

Well in this legislation and in their . . . Are they going to make 

it sure that before a regional park will ever be sold off, are they 

going to put provisions in here? And are they willing to make 

accommodations to legislation? So maybe they need to say, 

hold it. We’re not going to pass this legislation. We’re going to 

make sure we consult with everyone. We’re going to make sure 

we talk with individuals. We’re going to make sure we talk 

with the shareholders and stakeholders and people that are 

impacted, whether they’re the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

Association, whether it’s individuals, whether it’s the 

municipalities, whether it’s people that utilize the facility of a 

regional park. Are they going to propose and are they going to 

work with those individuals? Are they going to consult them? 

 

And we’ve seen the action of this government, and it doesn’t 

want to do that. It decides to do what it wants to do and it says, 

this is what we’re going to do. And it doesn’t seem to matter. It 

just doesn’t seem to matter what they want, what individuals 

want, what organizations want. And that, I think, this 

government has made very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very 

clearly the way they’ve handled the film tax credit, the way that 

they handled concerns. When they know it’s wrong and when 

they’re doing wrong, they spend more taxpayers’ dollars, more 

taxpayers’ dollars on billboards, on ads to PR spin what they 

want. 

 

So here you go. You have a regional park. Will they be 

spending money to advertise what they’re proposing when they 

go out and sell the option of looking at other regional parks? 

That is a concern. Where are they going to go? This 

government will go anywhere it wants to get rid of assets of the 

people, without consulting. And that’s the concern that people 

have. It’s clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is an area of 

concern. 

 

Now they talk about adjusting some of the legislation and 

correcting it. And some of that is for community and non-profit 

organizations in establishing and operating of regional park. 

They’re proposing some changes in here. And we have to make 

sure clearly through the legislations . . . And whether it’s 

legislation, regulations, these powers are handed off to the 

ministry or the minister or a regional park, but clearly 

regulations come into play too. 

 

And who develops those regulations when you have certain 

powers being handed over to a minister or the ministry? Then 

the regulations come in. And who do they consult? Who do 

they talk to with those regulations? Do they do what is right by 

consulting? And we see that. And I mean if you look at their 

track record when it comes to changes of regulations and 

legislation, this government does not like to have to consult. 

Oh, it brags about it that it does it. It talks about it. It likes to 

talk. They talk about it, but where is the facts? Their facts are 

not there because they don’t have those facts. It’s their idea is 

what they want, and they push ahead and they bully people on 

what they want. And that’s a fact. They bully people. And if 

you say anything that they don’t like or the way they’re going, 

then they bully. 

 

And you know what? It’s interesting. Why should people feel 

that they can’t come to this legislation, to a minister or a 

ministry of this government when the people of this good 

province clearly have issues and concerns? Why should they 

not? Why shouldn’t they bring it forward? But we have a lot of 

people who don’t want to come forward, who are nervous, 

whether they’re an organization, because . . . Why is that? 

Because of their . . . They feel concerned that if they raise 

issues, whether it’s with the media, opposition, whether 

government that come back to them will be . . . I guess issues 

and concerns that will come back to them because they’ve 

raised that concern. The government wants to bully them and 

push them . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Your speech doesn’t actually make 

sense. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — You know what? That just goes to show 

you. That just goes to show you how they are bullies. Exactly 

those comments right there the members opposite are obviously 

bringing forward. And they can say what they want and that’s 

fine, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because clearly the people have their 

voice and they want to have their voice heard. 

 

And this government sits there again in secrecy and wants to 

have little meetings. And they do everything they want in 

secrecy for their insider groups. And then they want to criticize 

people for the way they handle things, their track record, their 

record. They should be ashamed of what they’ve done and how 

they’ve handled the duty to consult and the track record. And 

you look at that about consulting individuals when you pass 

legislation. 

 

And if you want to talk about certain bills, Bill 85 is another 

one. Very concerning to a lot of . . . If you look at just that way, 

they’re pushing ahead with that. People have asked them to take 

time, take time. And any of their bills, if they’re a bill that 

makes sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to bring forward, we have 

supported that and we work with the government. When it 

makes common sense to work with the government, this 

opposition has done that. And we’ve moved legislation that has 

helped Saskatchewan people, and that’s clear. 

 

But when you have legislation that they want to push their way, 

and it’s their agenda and it’s the way they want to do it and it 

doesn’t . . . They don’t care about consulting anyone. They’re 

going to do what they want. Hey, we’re at the head of this and 

we’re going to do what we want. The people are going to . . . 

Take that for granted. And I say that to those members. Keep 

taking the people of this good province for granted, and see 

where it gets you. Just keep it up; keep that attitude that you 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3127 

have. And you’re so humble? We don’t see you as being very 

humble. 

 

But having said that, make your comments all you want. At the 

end of the day, the people of this province want to make sure 

that this government passes legislation, and they share with the 

people, and they talk to the individuals that’ll be impacted. 

Whether it’s our working men and women of this province, 

whether it’s middle-class families, people just want to feel like 

they’re getting their voice heard. And the government currently 

does not hear a lot of what the people are saying. We see that 

just by their actions, the way they carry on the business and the 

way they operate, and the way they conduct themselves. 

 

We’re supposed to be in here trying to do the good work of the 

people of this province and try to do that good work. And you 

know what? We have. We have challenges out in our province, 

and we understand that. And where we come in agreement on 

some of these changes, when they make sense, we’ll support 

that. When they don’t, when they don’t make sense, then you 

can’t support that and you have to make sure it’s clear what’s 

happening. 

 

Now having said this, this bill, this bill will have to have to be 

clearly worked out and asked some tough questions. Now 

having said that, this bill has some areas where clarification 

needs to be done. And what are the regulations? What are the 

rules? What will come after this? And we talk about the 

regulations. 

 

At this time, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to 

bring forward some questions for the minister and his officials 

in committee when we go to committee. And we’ll get there; 

there’s time for that. But this is a nice opportunity to have some 

opening remarks and talk about some of the challenges and why 

that this government is bringing legislation like this forward. Is 

it because they made such a mess of the LeRoy project and the 

way they handled that one so now they’re going to bring some 

provisions? Because that’s clearly, it’s about LeRoy and the 

way they did the secret little sale and they wanted everything 

quiet. That’s what it’s all about. It’s about the little quietness. 

It’s about certain people getting certain things. If you’re in the 

inside, the in-crowd, it’s a supporter. We’ve seen some of that 

stuff clearly by this government the way they handled it, the 

files. 

 

Now we’ll go back into this part of the legislation and proposed 

changes that they’re making. And sometimes, you know, these 

are items that’ll be cleared up and sometimes they’re not. But 

right now at this time, I conclude on my remarks on Bill 63. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the minister that Bill No. 63, The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 

shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Justice and Attorney 

General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing Committee 

on Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Bill No. 64 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 64 — The 

Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the 

Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to make some 

remarks, I guess, with The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 64. Clearly, clearly, you know, these are 

changes that will need to be brought into effect because of the 

changes that we’re doing with Bill 63. Consequential 

amendments are required to change some of the wording in 

legislation or regulations, and that provision will be provided 

when this comes into, I guess, effect and comes into law for us. 

So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have any further 

comments on this bill at this time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the minister that Bill No. 64, The 

Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 

shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This bill stands 

referred to the Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Marchuk that Bill No. 70 — The 



3128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter into the debate on Bill No. 70, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). I’d just like to go through some 

of the minister’s second reading comments here and talk a little 

bit about what this bill proposes to do and just some thoughts 

about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So this bill sets out to do about six different things, beginning 

with amending the compulsory school age that’s currently 

seven years of age to six years of age. The minister has pointed 

out that this school age has been in place since 1940 and isn’t 

consistent with other jurisdictions. Most other jurisdictions 

have moved to the age of six. And the reality is most children in 

grade 1 in Saskatchewan are six years of age, so the minister 

has flagged and said that this won’t have a significant increase 

in enrolments when the compulsory age is changed. 

 

The minister points out that research shows that children who 

have access to education at earlier ages have improved 

academic and social outcomes. I would agree with that. I know 

the literature that I’ve read about that is true. Any educator that 

I’ve ever talked to, people who specialize in early learning and 

care talk about the importance of child care, preschool and 

onward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s interesting that the minister recognizes this and 

has failed to move on full-day kindergarten, as a matter of fact. 

Full-day kindergarten was offered, some of the school boards 

were offering full-day kindergarten and, as of last year because 

of the funding formula and budget constraints, have been forced 

to cut it. 

 

And I know in constituencies like mine, and as a matter of fact 

everywhere, the reality is vulnerable kids can be found across, I 

know, all of Saskatoon, all of Regina. The reality is there are 

vulnerable kids everywhere. But full-day kindergarten has an 

extra big benefit for kids who might not have some 

opportunities in their home, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it was a 

huge blow to many families and unfortunate for many children 

to not have access to full-day kindergarten. So I know the 

minister is recognizing here the importance of how the . . . 

Literature shows that access to education at an earlier age has 

positive impact, yet this government can’t see fit to ensure that 

school boards can fund and offer full-day kindergarten. 

 

Again, a second thing that this bill proposes to do is to change 

the definition of school to reflect that pre-kindergarten 

programs are also provided at school sites. “The change will 

also reflect the different approaches [the minister says] for 

delivering the province’s education programs through virtual 

schools as well as custody and care facility schools.” 

 

Pre-K [pre-kindergarten], I’ve commended the government in 

my budget speech, but I think introducing more pre-K programs 

is really a very positive thing. I know in the previous 

administration the work had started and the government has 

carried on and has expanded the numbers greatly. And I think 

that that’s a good piece of work. 

 

But again I have to . . . There’s two pieces on . . . Before and 

after pre-K, we’ve got early learning and care, which starts 

before pre-K. That’s child care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this 

government, we had record numbers of live births here in 

Saskatchewan over recent years, and the government for the 

last two years in a row has added 500 spaces and 500 spaces. 

That’s a drop in the bucket. And adding spaces is not an early 

learning and care plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The reality is huge problems with our subsidy system. We’ve 

seen that our subsidy system, we’ve paid out a 25-cent subsidy. 

And I’ve asked the question, was that a direct deposit 25 cents 

or did the family who got paid get a cheque? A 25-cent subsidy 

is not acceptable. So it’s great that the government has 

committed to pre-K programs and is acknowledging that in 

some of the changes in this bill, but there’s other pieces that go 

to supporting families, and one of them is around child care. 

 

The second piece I have mentioned earlier, which was the need 

to support full-day kindergarten. I have children in my 

constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of them who’ve lived 

in refugee camps, who’ve never held a pencil. And full-day 

kindergarten does a great deal of work in preparing kids for the 

increased learning challenges that happen in grade 1. So there 

are some . . . Again, supporting pre-K is great and these 

amendments are positive, or the amendments support what 

already is happening, but I’m glad that we’re looking at school 

beyond the kindergarten to grade 12 model and recognizing that 

school, early learning and care starts before children even hit 

the official age of school. 

 

The change of the school day definition, this is a third change. 

The change to the school day definition is intended to reflect 

the regulatory amendments that were enacted on January 1st, 

2013 of this past year. And: 

 

The new definition recognizes that a school day could be 

comprised of instructional time and non-instructional 

time. The proposed revision to the definition of school day 

has been identified as necessary during . . . [the 

government’s] work to finalize new regulations for the 

school year. 

 

So this, I believe, is related to changing the school year from 

starting after Labour Day which has, I know . . . Actually I was 

the Tourism critic when Tourism Saskatchewan brought 

forward their study saying that starting the school day before 

Labour Day had a huge impact on tourism business. And they 

couldn’t retain staff and they were losing business. And which 

is as a parent, I actually really appreciate starting after Labour 

Day. But when I was the Tourism critic, I actually thought, well 

that would be an interesting private members’ bill. And I went 

and I talked to some of the, two of the school boards in 

Saskatoon and asked them what they thought. 

 

And you know what they told me, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They 

told me that their families had mixed opinions on the 

post-September 1st or Labour Day long weekend start because 

there are families who really appreciate the February break. 

There’s the families who really appreciate a full two weeks at 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3129 

Christmas. Families have changed over the years, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we all have different needs. So I decided at that 

time that that wasn’t something I wanted to do or the feedback 

that I was getting was that people had mixed opinions. 

 

So whether or not I like the idea of school starting after the 

September long weekend, the reality is I know many teachers 

and many school boards were very concerned about the lack of 

consultation on that particular piece. And I think that that seems 

to be a bit of a hallmark of this government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the lack of consultation. It may end up, a change may 

end up being positive, but people need to feel part of the 

process, especially people who know and understand a system 

well and are involved in that system. 

 

It’s absolutely imperative when we make public policy that we 

engage people who know about a specific topic — the good and 

the bad. We need to know that we have the full depth and 

breadth of discussion about an issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

before we go ahead. So I know that teachers and school boards 

did not appreciate the government making that move without — 

the move to the post-Labour Day start — without discussing it 

at all with stakeholders who know that sector very well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

A fourth change in this bill:  

 

The proposed amendment would grant the Ministry of 

Education the authority to develop policies and regulations 

for pre-kindergarten programs [the minister says] which 

will continue to contribute to more consistency and 

accountability among the province’s pre-kindergarten 

programs. 

 

So again I’ve talked about pre-K, and I think it’s great that the 

government has added more pre-K. But you’ve got the piece 

before pre-K, which is early learning and care, and you’ve got 

full day kindergarten which I think the government has let 

people, families down here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

A fifth piece that the minister is proposing, that the fines 

associated with various offences be increased. When we talk 

about offences, we find that we’re talking about provisions of 

the Act related to school attendance, school safety, 

administration, just to name a few of those. So the minister’s 

proposing that those fines related to those various offences be 

increased. Right now they’re currently at $500 or less for an 

offence, and the minister’s proposing to increase to a minimum 

amount of $5,000 for a first offence and $10,000 for subsequent 

offences. The minister went on to say that increasing the fine to 

these levels sends a clear message that non-compliance is taken 

seriously, which gives school divisions the backing they need to 

impose fines if necessary. 

 

The minister has said that in this case that the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation and the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association have indicated their support for these amounts to be 

increased. So clearly the government in this case has said that 

they’ve consulted. But we’ve also seen this government say that 

they’ve consulted with specific organizations and have learned 

later that they did not in fact consult with those. But in this case 

they are saying that they talked to the STF [Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation] and the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association, and it’s here in black and white, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So they say that they’ve consulted and these 

organizations are in support of that, and we have not heard 

otherwise from those respective bodies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The final piece that this bill proposes to do is: 

 

. . . to make it easier for newcomers to enrol in schools by 

clarifying who is considered a provincial resident. The 

present wording in the Act [the minister says] does not 

sufficiently describe who is a resident for the purposes of 

participating in . . . [the Saskatchewan] education system 

without cost. The regulations prescribe that tuition fees be 

charged to those who do not meet the criteria. [And 

apparently] Most provinces and school divisions accept 

children of temporary residents, refugee children, and 

reciprocal exchange students, 

 

But right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Act does not clarify 

these considerations. So the minister’s proposing these to 

support those who come to Saskatchewan from other countries 

on temporary work permits with children. Right now we 

provide publicly funded education to those who come to our 

province with young families from other countries on these 

temporary permits for post-secondary education. So this change 

would clarify that this is, the right is equally applicable to those 

who are here on temporary work permits. So children are 

entitled to be educated in the province without charge, and now 

this Act explicitly lays that out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I just want to say I know again in my own constituency I have 

schools, two schools in particular, where we have more than 20 

countries represented, more than 40 languages spoken. It’s 

really quite an amazing dynamic in some of these schools. And 

we are a province made up of immigrants and newcomers. And 

it’s great to see new people coming to Saskatchewan, but we 

need to make sure that the supports are in place for them. 

 

I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the change to the immigrant 

nominee family class last spring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that . . . 

if we’re talking about newcomers to Saskatchewan. I think 

many newcomers felt betrayed and let down by this 

government, people who had businesses, who had been in 

Canada, who were already permanent residents, who’d come to 

provinces like Ontario and BC, set up businesses and were 

working and came in good faith to Saskatchewan because of the 

immigrant nominee program and the family class. 

 

I think one of the things when we think about settling here in a 

new country, we have to think about . . . I can’t even imagine, 

actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, coming to a new country and 

facing total culture shock, different food, climate. I mean the 

climate has even been hard on those, this year, of us who have 

lived in Saskatchewan all our lives. So imagine coming from a 

tropical clime and coming to Saskatchewan. One of the things 

that helps people — there is evidence around this — that helps 

people settle and support is ensuring that they have family 

around them. And this change to the immigrant nominee 

program, to the family class was hugely . . . Many people felt 

betrayed. 

 

As a matter of fact, I’ve chatted with one of the civil servants 



3130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

who was here last week. He’s been in Saskatchewan for three 

years and is incredibly frustrated. He was hoping to bring his 

brother here and is no longer in a position to do that. And he 

feels like throwing his arms up and is quite frustrated. So on 

one hand, the government is making some good changes here to 

support newcomers to Saskatchewan, but we’ve seen in less 

than a year they’ve also made some very negative changes that 

hurt and harm people who’ve decided or want to make 

Saskatchewan home and contribute to this province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I know that there are more remarks to come on Bill 70, The 

Education Amendment Act. Just one moment, please. I believe 

that some of my other colleagues will have many things to say 

about Bill 70, and thanks for the opportunity, and I would like 

to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member has 

moved a motion of adjourned debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 73 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

my great pleasure to rise today to speak to this bill, Bill No. 73, 

The Municipalities Amendment Act. 

 

This bill is part of a suite of legislation introduced by the 

minister in relation to all three of the municipal bills or Acts 

that currently exist: The Municipalities Act, The Cities Act, and 

then The Northern Municipalities Act. So I believe the intent of 

reviewing all three of these bills at this time is to provide some 

modernization and streamlining of certain processes, and 

simply again the good work of the people over in the ministry 

and at the Department of Justice who are constantly reviewing 

legislation to ensure that it is modern and appropriate. 

 

And I always like to take a moment to commend the work of 

those folks and the public service in general for the good work 

that they do for our government and for our people and for the 

province in general. And just on that note, I also want to take a 

moment at this point to acknowledge the work of the staff in the 

building here and the hard work they do. I know everyone’s 

working really hard, and I just want to give a particular 

shout-out today to the good work of our excellent staff. And 

I’m sure that goes for government staff and for the Legislative 

Assembly staff because, without the work of the people behind 

us, we know that very little would happen in this building, and 

certainly the legislative agenda would not proceed and the voice 

of the people wouldn’t be heard. So this is just a shout-out to 

the staff that are working really hard for all of us and doing 

good work. 

 

In this bill there’s a few things that the minister indicated in his 

initial comments when the bill was introduced back in 

November. And he talked about improving processes and a 

number of different amendments. And there’s quite a few 

amendments in the bill, so I won’t take the time today to go 

through them line by line because a large number of them are 

clarifying or providing consistency or ensuring small details 

that were not properly worded in the previous or the existing 

bill are going to be cleaned up. So this is the kind of work that 

is ongoing in any government, and certainly the work here 

appears to be meeting that need. 

 

There are a few significant changes, though, that I want to take 

a few minutes to comment on. And the first one is to improve 

processes relating to boundary alterations or annexations 

through the municipalities involved. And right now it appears 

that the processes are established to do that, but there’s some 

changes needed to make it easier for municipalities to make 

those applications and more scope for the Municipal Board to 

rule on the applications when people are applying for 

annexation. So those are the kinds of things that we see in this 

bill. 

 

I’m just going to pull out the bill itself, just go through a few of 

the changes that are added. One of the big definitions that’s 

being added now, and this is something new, is the additional 

service area. It’s a new definition. And this is something that 

will be “a geographical area within a rural municipality that 

includes a residential or other land use requiring services or 

levels of services that are different from the services or level of 

services provided in areas of the rural municipality that are not 

additional service areas.” 

 

So I think one of the things this reflects is the changing nature 

of rural municipalities here in Saskatchewan. Certainly one 

only needs to look at municipalities like Corman Park or 

Sherwood where we see this isn’t your typical bucolic rural 

municipality that would have existed in days past. These are 

thriving places where all sorts of industry are occurring, all 

sorts of . . . I see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’re anxious for your 

substitute to arrive, but I don’t know . . . I’ll carry on. It’s where 

new industries are springing up all the time and mainly in the 

municipalities that are close or near to urban areas. And you 

know, I’ve been reflecting on this since I became elected and 

looking at the face of rural Saskatchewan since when I was a 

young girl and growing up in rural Saskatchewan. And things 

have definitely changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s an 

exciting time in rural areas. 

 

So the rural municipalities obviously are being caught up in the 

new complexities that the 2010s bring, and this new century. 

And so they have to have the tools they need to be able to 

respond accordingly. And I know in near urban areas, we . . . 

The legislative tool to date has been The Planning and 

Development Act and certainly that has been one that has 

worked successfully for the, you know, potential conflicts that 

can arise when urban municipalities are pushing out into the 

surrounding rural areas. And that’s one of the tools that’s been 

made. And I noticed there’s also another bill being introduced 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3131 

this session to deal with The Planning and Development Act. 

We know things like the Global Transportation Hub put 

extreme pressures not only on the urban municipality and the 

government that has its own needs to deal with, but also with 

the rural municipalities where it’s located, in this case 

Sherwood. 

 

So it’s important that the legislative suite that’s available to 

these municipal governments is responsive and gives them the 

kind of tools they need to be able to respond to the growing 

complexities of rural life. There are many small industries now 

located in rural Saskatchewan. You look at, you know, the 

canola crushing plants and then every time I drive anywhere in 

Saskatchewan I see all kinds of small enterprises taking place 

that you wouldn’t have seen 50 years ago for sure. 

 

And so the demands and the types of services that those 

industries need, or those complex business farms . . . You 

know, even the size of the farm machinery has completely 

changed, and certainly the buildings that are needed and the 

types of power and energy resources that are needed to keep 

these large-scale industrial-type operations operating at peak 

performance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we have increasing sophistication at the municipal 

governance level, and as a result The Municipalities Act itself 

needs to be amended and updated to reflect those kinds of 

changes. Now the rural municipalities Act is a very large Act, 

one of the largest ones in the legislative suite for the province. 

And it actually has almost 500 sections. The current Act is over 

230 pages long. It’s a complex Act and this bill attempts to fix a 

number of portions throughout the Act. 

 

One of the new sections that’s being introduced in the bill is 

part 8 is being added. And I’m just going to pull that up in the 

comments here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s under section 10 of 

The Municipalities Amendment Act, the Act that we’re talking 

about. It’s a new division 8. And this is when I spoke about 

earlier the new definition of additional service areas. This 

division is entitled “Additional Service Areas.” And it talks 

about these extra layers of municipal governance that are 

required where there are areas with additional services being 

required. 

 

So what this does is it gives the RM, or the rural municipal 

council, the authority by bylaw to establish these areas and to 

provide additional services or levels of services that are 

different, much like the definition that I referred to earlier, and 

then “to provide for the ongoing operation and maintenance of 

services and infrastructure in the additional service area that 

were originally funded pursuant to The Planning and 

Development Act . . .” So you can see where’s there a move 

from the types of provisions in The Planning and Development 

Act to now having it dealt with through the rural municipalities 

Act. 

 

The second part of the clause, 48.1(2), goes on to say that the 

RM council shouldn’t establish an additional service area that is 

specific to an individual residential, commercial, industrial, or 

agricultural property. So you can see this isn’t meant to serve 

the needs of one person who happens to start up a business, but 

it should be for a group of businesses or an area that has been 

developed in that sort of fashion. 

Now I’m not sure whether the Global Transportation Hub 

would be one of the areas where this additional service area 

would be required, but it certainly seems it would fit in, or that 

type of arrangement would fit into this new service area. 

 

The next section in this division 8 says that before passing the 

bylaw to establish an additional service area, the council has to 

provide public notice and call a public meeting. There must be 

a certified copy of the bylaw passed and forwarded to the 

minister under subsection (4). And then under subsection (5) it 

deals with the taxation or the fees required to cover the costs. 

So certainly the municipality’s going to want to have the tools 

it needs to provide the additional level of taxation for this type 

of additional service area, which really seems to make a lot of 

sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So that’s one of the . . . One of the main goals of this bill is to 

give the municipalities that tool to add those types of service 

areas to ensure that the sophistication and the layering of 

activity within the rural municipality is ably covered, not only 

within the bylaw authority, but also in the ability of the RM to 

assess the proper fees and levies and taxes on that more 

complex or more sophisticated area of activity within the rural 

municipality. So it’s not intended to cover the whole RM but it 

gives them these tools and these flexible tools to deal with what 

the minister describes in his comments as more urban type 

services. 

 

And I think this really raises the question of, you know, what is 

the role of rural municipalities now, in a day and age where 

there are urban type activities. People are building large homes. 

If you go drive by Saskatoon, every time I drive from 

Saskatoon to Regina, when the roads are somewhat decent, I 

take time to have a quick peek at the beautiful new homes that 

are being established. We have subdivisions that are springing 

up. And obviously the servicing required in those subdivisions 

is not what you would typically think of as activities within a 

rural municipality. It’s very associated to urban activity, so it 

may be a bit of an identity crisis going on for some of these 

RMs that are near urban areas. And certainly they want to be 

able to capture that and provide a better level of service for all 

of their ratepayers. But you know, this kind of amendment 

makes a lot of sense in terms of giving them the tools they 

need. 

 

I guess there’s other things in the minister’s comments about 

requests coming from SARM, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities, and SUMA, and the Saskatchewan urban 

municipalities Act. And these are things relating to, provisions 

related to municipal debt limits. Also the whole idea of these 

new service areas came from SARM itself, so this is a response 

of this government to the needs of the folks that are working in 

those rural communities. 

 

And then at the end — this is basically the end of my comments 

at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this bill — but there’s a 

whole host of small-level amendments that bring some ability 

for consistency, clarity, and revision and understanding, better 

understandings, better elucidations of the clause to make it 

more understandable and useful for the people that are 

interpreting the clauses. 

 

So I think at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would be the 



3132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

extent of the comments I’m going to have on this bill. I know 

that other of my colleagues would like to have an opportunity to 

make a few more comments before we move this over to the 

committee level. So at this point I’m pleased to adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012, 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 74 — The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise again today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 

74, An Act to amend The Cities Act. And I feel like, as I said 

earlier, it’s like déjà vu all over again. In fact this is apparently 

another part of the tool kit, how this government is dealing with 

the rapid growth of development around our cities, and how do 

we plan for that? How do we plan for those changes? And this 

is an important part of that. 

 

Last night I was talking about The Municipalities Amendment 

Act . . . Because when I read the minister’s speech, it’s almost 

identical. It’s almost identical. And I guess that makes sense 

because he’s just talking about the other partners, talking about 

the cities aspect. Last night I was talking about the 

municipalities aspect. So it fits together really well. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And so we’ll take some time before the end of the day to review 

this, and I think it’s important. Clearly this is an issue, and it 

needs to be talked about, that he wanted to note that 

Saskatchewan now has 16 cities. And Warman became the 16th 

just in October. So congratulations to the folks in Warman, the 

16th city. This is exciting news as our communities are 

growing, and this is good news for our province. 

 

And of course this is one that we have to make sure, when we 

have our communities growing at such a rate, that there is 

appropriate planning and there’s appropriate mechanisms to 

make sure that the kind of lifestyle and kind of communities 

that we’ve grown used to in Saskatchewan continue to be that 

case, continue to be that case to make sure that we have 

excellent roads, we have excellent water, we have excellent 

waste management systems, excellent police and security 

systems — all the things that make our communities strong. 

And at the same time we make sure that we honour and respect 

the challenges that are happening in rural Saskatchewan. And 

when this kind of growth happens, it puts pressures on all of us 

in many unintended ways. And so when we have this kind of 

legislation come forward, we want to make sure that it’s done 

in the appropriate manner. 

 

And so this is what the minister brings forward, The Cities 

Amendment Act, and it talks about how we’re going to as a 

province deal with the rapid growth, the extreme pressures that 

we are seeing on the edge of our cities. And of course we want 

to make sure that when we do this — it’s like planning for 

sustainable growth — that we’re also talking about all areas of 

growth, whether it’s in the inner cities, infill, how can we make 

the most . . . And I know in Saskatoon we’re talking about how 

do we plan for growth with the brownfield developments that 

are downtown. 

 

And I know the city has been talking, and it ranges somewhere 

I think between 5 and 10,000 people that they would like to see 

downtown between Idylwyld and 1st and the old city yards, as 

they move out to the edge of the city, because we want to make 

sure our downtown areas are vibrant as well. And I do want to 

highlight that, and we’ll be talking about that in terms of when 

we do our planning to make sure our core community’s as 

strong as possible, that our cities are both compact, that we 

have vibrant downtowns and people are feeling safe and secure 

there, and they receive the services. And we see — and this is a 

challenge even within our school systems where we see the 

challenges of new communities being built on the edge of the 

city demanding new schools — where downtown, some of the 

schools are underutilized, but they can’t be forgotten. They 

have their own challenges, and they have building needs and 

repairs and that type of thing. 

 

And so clearly these are the challenges of growth, and we have 

to make sure that our plans and our supports and resources are 

there and that we don’t take it for granted or that we create what 

they call the doughnut effect in our cities — that everything 

happens on the edge of the cities, and then you’re left with a 

hollowing-out effect in our downtown communities, our core 

communities. That’s a real shame because in many ways that’s 

where the true beauty of our cities are, from my perspective 

anyways. 

 

My home is in downtown Saskatoon in Caswell community, 

but I spend a lot of time downtown here when we’re in the city 

doing our provincial work. And so I think it’s an important 

aspect. So I’m going to have questions about that I think in 

committee, that we talk about not only the growth in the edges 

of our cities but how can we also help mitigate that by planning 

for growth downtown. But there are challenges and particularly 

when it comes to infrastructure. That’s a huge, huge issue. 

 

So the minister talks about the bill wants to do four things. 

First, they want to talk about how to improve the processes 

related to boundary alterations or annexations to make it work 

better for both the cities and the municipalities that are 

involved, and how they would incorporate using the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board to do that growth strategy. And 

I talked at length about that in terms of some of the issues, 

some of the changes to the Municipal Board and what they can 

do or can’t do. And I think that’s important that they’re utilized 

in a fair and appropriate fashion. 

 

Second, they want to respond to requests for amendments for 

consistent authorities and treatments regarding such things, 



April 9, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3133 

matters as unpaid utility charges and trailer home permitting — 

very interesting challenges. And when you got The Cities Act 

up, you’ve opened, you might as well be dealing with some of 

these other issues, and I think that they’re important. 

 

Third, how they can support the intent of agreements of New 

West Partnership and the Agreement on Internal Trade in areas 

such as businesses, business licensing, and municipal 

procurement. 

 

Now one that they haven’t talked about and we would have 

questions about is CETA [Canada-European Comprehensive 

Economic and Trade Agreement], C-E-T-A. And I think that’s 

the European trade agreement. And what are the impacts on this 

as well? I know there’s been a lot of questions raised around 

CETA and what might be the impacts of that. So we would 

have questions around that. Clearly that’s important. It’s 

important that we talk. 

 

And we know that there was some questions, and many of us 

received emails last week from a steel company when they felt 

that they were unfairly treated because they missed out on a 

major contract on a project in Saskatoon. And it was basically 

because when we enter into these agreements that it’s a level 

playing field across Canada. But some provinces haven’t 

entered into them so they can then have preferential treatment 

within their own province but then take advantage of the level 

playing field in the other provinces. That does seem unfair, but 

I guess when we sign the agreements that this is what we’re 

talking about. This is what we have. 

 

And fourthly, address other issue requests from the municipal 

sector to clarify wording and improve consistency in municipal 

administrative matters. And that could talk about education 

property tax reporting, licence fees, and purchasing policies. 

And so as I talked about earlier in terms of The Municipalities 

Act, that there is a process for dealing with boundary issues and 

particularly when one party to the discussion is uncooperative 

and is in fact causing problems just by not dealing with the 

problems at hand. And you know, at one point we do have to, 

we have to come to terms with this. But we do have to make 

sure that we’re not bullying or intimidating; we’re making sure 

that voices are being heard, that they’re being treated with 

respect. 

 

And in this process of having a new time limit on how long a 

municipality must wait for a response on a proposed annexation 

application is a suitable one, and we will have more questions 

on it. So what happens when they respond? Or what happens in 

terms of, is there a process of binding arbitration? We’re not 

sure about that, and we’ll have many questions about that. But 

the idea of requiring mediation before the SMB, the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, makes a lot of sense and so 

that’s very good. And it talks about how the . . . And this is in 

the legislation that’s before the House, clarifying that an 

application may be amended, withdrawn, and all of that type of 

thing. So the SMB becomes much more active. And of course it 

only makes sense because we’re seeing a growth around our 

cities that we haven’t seen in many, many years and so we have 

to be ready for this. So we’re seeing much more of this type of 

thing. 

 

And I think that it is interesting that the issue around city utility 

charges and permitting for trailer homes, something that SUMA 

brought forward so clearly, you know, and I haven’t seen here. 

And it was interesting that the minister, here is what he said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry consulted extensively on these 

amendments with the city sector, including individual 

cities and city officials as well as with SUMA and the 

Saskatchewan Association of City Clerks [and] other 

stakeholder groups . . . 

 

You know, earlier today we were debating the planning 

amendment Act, that Bill 90 that just came out, and he didn’t 

use that phrase. And this government is often very proud of its 

consultation. In fact if they consult — now this is what I said 

earlier but many of you may not have heard this — but if they 

consult with one or just a few, they often use the fact that 

they’ve consulted extensively and we, on this side of the House, 

have come to hear that that’s maybe a bit of a stretch. 

 

And so here they’re talking about that but this is a question 

we’ll have, I know, about Bill 90, one of the tools in this tool 

kit about how to deal with this issue that’s happening on the 

outskirts of our cities and our RMs about how do we make this 

happen. Did they do consultation? But here on this one they 

did, and that’s very, very interesting. But on the other one, they 

were silent and that to me creates a lot of problems, a lot of 

room for some questions. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s questions about 

consultations. But I do want to take a minute to really also 

underline that we are going to be asking questions about what 

does it mean to support the intent of the agreements of New 

West Partnership and Agreement on Internal Trade when it 

comes to municipal procurement, and what are the limits 

around that, particularly when it comes to we’ve heard a lot of 

discussion around water, waste management, that type of thing. 

So what is the limitations, parameters around in municipal 

procurement? That will be I know of interest to many of my 

constituents because obviously they’re hearing a lot of 

discussions about the many trade agreements that this 

government is interested in getting involved in. What are the 

real implications, and is it wise to do that? And do we at the end 

of the day become in an unfortunate circumstance that we wish 

we hadn’t, where we would like to support more of our own 

local businesses but we can’t because we’ve signed on to these 

agreements? That’s really a challenge for all of us. 

 

And so I think that we’ll be having many questions on that and 

we would hope that the minister would be prepared to answer 

those questions because when we go down that line — and this 

has been many years from different agreements, whether it’s 

NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] or the free 

trade agreements — what has been the implication for us? 

 

And so while this seems really straightforward, I think it’s 

going to be an interesting evening when we talk about these all 

together with questions. But I know many of my colleagues 

have comments they want to get on the record. And so with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of Bill No. 

74, An Act to amend The Cities Act. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 



3134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2013 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3103 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3105 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3105 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Public Relations Campaign 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

 Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3106 

 Equal Pay Day 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3106 

 Government Partners With Habitat for Humanity 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3106 

 Melfort Supports Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3107 

 Three Lakes Girls’ Avengers Win Basketball Silver 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3107 

 Social Media Accounts 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3107 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Quality of Care for Seniors 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3107 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3107 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3108 

 Workplace Fatalities 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 

 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Bus Routes 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3110 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3110 

 Testing Standards 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3111 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3111 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Student Loan Forgiveness for Nurses and Nurse Practitioners Program 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3112 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3112 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3113 

  Harrison (Point of Order) ...................................................................................................................................................... 3113 

  Sproule (Point of Order) ........................................................................................................................................................ 3113 

  The Speaker (Point of Order) ................................................................................................................................................ 3113 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3113 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3115 

 Bill No. 89 — The Creative Saskatchewan Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3115 



 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3117 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3120 

 Bill No. 90 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2013 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3120 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3123 

  Wyant (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 3127 

 Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3127 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 3127 

 Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3128 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3130 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3132 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


