




















































Hansard: April 22, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 50A  MONDAY, APRIL 22, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3313 

 April 22, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks, 

colleagues for the leave. It is a special day at the legislature 

today because of the group that I’m able to introduce, and a 

much larger group that was here a little bit earlier on when the 

Minister of Social Services chaired a press conference in an 

announcement about the multi-year wait-list initiative for 

people in our province with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the House will recall that in 2008 

there was a wait-list of 440 names. But much more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, than the names were the people represented 

behind those names and the families represented by those 

names. These were the names of individuals, after all, who have 

intellectual disabilities in our province and who are seeking 

only the dignity of a place to live or perhaps proper 

programming, in some cases it was day programming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today services are in place or in the development 

for every single person on that list, on that list of 440, as well as 

an additional 215 community living clients with emerging 

needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government was able to provide the funding to 

help achieve this. But those who are on the front line, those who 

are providing care, those who are providing programs and 

services for people that have intellectual disabilities are the true 

heroes in all of this. And we want to welcome a representative 

group of that particular team of people that work right across 

the province of Saskatchewan. And so today in your gallery I’m 

happy to introduce Carol Cundall, who’s with Estevan 

Diversified Services and spoke very eloquent today at the event 

here at the legislature, as well as Amy McNeil from the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehab Centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they represent others that have joined them today, 

and there was a large group of both residents and those who 

benefit directly from the programs, to those who are the 

caregivers, those who provide those programs. They are 

committed individuals, to say the very least. They are here 

today to recognize the end of the wait-list. But we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is a process, not an event. 

 

Even in Swift Current where Southwest Homes has seen the 

elimination of their wait-list of 25, we know that there are 

names that are being added to that. And we want to make sure 

we’re vigilant, and that was the counsel we received from those 

I’ve just introduced: that we not stop here, that we monitor the 

list as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to introduce with the group, the 

executive director for the Interlake Human Resources 

Corporation, Deborah Farago; Leanne Zacharias, human 

resources facilitator with SARC [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rehabilitation Centres]; David Ratzlaff, NIT family planner; as 

well as Lynne Demeule, the social associate representative of 

the board of directors for Cheshire Homes of Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

These are true heroes who are on the front line of this initiative. 

We want to welcome them to this Legislative Assembly. We 

want to encourage their vigilance in terms of this particular 

wait-list, and we just want to thank them very much for what 

they do every single day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming this very important group to the 

legislature, individuals who have done so much for so many 

here in the province. We want to say thank you to you for all 

that you have done. And we recognize that while there are few 

in the gallery, they represent many, many people in 

Saskatchewan communities, in large and small Saskatchewan 

communities, doing the work and caring for everyone here in 

the province. 

 

So thank you so much for the work that you do. Without the 

work that you do, either as front-line individuals or in the area 

of advocacy, what government wants to do, needs to do, 

couldn’t be done. So thank you so much for your role here 

today and what you do throughout the year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave for an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the members for the extended introduction. In recognition of 

National Victims of Crime Awareness Week, our government 

has declared April 21st to 27th Victims of Crime Awareness 

Week in Saskatchewan. This is a time to recognize not only 

impacts of crime on people but also the dedication of the people 

who give aid to victims in this province. 



3314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2013 

Today we have in the gallery 10 victim services volunteers who 

are being recognized for the years of support that they have 

given to victims of crime. These people are veteran volunteers 

of the victim services program in their communities, marking 

their 10- and 15-year anniversaries. Mr. Speaker, from Parkland 

victim services, we have Theresa Baumung, Gail Kaban, Anita 

Klochko, Mary Mayer, and Lucille Rezansoff. They are joined 

by Peggy Johnson from Moose Jaw victim services, Andrea 

Staples from northeast regional victim services, and Doug 

Haroldson from the south west victim services. Also in the 

gallery is Gerry Peppler of Yorkton, who is marking her 20th 

anniversary as a volunteer member of the Parkland victim 

services board of directors. 

 

The volunteers here today and nearly 300 others from across 

Saskatchewan are what makes these programs so successful. 

I’m told that last year alone volunteer victim support workers 

gave nearly 11,000 hours to thousands of victims of crime and 

tragedy. Today I was honoured to sit down for lunch with our 

fine guests and join them in commemorating their great service 

to our province and its people. Since becoming Minister of 

Justice, I’ve been consistently impressed when I get the chance 

to meet the victim services volunteers like the guests here 

today. I always come away with the feeling that this hard work 

that these people do reflect in part the true spirit of this 

province. 

 

I’d also like to mention Margaret Minski of Battlefords victim 

services, Mary-Ann Schilling from southeast regional victim 

services, Kathy Button from the northeast regional victim 

services, Noreen Kolback and Sandra Wright of Saskatoon 

victim services. These people are also celebrating their 10- and 

15-year anniversaries. Although they were not able to be here 

with us today, that does not mean that we do not appreciate the 

work that they do. 

 

Saskatchewan is a great place to live and work for many 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, but that does not mean our province is 

perfect. There’s always more that can be done to help victims of 

crime. The Ministry of Justice is committed to giving victims 

the support they need to overcome their challenges and live 

productive, happy lives. 

 

Last year we announced a major expansion of victim services 

that ensures everyone in Saskatchewan can access a variety of 

victim services. I am happy to say that the work on this 

expansion is well under way. We have already opened new 

victim/witness services in both North Battleford and Meadow 

Lake to assist child victims and other vulnerable witnesses who 

must testify in court. Over the next few weeks, victims of crime 

in a number of RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

detachments currently without police-based victim services will 

begin receiving support as this program expands province-wide. 

 

As for our guests, Mr. Speaker, I only ask they continue the 

great work that they have been doing. The time I’ve spent with 

them today only reinforces my faith in how kind-hearted and 

dedicated Saskatchewan’s victim services volunteers are. I had 

a wonderful time with them, and I’m grateful that they came to 

share their achievements with us today. To show our 

appreciation for their efforts, I would ask members to join me in 

applauding our guests for their accomplishments and to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Minister of Justice in welcoming our guests and 

congratulating them on their work. I had the privilege of taking 

over from Minister of Justice Bob Mitchell who started this 

program, and then I spent almost five years working with the 

people, and many of the people that are here today. And at that 

point we weren’t certain whether this was something that would 

continue for the long-term, but we sure believed that it did. And 

it’s very clear, through all the work that you have provided as 

the volunteers, this important service for Saskatchewan people 

is here for the long term. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m especially honoured to be able to introduce 

five individuals seated up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, way up 

at the top row. Mr. Speaker, joining us today here in the 

legislature are four students from the Canora Composite School. 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to introduce Haley Tratch, 

Laura Weinbender, Calvin Kuang, and Kevin Park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also accompanying these four students is teacher 

Simone Achmus. Ms. Achmus is a grade 6 teacher at the 

Composite, but spends a fair amount of her extracurricular time 

ensuring that this Global Vision initiative goes forward. Mr. 

Speaker, with the help of Ms. Achmus, these students were 

recently selected to be a part of Junior Team Canada, a national 

trade mission group. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of the House, I’ll expand 

on that a little later during members statements. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming this great 

group to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’m pleased, 

very pleased to have my wife, April, join with me today and 

come into the gallery. She’s a busy lady. She’s a new city 

councillor for the last six months. Last Saturday she was elected 

to the Wapiti Regional Library board executive. She has a job 

back home, and last night we attended a brilliant Juno Awards 

ceremony. And today happens to be her birthday. So happy 

birthday, April, and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m not 

going to say. I’d like you to make April welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 

for leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 



April 22, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3315 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks to 

the members for allowing the additional time on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce two medical researchers 

from the University of Regina sitting in the Speaker’s gallery 

today. I’ll ask them to wave when I call their names. They are 

Dr. Nick Carleton and Dr. Mohan Babu. Both were awarded 

research funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health 

Research, an organization that supports health researchers and 

trainees across Canada. 

 

Dr. Carleton is using software to help people deal with chronic 

pain. An assistant professor of psychology, Dr. Carleton has 

worked on the development of computer software that can help 

manage pain for people with fibromyalgia in only a few 

minutes a day. This software has been made available to people 

across Canada through the Internet. Dr. Carleton has received 

over $460,000 in funding to support this work over the next five 

years. 

 

Dr. Babu’s research is focused on fighting a number of 

mitochondrial diseases. In Dr. Babu’s words, mitochondria 

generate the majority of a cell’s energy supply and are required 

for a large number of diverse cellular functions. Defects in 

mitochondrial function can cause or contribute to many 

diseases. Dr. Babu, an assistant professor of biochemistry, is 

assembling detailed information about how mitochondria 

function in yeast in an effort to pinpoint the role they play in 

human disease. Funding of $780,000 will support this research 

through the next five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate these researchers for the 

work they are doing and thank them for their contributions to 

health and health care. Their work is a testament to the high 

calibre of research being done at the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members welcome Dr. Carleton 

and Dr. Babu to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming these two impressive research 

academics to their Legislative Assembly, Dr. Carleton and Dr. 

Babu. 

 

Certainly that union between research academics and the 

improving of the quality of life, while at the same time bringing 

important research dollars to the University of Regina, is 

commendable. It goes to improving quality of life generally but 

is a signal to the good work being done on the University of 

Regina campus. So again I’d like to join with the Minister of 

Advanced Education, on behalf of the official opposition, as the 

Advanced Education critic, in welcoming you to your 

legislature, congratulating you, and thanking you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand today to present a petition on cellphone 

coverage for northwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, along with the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations, along with the community of Turnor Lake. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 

come from all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular 

petition, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 

are primarily from Dillon. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we 

know since the employment Act was introduced in December, 

literally hundreds of hours of study have gone into carrying out 

the due diligence. But we also know there’s no labour relations 

crisis to fix, no necessity to rush this omnibus bill through, and 

stable labour relations in all sectors run the risk of being thrown 

into turmoil as a result of Bill 85’s sweeping changes. 

Thousands of represented workers stand to lose their rights to 

bargain collectively and be represented by the union of their 

choice. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from 

Meadow Lake, Loon Lake, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Tisdale, 

Star City, Naicam, Melfort, and throughout the province. Thank 

you so much. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

2013 Juno Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise in the House today to say thank you to all the volunteers, 

organizers, sponsors, and everyone who helped make Juno 

Week such a success. To bring the 2013 Juno Awards to the 

province of Saskatchewan was no small feat. It took dedication, 

time, and commitment of many people, approximately 600 

volunteers, to make the weekend possible. But we realize the 

positive impact the Junos bring to our province, and that is why 



3316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2013 

the people of Saskatchewan worked tirelessly to make this past 

week such a hit. 

 

Juno Week was an opportunity to highlight our province 

Saskatchewan’s music industry, the positive impact music has 

on our quality of life. Junos also offered the opportunity to 

showcase Saskatchewan artists who received exposure and 

publicity that they otherwise would not have received. This 

exposure of local talent is a critical aspect of hosting this 

prestigious event. 

 

Even though the weather put spring on hold, people of 

Saskatchewan attended all the Juno events with enthusiasm and 

excitement. This weekend was loud, and I think many of us can 

still hear the music coming from the downtown Potash Corp 

tent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join me in thanking 

everyone who helped make the 2013 Juno Awards such a huge 

success. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Earth Day 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, as someone who’s committed to 

protecting and caring for the prairies, I’m pleased to be able to 

rise today in the House and recognize Earth Day. Earth Day 

outlines our responsibility as individuals and as a collective in 

protecting the environment for future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, environmentalists come in all shapes and sizes. 

And even though not all of us use that term to describe our 

activities, Saskatchewan has a long history of caring for and 

valuing the natural beauty that surrounds us, whether it’s the 

plains of the South or the trees and lakes of the North. 

Individuals take practical steps to protect and preserve the 

natural world around us. Farmers work to preserve wetlands for 

waterfowl. Ranchers preserve the natural prairie. And many 

households take initiative to recycle and conserve energy. 

 

But the reality of climate change and the growing awareness of 

our ecological footprint demand that governments step up to the 

plate as well. With the 73 per cent cut in climate change and 

environmental initiatives in the last two years, the Sask Party 

government has continued to dodge its responsibility in this 

area. 

 

It’s not enough to utilize green branding and attaching a logo to 

mailouts. We must use common sense solutions and implement 

a real plan to protect the environment. It’s not enough, Mr. 

Speaker, to rely on the actions of individuals. Our governments 

need to back the talk with concrete measures to move forward 

sustainably as responsible stewards of our resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge this government to take action now to 

improve our international reputation, which is now in shambles, 

by implementing concrete programs to reverse the devastating 

effects of carbon on our atmosphere and aggressively reduce 

our overall CO2 emissions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

Students Selected for Junior Team Canada 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to recognize and congratulate 

the special group of four grade 12 students I had the pleasure of 

introducing earlier on this afternoon. These students, Mr. 

Speaker, have recently been selected to Junior Team Canada, a 

trade mission group that sends youth around the world to help 

them develop international business experience. 

 

Junior Team Canada is part of the national, non-profit 

organization, Global Vision. Mr. Speaker, Global Vision was 

founded in 1991 by prominent business, government, and 

educational leaders. The organization is dedicated to providing 

Canadian youth with the skills and experience to become the 

business leaders of tomorrow. 

 

These students will represent Saskatchewan and Canada as 

ambassadors on the upcoming trade mission to China, 

Singapore, and Malaysia this August. After attending a regional 

conference in Winnipeg in February, these students were 

selected to the national team. The students were chosen to travel 

to China, Singapore, and Malaysia, Mr. Speaker, because of 

their enthusiasm and dedication to branding Saskatchewan on 

the world stage. While travelling, the students will meet with 

international business leaders and politicians and make 

presentations aimed at strengthening trade relationships 

between Canada and Asia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate these students for 

being selected and thank them for their dedication and interest 

in developing both Canada and Saskatchewan’s relationship 

with this region. I ask all members to join me in saying 

congratulations and wishing them best of luck in their trip in 

August. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 

National Volunteer Week in Canada and here in Saskatchewan. 

This time is set aside to recognize the work of volunteers across 

Canada and in our province. I’m sure that every member in this 

House has volunteered in their community, whether it was part 

of a political campaign, an event at a local school, or in the 

community in support of an issue in which we believe. 

 

Volunteers in our communities coach teams, deliver meals, 

build homes, and contribute their time in more ways than I 

could list today. Volunteering and commitment to our 

communities is something that unites us as a province and 

speaks to each of us across the diversity that is present in 

Saskatchewan. I’m always amazed at the variety of those who 

are actively volunteering in their communities, from the 

youngest citizen to the oldest and across all cultural 

backgrounds and abilities. 

 

The capacity of our community organizations to support, train, 

and coordinate volunteering in our community is something to 

be commended and valued. Organizations like Volunteer 

Saskatoon and the United Way in Regina help support and 



April 22, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3317 

promote volunteerism across Saskatchewan. Volunteering is the 

backbone of this province, and one of the areas where the 

warmth and generosity of the Saskatchewan people shine. This 

community spirit built this province and continues to shape our 

communities. 

 

I’d like to ask my colleagues to join with me in recognizing 

National Volunteer Week. The generosity of people in 

Saskatchewan in contributing their time and experience to their 

communities is something that we all value and benefit from. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Community Living Wait-List Initiative 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to recognize this morning’s announcement of the 

completion of the multi-year initiative to address the wait-list of 

people with intellectual disabilities who require specialized, 

residential, and/or day programs to meet their needs. 

 

The $62.5 million dollar initiative launched in 2008 represents 

the largest investment in Saskatchewan history in support of 

people with intellectual disabilities. By completing this historic 

initiative, we ensured that some of our most vulnerable citizens 

will receive the services they need in their own communities. 

 

Best practices tell us that people with intellectual disabilities do 

much better in community-based settings, providing them with 

enhanced opportunities to play a full and active role in their 

community. The community living wait-list initiative involved 

support for new, expanded, enhanced, or existing services in 41 

communities across the province; funding for almost 500 new 

staff positions in community-based organizations; and served 

655 clients. That’s 215 more people than our original goal. 

 

The initiative was driven by many of the hard-working Social 

Services staff, and supported by partnerships with the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres, 

Saskatchewan approved private service homes Inc., 

Saskatchewan Housing Corp., and dozens of individual 

community-based organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the wait-list initiative is another example of our 

government’s ongoing commitment to making Saskatchewan 

the best place to live for people with disabilities. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

National Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We don’t yet see many 

daffodils popping up in gardens in Saskatchewan, but they are 

an important symbol of the fight against cancer during April, 

National Cancer Awareness Month. 

 

Today and this month, we should all take a few moments to pay 

tribute to everyone in our great province who faces a cancer 

diagnosis and the friends, family, neighbours, health care 

providers, and volunteers who support them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has increased funding by almost 

$12 million to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency for the 

prevention and early detection of cancer through a number of 

programs and to improve timely access to treatment for an 

increasing number of cancer patients. Mr. Speaker, in addition 

to programs like the human papillomavirus vaccine to prevent 

cervical cancer, we continue our efforts to encourage teenagers 

to remain tobacco free or quit using tobacco. There are also 

many concerted efforts across the province to encourage healthy 

eating habits, regular exercise, and other choices that improve 

personal health and reduce the likelihood of a cancer diagnosis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during national Cancer Awareness Month, we 

acknowledge the work of the many people in Saskatchewan 

who devote themselves to this cause. To all the non-profit 

organizations, their staff, and their volunteers raising money for 

research, prevention, public education, and services for people 

with cancer: your important work is greatly appreciated. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Earth Day 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 

to announce that today is Earth Day. Mr. Speaker, Earth Day 

provides the opportunity for all of us to reflect on the 

importance of our environment. 

 

Our government is moving forward with three new recycling 

initiatives: the multi-material recycling program, the 

agricultural plastic waste program, and the household hazardous 

waste recycling program. The multi-material recycling program 

will divert up to 40 per cent of household waste from landfills. 

When implemented, Saskatchewan will be the first province in 

Canada to have a program of its kind to recycle agricultural 

plastic waste. With organizations such as Sarcan and SARRC 

[Saskatchewan Association for Resource Recovery 

Corporation], the Saskatchewan scrap tire association, and the 

Saskatchewan Waste Reduction Council working hard to run 

recycling programs in our province, we are well on our way to 

becoming a greener Saskatchewan. 

 

Earth Day is another reason to recognize why we have 

undertaken an extensive sampling and monitoring program 

through the boreal watershed management strategy. Never 

before has a government of Saskatchewan taken such a strong 

approach to the protection of our northern lakes. This strategy 

will define areas in the boreal watershed where development 

can and cannot occur. This will help protect the environment 

while facilitating the development and growth of our northern 

resources, improving economic development, and creating job 

opportunities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Health Region Staffing 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In recent weeks 

we’ve heard about home care services being cut, chronic 



3318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2013 

understaffing at seniors’ care facilities, and the possible closure 

of a pediatric oncology ward. None of that is news 

Saskatchewan people expect when our economy is doing as 

well as it is. But that’s the kind of news, Mr. Speaker, that just 

keeps coming. 

 

We received a copy of an internal memo from the Saskatoon 

Health Region that says there will be no overtime and a freeze 

on hiring. The reason for this drastic action is the funding gap 

of $25 million from the budget and the accumulated deficit of 

nearly $70 million. 

 

This directive for no overtime and a freeze on hiring will 

require a substantial casual pool if patient care is not to be 

compromised. So my question to the Premier: has he checked to 

see if the casual pool in the Saskatoon Health Region is 

sufficient to handle this directive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Leader 

of the Opposition for the question. I think it’s important to note 

that in the budget just recently presented in this legislature, that 

members opposite voted against, there was actually an 

additional $40 million in funding for this particular health 

region that we’re talking about. Mr. Speaker, I also think it’s 

important for that member, the Leader of the Opposition and 

other members, to remember as well that this government has 

increased resources to all the health regions so that the 

complement of health care workers — not just nurses and 

doctors, but all health care workers — is significantly higher 

certainly than it was. It’s why we’re able to see progress in 

terms of the surgical wait times initiative. It’s why we’re able to 

see the successful implementation of the patient-first initiative, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As to the member’s question, you know, we have in the health 

region, the board itself and professionals making these 

decisions. They know the mandate from the government is 

patient first, and we expect them to conduct their affairs 

accordingly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my specific question to the 

Premier was whether or not he had checked to see if the casual 

pool is sufficient in order to handle this directive of no overtime 

and the hiring freeze. Front-line health workers, Mr. Speaker, 

tell us that the answer is no, and they’re deeply concerned about 

the implications of this directive. 

 

Last year alone, the Saskatoon Health Region posted over 3,800 

jobs. Now according to the internal memo from the Saskatoon 

Health Region, “no new or replacement positions are to be 

posted until further notice.” Mr. Speaker, you don’t go easily 

from filling thousands of jobs in one year to having a hiring 

freeze, Mr. Speaker. And those on the front lines of our health 

care system, Mr. Speaker, are concerned about the care that 

they provide to our loved ones. It’s their fear, Mr. Speaker, and 

it’s our fear that this will mean, Mr. Speaker, increased 

short-staffing situations and increased situations where people 

fall through the cracks because the level of care is not there that 

is needed. 

My question to the Premier: what assurance can he give 

Saskatchewan people that the cancellation of overtime and the 

freeze on hiring will not affect patient care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, over the last six years, this government has put in 

place budgets — which the members opposite, by the way, have 

voted against each and every one, Mr. Speaker — budgets that 

provide for increases to our regional health authorities. One 

billion dollars in overall increases to the regional authorities in 

those six years: a 46 per cent increase in their budgets, Mr. 

Speaker, historic funding for regional health authorities. 

Regional health authorities have used those budgets, Mr. 

Speaker, to provide for the proper complement of staffing. We 

know that regional health authorities’ staffing levels were up 12 

per cent over those years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The regional health authority of Saskatoon is looking to 

decrease their overtime, Mr. Speaker. Across all health regions 

in Saskatchewan, our health regions paid out close to I believe 

$80 million last year in overtime. They are putting in place a 

process where qualified individuals who are not at overtime 

hours will be assigned hours, will be given the availability of 

hours, Mr. Speaker, to try to get that overtime number down to 

an appropriate level. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s necessary to have the 

adequate casual pool in order to fill the 3,800 jobs that were 

posted by the Saskatoon Health Region last year. By the 

Premier’s non-answer and the lack of details from the minister, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear they have not thought through the 

implications of this decision. 

 

We saw in the legislature recently, Mr. Speaker, when Carrie 

Klassen came and demonstrated what happens, when the proper 

staffing levels are not there, what happens to our loved ones and 

the care that they deserve. We heard, Mr. Speaker, about calls 

not being answered. We heard about situations, Mr. Speaker, of 

seniors being left on the toilet unattended for hours because 

there weren’t enough health care workers there to care for them. 

We heard about seniors missing weekly baths, all because of 

short staffing. And now with the cancellation of overtime, Mr. 

Speaker, and the hiring freeze within the Saskatoon Health 

Region and the fact that last year they posted 3,800 jobs, this is 

all compounding, Mr. Speaker, for a situation that’s very 

concerning for our loved ones who deserve the best possible 

quick care. 

 

My question to the Premier, and a question that many 

Saskatchewan people are asking: at a time when our economy 

remains strong, why isn’t the Sask Party government doing 

enough in order to ensure that our loved ones receive the care 

that they deserve and the care that they need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to be 

very clear with the plan that the Saskatoon Health Region has 

put in place. Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear that no 



April 22, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3319 

overtime does not mean that there will be no coverage for 

patients and for residents, Mr. Speaker. In fact this will go a 

long ways, the region believes, to in fact strengthening the 

casual pool because it will provide for more hours for the casual 

workers rather than giving those overtime hours to individuals 

who have already reached the number of hours that they would 

work that would put them into an overtime situation, Mr. 

Speaker. So it doesn’t mean that there will be no coverage. And 

the health region believes that it will in fact strengthen the 

casual pool. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of positions to be filled or to be 

posted, the region has put in place a process through their 

executive management that will allow for, when positions that 

are deemed to be in high need to be posted, that there will be a 

way for those positions to be posted. So this does not mean that 

there will be, Mr. Speaker, people that do not have the help that 

they need in the region. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Flood Claims 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the delay 

of spring, the whole province is concerned by the flooding that 

could hit our communities. But many people in the province are 

still waiting on their past claims for disaster assistance after 

flooding in 2011 that took so many by surprise, ruining homes, 

businesses, and dreams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government said it set aside money 

to help out with these circumstances but too many past claims 

are outstanding — $60 million worth alone in 2011. To the 

minister: why has the province failed to clean up the claims for 

PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] that are going on 

two years, leaving people’s hopes, dreams, and lives in the 

lurch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

that just simply isn’t the case. From 2010 claims, 98 per cent of 

the 2010 claims are completed and the files closed, Mr. 

Speaker. From 2011, 85 per cent are closed, Mr. Speaker, 

roughly half from last year, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk about PDAP and you look at the 

process that this government has instituted, we’ve made 

remarkable improvements to coverage compared to the 

members opposite when they were in government. Mr. Speaker, 

personal deductibles under the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

was 20 per cent; under this government, 5 per cent. Maximum 

coverage under the NDP, $160,000; under this government, 

$240,000. Mr. Speaker, we have the maximum assistance levels 

are higher, the deductibles are lower, and the response time is 

much, much quicker than under the NDP. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure the minister 

knows his file but the answer from his ministry staff is that $59 

million is outstanding. And that’s in the response on a written 

question he can reference. 

 

And one of those people that’s waiting is Sheila Acton who’s 

waiting for her circumstance to be cleaned up. She developed 

her dream of running a small business, a small resort on 

Katepwa, and was ready to operate and was booked up when 

her dreams were crushed in spring 2011 by flooding that 

structurally devastated her property and left her unable to 

operate. 

 

Ms. Acton followed up with all the right steps. She had an 

adjuster from PDAP visit her property, filled out the forms, had 

a structural engineer and contractor provide reports. And she 

shared that she was reassured by PDAP staff all the way 

through that she’d be taken care of and that she met the criteria. 

Despite this, Ms. Acton is still waiting. She’s lost two years of 

business. Her PDAP claim is yet to be finalized. Her dream 

project sits rotting on the shore of Katepwa . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Will the member get to his question, please. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — With her project, Mr. Speaker, I would 

ask the minister, why would the Sask Party government treat 

people like Ms. Acton, an entrepreneur here in Saskatchewan, 

with the kind of delay tactics that we’ve seen instead of 

providing timely response for the claims that matter in their 

lives and businesses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

government has a great deal of concern and sympathy for 

people who have lost their houses or their businesses to natural 

disasters such as floods. I’m not aware of the specifics of the 

particular situation the member opposite has described, but I 

certainly will have our officials look into the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to his rather lengthy preface, the part about the 

$59 million, if the member would read further into the written 

questions, he would see that the vast majority of those dollars 

are owed to municipalities. They’re for large infrastructure 

projects, Mr. Speaker, for instance roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have paid out a great deal in claims to 

municipalities for issues such as roads. But here’s the situation, 

Mr. Speaker. Advance payments go out, but we can’t complete 

the claim until the road’s actually built, and in some instances 

they’re still under water. The NDP might think they can walk 

on water, Mr. Speaker, but you can’t build roads that are under 

water. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on top of the delay of over 

two years, just a few weeks ago the Sask Party changed the 

process on the file — a surprise for Ms. Acton. The Sask Party 

sent an out-of-province Alberta contractor to do a second 

review. Mr. Speaker, Ms. Acton shared that the contractor told 

her as he looked around the property that she could just simply 

rent a hydraulic jack on her own instead of waiting for PDAP. 

And he said she could do it herself for only $10,000. 



3320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, such a claim is ludicrous. Her property has been 

assessed a total writeoff. The whole point of the disaster 

assistance program is to help people in need when disaster 

strikes, in a timely way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister assure the House today that Ms. 

Acton’s claim will get immediate action and settlement with no 

more dragging of feet, and will he condemn the approach of his 

contractor? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again as I said, 

our government is very concerned about individuals who have 

lost homes or businesses. That’s why we made the 

improvements we did to the PDAP system, Mr. Speaker. As I 

mentioned earlier to the member, I’m not aware of the 

particulars of that individual case, but I’ll certainly bring that up 

with my officials, have them contact Ms. Acton, and see what 

we can do to rectify the situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I would just mention, we’ve made a great 

deal of improvements. Under this government, maximum 

assistance levels are much higher than they were under the 

NDP, deductibles are lower than they were under the NDP and, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve made remarkable improvements in how 

quickly payments are made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s put this in perspective. A number of years 

ago when Vanguard flooded, Mr. Speaker, the NDP response 

when they were in government, they sent a guy out with a 

clipboard and asked him to write a report. No assistance at all, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the treatment of Ms. Acton 

through this two-year delay process by that government is 

neither fair nor acceptable. The surprise additional review by 

that government’s out-of-province contractor is bizarre. Ms. 

Acton shared that not only did he tell her just to rent a jack and 

do it herself, he showed up and told her that the province was 

broke, out of money, and that she wouldn’t be paid out. Up to 

this point, Ms. Acton had been reassured by PDAP that she’d be 

fully covered. 

 

You can only imagine the stress and heartache of being told 

she’d be left out in the cold after two years of looking for a 

settlement. And before that government’s contractor left her 

property, he told Ms. Acton he was headed for Moose Jaw next 

to change a $50,000 concrete claim to only $5,000. 

 

How does that minister condone this unprofessional, unfair 

process to undermine claims? Will he condemn those actions 

today and will he finally step up and show some leadership to 

settle the claims of Ms. Acton and all those other outstanding 

claims here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned on several 

occasions previously, we will look into the matter. I’m not 

aware of the specifics, but if an independent contractor said 

that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll investigate that as well. Mr. Speaker, I 

can only surmise that if he’d said something ridiculous like, the 

government’s broke, maybe he was confusing these days with 

days when the NDP were in government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the line of questioning is just absolutely bizarre. 

Mr. Speaker, I told that member we take these cases very 

seriously. We will have our officials investigate it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, under this 

government PDAP is considered much more seriously. We have 

quicker response times, lower deductible. We’ve increased the 

maximum assistance rate. Mr. Speaker, this government will 

take no advice from the members opposite on how to manage a 

natural disaster. Mr. Speaker, their 16 years in government was 

a disaster. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Conference Sponsorship and Crown Corporation 

Advertising 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

today’s SaskTel International document, something seemed to 

be missing, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party government has failed 

to use today’s report to showcase how the people of 

Saskatchewan have benefited from a $75,000 sponsorship to an 

IT [information technology] conference last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that $75,000 was on top of a $35,000 sponsorship 

by Enterprise Saskatchewan and $25,000 from SaskPower for 

the same conference. That’s $135,000 of Saskatchewan 

taxpayer money, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister Responsible for 

SaskTel International: why did his annual report leave out an 

explanation of what SaskTel International got out of the WCIT 

[World Congress on Information Technology] or even any 

mention of the expensive sponsorship, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about that 

conference on the floor of the House before. What I would say 

though is that the conference was made up of delegates from 

around the world. SaskTel International operates outside of the 

borders obviously — that’s why it’s called SaskTel 

International — and deals with a number of these companies, 

Mr. Speaker. It was an excellent way to put the resources that 

SaskTel can offer, such as consulting and software packages, on 

display for their international customers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can check into what came from the conference as 

far as specific contracts, although that’s getting into some pretty 

fine detail, Mr. Speaker. We know that when SaskTel 

International has worked around the world, it is sometimes 

garnered through a conference but quite often through work that 

it’s done and other jurisdictions find out about it, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ll be interested to see what the next question will be. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 



April 22, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3321 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, in today’s annual document, it 

shows $780,000 in earnings for the important Crown 

corporation last year. And it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government saw fit to spend 10 per cent of those earnings on 

one conference in Montreal. It’s also amazing, Mr. Speaker, 

that SaskTel International was the only telecommunications 

company that was a platinum sponsor for this out-of-province 

conference. Mr. Speaker, those sponsorships came on top of 

staff time and per diems, hotels, flights, and other costs, and it 

came at a cost of 10 per cent of the total earnings of SaskTel 

International. 

 

Mr. Speaker, could the government offer more than platitudes 

to explain this platinum sponsorship? Can the minister explain 

exactly how much was spent on this Montreal conference and 

what the people of Saskatchewan got out of the Sask Party’s 

platinum sponsorship? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel, as I said, 

contracts around the world — SaskTel International — and 

some years it will contract more than other years. 

 

This year SaskTel International’s revenues were down 

compared to the previous years of roughly about $2.6 million, 

Mr. Speaker. But that is the nature of the industry that SaskTel 

International is in, Mr. Speaker. There are years where they 

garner a number of contracts. For about two or three years, they 

had a large contract; that’s why the revenues were up. This past 

year, the revenues have dropped a little bit. That doesn’t mean 

that you don’t continue to advertise and make sure that the 

international community understands what services and 

products SaskTel International has to offer. 

 

I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that on an overall annual 

report of revenues of over $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member opposite would key in on one specific area of 700,000. 

Mr. Speaker, obviously the rest of SaskTel is doing very well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder if the 

Saskatchewan Party government really understands today’s 

telecommunication business and the important Crown 

corporation that they operate. 

 

They hand over hundreds of thousands of dollars for a 

conference but can’t explain the benefits. Mr. Speaker, one has 

to wonder if the Sask Party was intentionally bleeding expenses 

out of SaskTel International. This conference alone ate up 10 

per cent of the Crown’s income for that year. Mr. Speaker, one 

has to wonder if the whole intent is to set up SaskTel 

International to be privatized. 

 

To the minister: will the Sask Party government be straight with 

the public? Will the Sask Party government come clean and 

explain its plans for SaskTel International? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve answered 

the question as best as I possibly can. You know, they will have 

contracts. Sometimes those contracts end, and before they get 

another contract, Mr. Speaker, you’ll see the revenues drop. 

Absolutely. That doesn’t mean that you pull back and don’t do 

advertising or at least promote the company, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SaskTel International, over the last number of years, has made a 

large profit. This year it was down a little bit. That would be the 

only part of SaskTel I would think that has dropped down. We 

know that the revenues are up. We know the profit is up for 

SaskTel. I think SaskTel is a little bit of a reflection of the 

province. We see the number of people moving into . . . the 

population increasing, Mr. Speaker, which then creates more 

usage of cellphones, data services. We have seen a good, strong 

year for SaskTel as a whole corporation, Mr. Speaker, and we 

expect it to do very well because of the investment that SaskTel 

is making into infrastructure into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Protecting the Environment 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, today is Earth Day, and people 

throughout Saskatchewan and throughout the country are 

demanding better environmental protection. They’re concerned 

about the serious neglect of the environment that we’re seeing. 

The federal government has all but given up on the fight against 

climate change. They’ve removed 99 per cent of . . . of 

protection from 99 per cent of our waterways, and they’ve 

seriously undermined environmental assessment. 

 

Here at home, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has slashed funding 

for both environmental protection, environmental assessment. 

And just over the last two years, they’ve cut funding for climate 

change programs by 73 per cent. My question to the Premier: 

why did his government cut funding for environmental 

protection, environmental assessment, and programs to fight 

climate change? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Thanks to 

the Leader of the Opposition for the question. His preamble is 

wrong. Mr. Speaker, we know that, I think, one of the largest, 

one of the largest Canadian projects with respect to greenhouse 

gas emission reduction, with respect to climate change on a per 

capita basis in terms of public investment, you won’t find it, 

that project, in Ontario or you won’t find it in Manitoba or even 

in Alberta with their, with their own fund, their carbon tax and 

their CCS [carbon capture and storage] projects. You’ll find it 

right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I haven’t heard word one except for some muted criticism 

from the NDP about the clean coal project that’s going on at 

Boundary dam, about a $1.3 billion project, Mr. Speaker, on 

time and on budget to capture 96 per cent CO2, all the other 

emissions in terms of particulates taken care of. The sale of the 

CO2 for enhanced oil recovery and then the geological storage 

of that CO2, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the most significant CO2 

mitigation projects you’d find, not just in Canada, but in North 

America. It’d be nice to hear the Leader of the Opposition 

acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. 



3322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago the Premier was 

in Washington desperately trying to make the case for our 

province’s environmental record. He talked about the need to 

“give them as much environmental elbow room as possible.” 

 

Then the Premier, Mr. Speaker, got back on his plane, came to 

Saskatchewan, delivered a budget, Mr. Speaker, that cut 

funding for environmental protection. He cut funding for 

environmental assessment and he cut funding for programs to 

address climate change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on the one hand, trying to show the importance of 

Saskatchewan’s environmental record needs to be shared and is 

important. Coming back, Mr. Speaker, to the province, and then 

cutting programs. Then on the issue of renewable energy, Mr. 

Speaker, the other night in committee, the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana asked the government about plans for 

moving to renewable energy. And what we heard from the 

government, Mr. Speaker, was that it’s a fallacy and a 

misconception to think that we can greatly improve the 

sustainability of our electrical system. 

 

My question to the Premier: why would he return to the 

province saying that the environmental record is important and 

then so clearly demonstrate that it’s not a priority by cutting 

programs and also showing that there is no interest, Mr. 

Speaker, in positively moving to renewable energy here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the Leader of the Opposition got at 

least one thing right in that preamble. We were in Washington, 

Mr. Speaker. We actually flew economy there and back. But, 

Mr. Speaker, we were raising the environmental record of not 

just our province but the country, Mr. Speaker, to try to get 

support for Keystone. 

 

He might want to turn his chair and ask his environmental critic 

who just last Thursday reversed the NDP’s support for 

Keystone. After they had opposed it, then supported it — he 

had supported it — she’s now opposing it again, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s pretty interesting. 

 

We also wanted to go down to Washington to let the Americans 

know that in terms of being serious about climate change and 

GHG [greenhouse gas], the province was doing a lot better now 

than it ever was under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. During the 

NDP’s term in office, when that member was very supportive of 

NDP policy, we saw a 70 per cent increase in greenhouse gas 

emissions, Mr. Speaker. That’s why Yens Pedersen, former 

NDP leadership candidate said, “We came out of government 

for the last 16 years and we hadn’t reduced carbon emissions or 

reduced poverty, and we are the socialist party.” By the way, he 

used this quite freely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what his own members are saying about his 

policies. He’s opposed to cutting programs and defunding 

offices without any people, Mr. Speaker. We’re in favour in 

investing money in the largest CO2 project in the country. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 420 and 421. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 420 and 421. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this afternoon and this 

evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:25.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3313 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3313 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3313 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3314 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3314 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3314 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3315 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3315 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3315 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3315 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2013 Juno Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3315 

 Earth Day 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3316 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

 Students Selected for Junior Team Canada 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3316 

 National Volunteer Week 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3316 

 Community Living Wait-List Initiative 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3317 

 National Cancer Awareness Month 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Region Staffing 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3318 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3318 

 Flood Claims 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3319 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3319 

 Conference Sponsorship and Crown Corporation Advertising 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3320 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3320 

 Protecting the Environment 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3321 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3321 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3322 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


