




















































Hansard: May 02, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 57A  THURSDAY, MAY 2, 2013, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3427 

 May 2, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll ask your 

indulgence to make two introductions this morning. Firstly, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce a group of cattle industry 

representatives seated in your gallery. They are with the 

Cattlemen’s Young Leaders program, which is a program 

administered by the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association. I won’t 

introduce them each by name, but there are many familiar faces 

up there. 

 

The Cattlemen’s Young Leaders program provides support to 

the leadership skills of our young cattle producers by providing 

opportunities for them to learn from existing industry leaders. It 

is a very valuable and successful program, and it helped to 

model our own youth leadership and mentorship program 

which I announced this morning. 

 

I will have the opportunity to meet with this group later today. I 

want to thank these representatives for their work in the cattle 

industry and I ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 

their Assembly. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also want to 

introduce Dr. Roger Beachy, CEO [chief executive officer] and 

executive director of the Global Institute for Food Security, 

accompanied by deputy minister of Agriculture, Alanna Koch. 

Dr. Beachy is a world-renowned scientist and researcher. 

Before accepting the position at the global institute, Dr. Beachy 

was the chief scientist at the United States Department of 

Agriculture. He has also worked on research projects that led to 

the development of the world’s first genetically modified food 

crop, was the first director of the US [United States] National 

Institute of Food and Agriculture and was the founding 

president of the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center in Saint 

Louis, Missouri. 

 

We are very fortunate to have attracted such a respected and 

dedicated leader to the helm of this important institute. We 

were proud to fulfill our election and growth plan commitment 

to establish a Global Institute for Food Security with our 

partners, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Saskatchewan. We know this institute, under Dr. 

Beachy’s leadership, will play a valuable role in helping our 

producers provide safe, reliable food to a growing world 

population. I ask all members to join me in welcoming Dr. 

Beachy to this honourable Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I too would like to rise and welcome 

the young leaders to our Assembly today. The work that they 

do we know will be important for the future of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. I would like to welcome all the farm leaders 

here as well. 

 

And in particular, I would like to extend a special welcome to 

Dr. Beachy on behalf of the opposition. We all know the 

importance of food security globally and we look forward to his 

leadership to lead Saskatchewan into the future as far as food 

security goes. So on behalf of the opposition, I would like to 

welcome all these guests today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 

I’m pleased to stand to welcome today 24 grade 4 students from 

the Wadena Elementary School. Maybe give us a wave up 

there. Thank you. 

 

Now Wadena, of course, is in the Kelvington-Wadena 

constituency but their MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], the hon. minister, asked me to introduce the . . . 

You learn something new every day, Mr. Speaker. They are 

accompanied today by their teacher, Lindsey Harvey; by their 

principal, Nevin Halyk; and by chaperones Bonnie Sowa, Lisa 

Ochitwa, and Korey Murray. And I’d like all members to make 

these students welcome to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to introduce to you and through you some very 

important people. Mr. Speaker, I have with me today many 

members of my executive at Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, the 

Saskatchewan Party executive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have with us — and if you would stand and 

wave — vice-president, Morgan Rock; we have secretary, 

Bonnie Poissant; treasurer, Rocky Poissant. And then we have 

officers Nick Dhaliwal, Lisa Brewster, Malkit Sidhu, Katherine 

Gagne accompanied by her daughter Victoria Gagne, and Kelly 

Zazula. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to have them here 

today. I know after the redistribution of the boundaries, Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley will be known as Regina Rochdale. So it 

gives me great pleasure to be able to acknowledge the hard 

work that the executive has done. They’re going to be touring 

the building and then we will be getting together to have lunch 

this afternoon. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I’d like to introduce three guests who are 

seated on the floor of the Assembly, Ronnie, Jennifer, and 

Devon Birns who have joined us here in the Chamber to watch 

the proceedings of question period today. So I’d ask all 

members to welcome these guests to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 



3428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you, I would like to also introduce a group of grade 4 

students from Connaught School in North Battleford — kids, 

give us a wave up there, please — in the west gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you remember this class. This is the class 

that you attended on your tour last January when you came to 

The Battlefords, and we appreciate you doing that. They’re a 

fine group of students, and I’m looking forward to meeting with 

them later this morning. They’re accompanied today by their 

teacher, Lindsay Anderson, and Allyson L’Heureux and 

Ashraff Ogram. And I’m looking forward to having an 

opportunity to answer some questions for them later on this 

morning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with members opposite and welcome our 

cattlemen that are here today, and our agricultural leaders. I 

know we met with the cattlemen just maybe two weeks ago, 

Mr. Speaker. It was a enlightening discussion, a good 

discussion — also some of the best prime rib, Saskatchewan 

prime rib that we’ve had for some time. Thank you so much for 

that. Thank you for the leadership in the province. 

 

I’d also like to point out someone who was once a former . . . 

someone who was quite fierce on the football team for both I 

believe the Rams and the Thunder. That’s Mr. Jeff Yorga, who 

hails from southwest Saskatchewan. It’s a pleasure to see Jeff 

here today. He’s an agricultural leader in our province. And I 

don’t know that our politics necessarily are the same. He was a 

left tackle, though, I believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I see just at the end of that same row a good friend from 

the gym that’s been introduced by the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle. I welcome Morgan to his Assembly, a very strong 

entrepreneur in our province. And I always enjoy our 

discussions at the gym. We certainly find areas of agreement 

and sometimes areas of debate. It’s a pleasure to welcome all 

these individuals to their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling for better seniors’ care here in the 

province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 

including creating more spaces and more choices for 

seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 

facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 

appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and 

providing more support to help seniors remain 

independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased today to stand up and present a petition for 

northwestern Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we have been 

presenting petitions for a number of months now, and this 

particular petition is in relation to the area near Dore Lake and 

Sled Lake. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To undertake as soon as possible to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the northern hamlet of Dore Lake, 

located in northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition are primarily from 

Dore Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to the 

Legislative Assembly today from citizens from various parts of 

the province. Northern Saskatchewan is being targeted by the 

Nuclear Waste Management Organization to become a storage 

site for millions of used irradiated nuclear fuel bundles. These 

radioactive nuclear bundles would be shipped on provincial 

highways. Some provinces have already banned the storage or 

transport of used nuclear bundles. I present you the petition: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly pass legislation to 

permanently ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

of nuclear waste into, out of, and through Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Southend, 

Pelican Narrows, Prince Albert, Sandy Bay, Peter Ballantyne 

Cree Nation, James Smith First Nation, and other communities 

in Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition asking for the repaving, repairs, and maintenance of the 

northern road, Highway 102 from La Ronge to Sucker River. 

This road is the major highway used by busing transportation of 

our students to school, tourism for camping and fishing, and by 

the mining and forestry industry. Mr. Speaker, people are very 

concerned for their safety. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the repair and 

maintenance on the La Ronge northern road, Highway 

102, is important to northern residents and must be 

undertaken immediately. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3429 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Essential Services 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in 

question period we asked the Premier to delay passage of Bill 

85 and we offered to work together co-operatively to address 

problems in the bill, including working out a fair essential 

services section. This has been our consistent, common sense 

approach. 

 

Now I know that Sask Party MLAs all have a copy of A Rooted 

and Growing Vision report which was endorsed by our party in 

2011. So I invite them to turn to page 41 and read along. It says 

very clearly that we should repeal Bill 5, the public services 

public essential services Act. And then in big bold letters it says 

that we should, and I quote, “develop an essential services 

policy that is respectful and actually works.” 

 

Page 41 of the report goes on to outline the many problems 

with the Sask Party government’s approach to essential 

services. And it concludes by saying the government should 

“work together with all parties to develop a new approach to 

‘essential services’ that makes sense, is respectful to all 

involved and ensures the provision of needed services.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what you get with the 

Saskatchewan NDP [New Democratic Party] team, a consistent, 

no surprises, common sense approach that will always put the 

interests of Saskatchewan people first. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Regina’s Youth Week Celebration 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in this Assembly today to share an event that’s going on in 

Regina tomorrow. Tomorrow evening the North Central 

Community Association is putting on Regina’s Youth Week 

celebration at the Albert Scott Community Centre, hosted by 

CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Regina’s Creeson 

Agecoutay and Kim Wenger from Newo Yotina Friendship 

Centre. This event will feature an exciting mixture of live 

music, dance, and other great performances. It’s a great 

opportunity for all people of all ages to get out and celebrate 

Regina’s youth. 

 

Street Culture Kidz project, in partnership with Street Culture 

Studios, will also be performing at the event. Street Culture 

Studios was incepted seven months ago and began producing 

music and videos shortly afterwards. It was developed as an 

engagement tool to connect street-entrenched, gang-affiliated 

youth with an outlet to express themselves in an alternative to 

gang and street life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to spread 

the word about this great event and join me in thanking 

organizers, sponsors, performers, and hosts for making 

Regina’s Youth Week celebration what is sure to be a great 

success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

National Youth Arts Week 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, May 1st, 

was the start of National Youth Arts Week. Two weeks ago, on 

April 19th, I had the privilege of attending a media launch 

which introduced the Saskatoon team that would be 

coordinating a series of local events recognizing National 

Youth Arts Week. This project is in partnership with SCYAP, 

or Saskatoon Community Youth Arts Programming, which will 

act as a venue for many of the events, and generously supported 

by the Michaëlle Jean Foundation and Affinity Credit Union. 

 

The range of events taking place in Saskatoon is absolutely 

astounding. There’s everything from spoken word workshops to 

hip hop to a project where participants will write and perform a 

play in one day. 

 

One of the events that I’m most interested in is Make Food, 

Make Music taking place in my constituency at the Core 

Neighbourhood Youth Co-op. This event will combine music 

with making bannock and soup. 

 

The youth coordinators have created events which are 

non-traditional, accessible, and inclusive. Right now 

participants will just be finishing up a 24-hour artathon that 

they started yesterday at noon. 

 

The energy and creativity behind the events this week are a 

fabulous youth team: Grace Schenher, Samantha Katherine 

Braun, Melissa Gan, Chelsea Guest, Andrea Paige Cessna, 

Zoey Roy, and Muskwa Lerat. That is the youth team in 

Saskatoon. 

 

This project encourages youth to participate in the arts and 

make a difference in their communities. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask 

that all members join me in recognizing National Youth Arts 

Week and encouraging our young constituents to take part in 

events in their communities. I want to congratulate the 

coordinators and all the volunteers that are working on the 

many activities taking place throughout Saskatchewan. Thank 

you. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

North Battleford Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 1st 

marked the 100th anniversary of North Battleford becoming a 

city. I was pleased to be able to attend that celebration along 

with my colleague from Cut Knife-Turtleford and the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

At one time, Mr. Speaker, North Battleford was dubbed the 

fastest growing centre in the West, and no wonder. We became 

a village on March 21st, 1906 and a short four months later we 

became a town status. And then on May 1st, 1913, we were 



3430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

declared a city. And worthy of note here, Mr. Speaker, we were 

the first city declared by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The official ceremonies began at 4 p.m. in Centennial Park with 

congratulatory messages from several dignitaries. The 

celebration then continued on at our beautiful Dekker Centre 

for Performing Arts at 5:30 with a formal reception and dinner. 

This was certainly a great day to feature our new CUplex. The 

event concluded with some excellent entertainment from the 

stage of the Dekker Centre. 

 

I was certainly thrilled to be part of the momentous occasion 

and to share in the pride that all residents feel because they 

know that they live in the greatest city in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in congratulating 

the citizens of the city of North Battleford on their 100th 

anniversary, and I wish them great success and prosperity for 

the next 100 years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Lashburn Sportsplex Mortgage Burning 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday, April 

27th, I had the pleasure of attending the Lashburn Sportsplex 

mortgage burning event where we celebrated the facility being 

officially debt free. 

 

In February of 1999, the first town hall meeting was held in 

Lashburn regarding a new sportsplex and the community 

voiced their overwhelming support. Local volunteers carried 

out fundraising projects including raffles, serving at weddings, 

applying to foundations, door-to-door fundraising, working 

farm land, hosting hockey tournaments, and many more. 

 

In December 2008, the facility was completed and opened at an 

estimated cost of $5.4 million. Because the sportsplex is now 

debt free, they are presently looking at developing the upstairs 

of this important local facility. 

 

On Saturday evening, CN [Canadian National] Rail 

unexpectedly donated $300,000 and the facility will now be 

named the CN Sportsplex. Mr. Speaker, this facility provides 

sports and recreation for the whole family. People from the 

surrounding communities of Maidstone, Marshall, Hillmond, 

and Lloydminster come to use the sportsplex. As those of us 

from rural Saskatchewan may know, facilities such as this are 

often the hub of our communities, and it was humbling to see 

the community pride last Saturday evening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

congratulating the sportsplex community and all those who 

have donated or supported this project. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

KidSport Month 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 

in this Assembly today to recognize that May has been 

proclaimed KidSport Month in Saskatchewan. Yesterday on 

behalf of the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport, I had the 

honour of speaking at the KidSport Month launch at Kitchener 

School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased whenever I get a chance to talk 

about sports, as I believe it plays an essential role in our 

province. KidSport Month promotes and raises awareness and 

funds for KidSport, an organization that reduces financial 

barriers so all young people have access to the benefits sport 

offer. Since 1995, KidSport in Saskatchewan has raised more 

than $7.2 million and assisted more than 98,000 young athletes 

to make sure no kid is left on the sidelines. 

 

Like KidSport, our government works to improve access to 

sport and recreation in any way we can, which is why we offer 

families the active families benefit, a fully refundable tax 

benefit that helps parents cover the costs of registering their 

kids in sport, culture, and recreational activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in recognizing this 

great organization, and I hope everyone enjoys a happy, active 

KidSport Month. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Economic Growth in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

with great pride I stand in this House to say, I love 

Saskatchewan, but apparently I’m not alone. The head of the 

Conference Board of Canada apparently has pretty strong 

feelings about our province. 

 

The Conference Board estimates that Saskatchewan’s economy 

grew by 2.9 per cent for 2012 and will grow by 3 per cent in 

2013, the second highest growth rates among the provinces for 

both years. 

 

Conference Board director Mario Lefebvre says our historic 

growth is “the new normal” and that we can expect it to 

continue because our economy “. . . has a lot to offer.” He went 

on to declare, and I quote, “You’re there. It is happening. It’s 

now and it’s your new reality.” 

 

Mr. Lefebvre isn’t alone. We just learned that there is a whole 

RM [rural municipality] in Manitoba that wants to become part 

of Saskatchewan. And why not? We have a lower PST 

[provincial sales tax], lower income tax, and a better football 

team. What’s not to like, Mr. Speaker? Go Riders. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the Premier’s 

slick announcement last week in which he tried to convince 

Saskatchewan people that program wait-lists for people with 

intellectual disabilities have been eliminated, we have heard 

from several families who are outraged and say that’s simply 

not true. They have loved ones with intellectual disabilities who 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3431 

have been waiting and waiting for residential or day programs 

to meet their needs, and they’re still waiting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my question to the Deputy Premier: has he heard from any 

families about people with intellectual disabilities who are still 

waiting for services? And why did the Sask Party say that the 

wait-list had been eliminated? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was indeed 

appalled when I became the minister of Social Services and 

found out that we had so many people waiting on a list for 

supports that had children or adults with disabilities, Mr. 

Speaker. So I initiated the 440 wait-list initiative, quite frankly, 

and our government supported it wholeheartedly with a record 

high amount of money that’s ever been spent for individuals 

with disabilities. 

 

The 440 wait-list at that time, of course, now would be five 

years. And was there an emergent wait-list coming behind it? 

Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. So you know, the wait-list that was 

there five years ago is what we refer to as the 440 wait-list. 

There will be others that will come onto the wait-list, and we 

can assure them we will work with them and try to find 

appropriate placement for those families. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Craig Bayliss lives in 

Herbert. He has a 24-year-old son who requires 24-7 care due 

to intellectual disabilities and significant mental health 

challenges. Craig has gone to the Premier’s office in Swift 

Current at least four separate times since March because he and 

his wife are desperate for help. They need a group home 

placement for their son because they are unable to care for him 

due to their own health challenges. 

 

But despite those repeated visits, Mr. Speaker, Craig received 

no assistance. Craig’s son has been waiting for a group home 

placement for two years. Craig said, “I should not have to fight 

for help for my intellectually challenged son when things are 

going well in our province.” 

 

I appreciate that the Premier is busy, Mr. Speaker, but he has a 

lot of staff and the entire public service to rely on. So it’s not 

acceptable for a father’s pleas for help for his son with 

intellectual challenges to go unanswered, Mr. Speaker. My 

question to the Deputy Premier: why has Craig Bayliss been 

ignored despite repeated visits to the Premier’s office, and what 

is he going to do to help Craig’s son today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we will definitely 

arrange for someone, immediately following question period, to 

meet with Craig and his family. Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure the 

members opposite can appreciate, the group home space has 

been increased quite considerably in Swift Current, and the 

original 440 wait-list has been eliminated. But as I said, there 

are emergent families then, that their children come on the 

wait-list, or they’ve moved to the community and they have 

children with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again as everyone can appreciate, it takes some 

time to develop space, and it takes a community-based 

organization that’s going to support that group home. So all of 

those things must be put in place. But as I said, we’ll have 

someone meet with this family and discuss their particular 

issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when Saskatchewan people hear 

about Craig Bayliss showing up at the Premier’s office four 

separate times seeking assistance and receiving no help at the 

same time as the Premier’s holding a fancy news conference, 

Mr. Speaker, pretending that all is well for people with 

intellectual disabilities, there’s a disconnect with those two 

messages. 

 

But it’s not just Craig’s son, Mr. Speaker, who’s being left 

behind by the Sask Party government. It’s also Jennifer Birns’s 

brother. Jennifer and her brother are here today. She wrote to 

my office saying, “They claim to have eliminated the waiting 

list for Saskatchewan and provided services to every 

intellectually disabled person who currently does not have 

services. I do not understand how the Brad Wall government 

can make a statement that is any farther from the truth.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jennifer’s brother was put on a wait-list for day 

programming in 2006, not an emergent case. So when Jennifer 

read the headlines about wait-lists for intellectually disabled 

people being eliminated, she was actually shocked, Mr. 

Speaker, because she knows that’s not true. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: why did the Sask Party 

government ignore Jennifer’s brother when they said that the 

wait-lists have been eliminated, and what is the Deputy Premier 

going to do to help Jennifer’s brother today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the 440 wait-list 

was for space . . . homes. And so day programs have also been 

quite considerably expanded, and we’ll have someone meet 

with this family and discuss their particular case. 

 

But what we don’t want to see happen in this province, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, is to go back to the days where that 

wait-list went up to 440. We do not deny that there has been a 

wait-list that has emerged beyond the 440 wait-list. We totally 

recognize that. The Premier in fact spoke to the fact that there 

were others come onto the wait-list since the 440 wait-list, Mr. 

Speaker. We understand that, and we will be working with 

community-based organizations in order to develop space. But 

we’ve increased funding by 110 per cent for group homes for 

people with intellectual disabilities, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 

increased funding by 81 per cent for day programs for people 

with intellectual disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there’s more work to be done and there 

always will be work that we can do in this area. But we do not 



3432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

want to go back where there’s a wait-list continuously that’s 

being ignored, which is what happened under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that Craig has 

visited the Premier’s office in Swift Current repeatedly, his son 

was obviously not on the wait-list that was eliminated because 

his son is still waiting for services, being ignored. And 

Jennifer’s brother was obviously not on the wait-list either 

because he is still waiting for services too. 

 

Yet it doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker, because last week the 

member for Riversdale asked the Minister of Social Services in 

committee: “. . . so is everybody then taken care of? Or do you 

have an additional number of people who are still waiting for 

services? Or a new list?” The minister replied, “No, there isn’t a 

new list.” The minister went on to say that the government is 

now looking at children in care who will need support down the 

road. 

 

So my question to the Deputy Premier is this: if Craig’s son and 

Jennifer’s brother weren’t on the original list that has 

supposedly been eliminated, and if the province no longer has a 

wait-list and then they are now focused on children who will 

need services down the road, where does that leave Craig’s son 

and Jennifer’s brother, who do not have services and need 

services today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, what the ministry is 

working on, to my understanding, is to have a better 

relationship with Education. The Education budget is where 

you will find the supports for individuals with disabilities until 

they’re age 22. But there was no connect between the two 

ministries. And so then the Ministry of Social Services, that has 

the programming for intellectual disability adults, didn’t speak 

to Education when we had these children that were going to age 

out of the education system. 

 

So that is where they’re trying to get a better connect, so that 

the services can be streamless and go from one to the other. 

That was never done under the NDP, and we’re going to do it 

now because this government is going to take this situation very 

seriously. We understand there will always be a lapse of when 

we can get the appropriate spaces available but, Mr. Speaker, 

we have done an awful lot more than what was done before. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, something is not making sense 

here because Jennifer’s brother was on a wait-list in 2006. The 

minister, the government, the Premier claimed that the wait-list 

had been eliminated. He does not have services. The minister 

and committee says there is no new list, Mr. Speaker, so the 

story is not straight coming from the Sask Party government on 

this issue. It’s a big problem, Mr. Speaker, when we have the 

slick photo ops and we have the congratulatory news releases, 

but that doesn’t reflect the reality that Saskatchewan families 

are facing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to listen to Craig and Jennifer because 

they know the situation. They are experiencing it every day 

with their loved ones. Craig, Mr. Speaker, showed up at the 

Premier’s office four times to seek help. Craig and Jennifer 

can’t understand why the Premier would choose to make a slick 

announcement instead of actually making sure no one was left 

on the waiting list. And they cannot understand why their loved 

ones can’t access much-needed programs at a time when our 

economy is doing well. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: what does he have to say to 

Craig and Jennifer who are wondering why he ignored all those 

with intellectual disabilities who are still waiting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made 

record investments in support programs, both support living 

and day programs, for individuals with disabilities. There is 

more work that needs to be done. We’ve never denied that. And 

we will continue to work on this file because this entire 

government is very committed to put supports in place for 

individuals with disabilities. 

 

Sometimes in some communities there is a bit of a lapse 

because you have to find the appropriate space, Mr. Speaker, 

and the appropriate workers in that particular community 

because it’s very important for these families that their children 

be able to remain in their communities. And we agree that is 

important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to work with these families, 

with these individuals. But what we will not do, we will not go 

back to the days of the NDP when they were absolutely 

ignored. In my home constituency, I had an 85-year-old mother 

trying to look after her adult daughter, and there was no hope 

for her until we became government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Provision of Midwifery Services 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For many families 

in Saskatchewan, having a midwife assist with pregnancy and 

childbirth is a choice they would like to make, but for most 

women here it’s not a choice that they can make. Only women 

in Saskatoon, Regina, and Swift Current have access to 

provincially funded midwives. In rural areas, there are no 

options for this service. And, Mr. Speaker, even in places where 

there are midwives, many who want this care are turned away 

because of high demand and long wait-lists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government says they support midwifery, 

why hasn’t the government worked to ensure all women have 

the choice of midwifery care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3433 

Speaker, I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to respond to 

the member’s question, particularly in light of the fact that this 

Sunday we’ll be celebrating International Day of the Midwife, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a service that has slowly grown over the 

last number of years, particularly when this government 

actually proclaimed the legislation in 2008 that was passed by 

the members opposite, but wasn’t actually acted on, Mr. 

Speaker. The first clinic was established in Saskatoon in 2009. 

And I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that since that time, 

nearly 1,000 births have been supported by the help of a 

midwife in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are growing the numbers of midwives in 

Saskatchewan, but we know that it is one profession that it is, at 

this time, a challenge to recruit into. But we have provided 

significant dollars to provide for health regions to fill positions 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government needs to attract and retain midwives and to do that, 

they need a real strategy. What we just heard from the minister 

is anything but a real strategy. A strategy for our province 

should include the funding, yes. But health regions also need 

ministerial leadership to implement the programs that women 

want. And in the communities where the government has 

created midwifery positions like in Regina, for example, some 

positions sit vacant. If the political will was there, the 

recruitment and retention of midwives would happen. 

 

How can the Sask Party government say they support 

midwifery when they leave the positions already in the system 

vacant? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, first of all, an important part of having a plan is 

ensuring that you actually proclaim the legislation that would 

allow for midwives to practice in the province, Mr. Speaker. So 

we’ve put that in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in last year’s budget we provided 500,000 

additional dollars to the midwife program to be able to provide 

three positions in Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. We 

know that there is interest from other health regions, including 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland and Kelsey Trail, Mr. Speaker, 

and we’re working with those health regions to be able to 

provide funding for positions. 

 

In this budget, Mr. Speaker, in the ’13-14 budget, we have $2.2 

million invested not only in the salaries and benefits for 

midwives, Mr. Speaker, but also for bursaries, return-of-service 

bursaries for those midwives that need to take their training 

outside of the province, Mr. Speaker. And there’s additional 

funding for, yes, positions that are vacant within the system that 

regions are trying to fill, which brings total funding up to $3.1 

million in this year’s budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact is this 

government five years ago committed to supporting midwifery 

services but most Saskatchewan women still do not have access 

to this important care. 

 

Today we are joined in the gallery by a number of concerned 

individuals who want to see the province offer more midwifery 

services at a very important time in the lives of so many women 

and families. One of these people is Rhonda Young-Pilon, a 

mother and a nurse. Like so many other women across the 

province, Rhonda knows options for care are incredibly limited, 

especially for those women in rural and remote areas. And 

Rhonda also knows the great benefits that come with increased 

midwifery services for those who want that option for their 

pregnancy and childbirth. 

 

What is this minister going to do to ensure midwifery is 

expanded for women across Saskatchewan in urban and rural 

communities alike? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we know that while the 

number is low in terms of midwives across Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, that number is growing year by year, Mr. Speaker, 

because in fact when the government changed, the number of 

midwives in this province were zero, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there are nine currently practising, Mr. Speaker, within 

Saskatchewan. There are funded positions which are currently 

vacant which health regions are trying to recruit into — six 

additional positions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well we know that, for example for home births, right now 

the regulations state that there must be two midwives available 

during a home birth, as opposed to an in-hospital birth. We’re 

currently under way with the Saskatoon Health Region to do a 

pilot program in that health region to see if there is a feasibility 

of having another health professional such as an RN [registered 

nurse] or a paramedic that would be able to be the second 

attendant at a home birth, which would then free up the 

additional midwife to be able to practise in another place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think while we still have a ways to go, we will 

take no lessons from the members opposite on this issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Reporting of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as important issues have 

been raised by Saskatchewan people, we’ve seen a dismissive 

attitude by that Sask Party government. We see it here again 

here today. 

 

The auditor published a special report calling out that 

government’s finances. She says that their financial reporting is 

misleading and confusing. She said this government has run 



3434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

three deficits in a row during good times, Mr. Speaker. She 

highlighted that government is effectively hiding $15 billion of 

debt for an alarming and growing total of over $19 billion of 

debt from Saskatchewan people, all for the sake of their 

political and partisan interests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the response of the Sask Party to the auditor’s 

report was unacceptable, trying to brush it aside. How can that 

Minister of Finance and that government dismiss and brush 

aside the Provincial Auditor’s call for them to be straight with 

our provincial finances, and for them to stop hiding our 

growing provincial debt? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

since 1992 the governments of Saskatchewan have published 

the financial statements. They are in the public accounts, Mr. 

Speaker. And in 2004 the NDP at that time changed The 

Financial Administration Act to ensure that the numbers are in 

fact, have to be published in the Public Accounts document. 

 

We continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, we continue to ensure that 

there is a financial statement summary that is included in the 

budget, Mr. Speaker. It is enclosed on pages — I’m sure that 

the member has read them — they are on pages 84, 85, and 86, 

Mr. Speaker. It talks about the fact that we, in the summary 

financial statements, Mr. Speaker, all, all of government is 

accounted for, excluding the universities in this province. The 

very same answer, Mr. Speaker, that I gave two days ago. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Performance of Government 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think the way that 

Minister of Finance does his accounting, I think he thinks the 

Leafs won the game last night, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that dismissive approach continues file after file. And we 

certainly see it in education, with needed infrastructure and 

with the needs in the classroom. We saw it a few weeks ago 

when we spoke about a leaky roof at Laval. And we heard 

about it this past week from the Sask Party as we talked about 

the crumbling gymnasium at Sacred Heart School. 

 

And we’ve also heard those, that same dismissive attitude when 

concerns have been raised by students and parents and teachers 

as it relates to wasting $6 million on standardized testing, as 

opposed to placing those dollars where they’re really needed in 

the classrooms concerns like English as an additional language, 

concerns around the need for educational assistance, concerns 

like actually reducing class size. When it comes to the needs of 

students, the Sask Party must have a better approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party taken such a dismissive 

approach when it comes to improving education in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

let’s talk about the approach that Saskatchewan has followed in 

the last five, six years, Mr. Speaker, prior to that government. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that the Conference Board of 

Canada is indicating that Saskatchewan’s time has come. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the comments, the former 

comments of the NDP, and I recall when I was sitting on the 

opposite side in that very chair that the member sits in, and I 

listened to an NDP member talk about the growth in this 

province, the potential growth of population. Do you know 

what that member said? It is impossible for Saskatchewan to 

grow at the national average. That’s what the NDP’s 

philosophy was. That was what their attitude was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I can tell you, quoting again from the Conference Board 

of Canada, Mr. Speaker, and this is the article written by Bruce 

Johnstone of the Leader-Post yesterday, and I quote, 

“Population growth, which was on average negative from 1987 

to 2006, has been solidly above the national average for the past 

four years.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province is growing — 82,000 more people in 

this province — and we’re going to continue to work for all of 

the people in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the deputy leader has very 

accurately shown the dismissive approach that the Sask Party 

has when it comes to the advice coming from the Provincial 

Auditor, when it comes to what people in the province are 

saying about our school system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the dismissive approach . . . I am somewhat shocked and 

surprised by the responses we had in the first set of questions, 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the concerns being brought 

forward by Saskatchewan people because something’s not 

adding up in this story here. We have the Premier make an 

announcement, Mr. Speaker, that the wait-list is eliminated. We 

have a young man in the province, Mr. Speaker, who’s been on 

a list since 2006, who should have received care, Mr. Speaker, 

if in fact the wait-lists have been eliminated. We have the 

Minister of Social Services in committee say, Mr. Speaker, 

there is no list. So, Mr. Speaker, something’s not going on that 

makes sense here, based on what the Sask Party’s various 

stories are saying. 

 

My question to the Deputy Premier: when we have a story 

that’s told in a news release that doesn’t match with the reality 

of the situation, because clearly people are still waiting for the 

list that’s supposed to be eliminated, why would the Sask Party 

government choose to simply dismiss these concerns and say 

that they’re doing better than ever? That’s my question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the families that the hon. 

member has mentioned this morning will not be left out, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to ensure that we continue to look at their 

concerns . . . [inaudible]. Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the 440 

wait-list does not exist. We wanted to make sure that the NDP 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3435 

that left us those 440 people on a wait-list were taken care of. 

The minister has indicated that that has happened. Are there 

other people that are coming forward with disabilities? 

Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to continue to work 

on that. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, when the member opposite stands 

in this Assembly and talks about 47 people in the hallways, Mr. 

Speaker, when the member opposite raises in committee that 

there were firings of 90 Highways workers, when in fact both 

of those situations were absolutely wrong. They were wrong, 

Mr. Speaker. And yet we do not hear from any of those two 

members, Mr. Speaker, that we are sorry, that we didn’t mean 

to say what we said — that’s what’s disheartening, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t an issue to get mad 

about. This is an issue that needs to be explained. We have a 

claim, Mr. Speaker, by the Sask Party government that they 

have eliminated the wait-list for people waiting with intellectual 

disabilities for care homes, Mr. Speaker, and services. 

 

We have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where Jennifer’s brother has 

been on a wait-list since 2006. We have a situation in the 

Southwest, Mr. Speaker, where Craig from Herbert has gone to 

the Premier’s office four times since March looking for 

assistance for his son. So can the Deputy Premier please 

explain, if the wait-list has been eliminated, why is it that we 

have an individual who’s been on the list since 2006 here in the 

Assembly? Why is it that Craig from Herbert has to go to the 

Premier’s office, the Premier’s office in Swift Current, four 

times to plead for help for his son? Please answer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, clearly we will not be 

dismissive of the concerns of individuals that are waiting for 

help, Mr. Speaker. We have looked at all of those scenarios. 

Whether there be seniors who do not have provision of services 

through the seniors’ income plan, Mr. Speaker, whether they’re 

people who have disabilities and are waiting for a list, those 

kinds of situations have to be taken care of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the situation is this, Mr. Speaker: when we became 

government, we were left with a list referred to as the 440 

wait-list. Over a period of time, the NDP left these people to 

accumulate on a list that totalled 440 individuals. We have 

eliminated that list. Are there others who continue to need the 

services of this government? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. We will 

not deny that. We need to continue to work. We need to 

continue to work with the partners, the CBOs, 

[community-based organization] across this province to ensure 

that we deliver the services that people need. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 2012 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill, and the 

bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 2012 and that 

the bill be now read for the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 

2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 



3436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed 

again by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice to report Bill No. 57, The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of this bill and that 

this bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 57, The Condominium Property Amendment 

Act, 2012 and that the bill now be read for the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move this bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 57, The Condominium 

Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 84, The Common Business Identifiers 

Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 84, The Common Business Identifiers Act 

and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that this bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 84, The Common Business 

Identifiers Act be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 68, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 

2012. This is a bilingual bill with amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill and its amendment be now read for the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3437 

Whole on Bill No. 68, The Justices of the Peace Amendment 

Act, 2012 and that the bill and its amendments be now read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that the amendments be now read 

a first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that the amendments be now read the first 

and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 68, The Justices of the 

Peace Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 56, The Court of Appeal Amendment 

Act, 2012, a bilingual bill with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 56, The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 

2012 and that the bill and its amendments be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012 

Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that the amendments be now read 

a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that the amendments be now read a first 

and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012 

Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 56, The Court of Appeal 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 



3438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 61, The Railway 

Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Highways 

and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

bill and that the bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — I don’t believe we’re at the point of debate at 

this time, and I would ask members to realize that. The Minister 

of Highways and Infrastructure has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 61, The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 and that the bill now be read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure that Bill No. 61, The Railway 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

the bill. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, the Opposition 

Deputy House Leader raised a point of order regarding the 

remarks made by the Premier yesterday, May 1st, 2013 during 

question period. Later that day, the Premier unequivocally 

withdrew and apologized for the remarks. This ends the matter. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased and honoured to be able to stand today to speak 

about something that’s very, very important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to take every effort to 

explain to the people of Saskatchewan the purpose of my 

motion today, and to explain to the folks of Saskatchewan, the 

good folks of Saskatchewan, exactly the threat that’s being 

proposed by the Saskatchewan party to our Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think what’s really important is a lesson in terms of how the 

province of Saskatchewan has benefited, Mr. Speaker, over the 

years. I think a lot of people in Saskatchewan have one basic 

message to give to the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Party, is do not sell our Crowns. 

 

May 2nd, 2013 is another day in which the NDP are going to be 

proudly standing to tell the people of Saskatchewan that our 

Crowns are under attack by the Saskatchewan Party 

government because this cash-strapped government needs to 

find some quick money to continue to try and impress upon the 

people that their budgets are indeed balanced, Mr. Speaker, 

when that’s the furthest thing from the truth. 

 

A history lesson I think is really important because what’s 

happening here, Mr. Speaker, is history is repeating itself. 

When the Conservatives were in power before 1991 . . . And 

you’ll notice many of the members across the way do not talk 

about anything before 1991. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s when the 

province of Saskatchewan was fifteen and a half billion dollars 

in debt, when the NDP took power in 1991 and rebuilt this 

great province to the point where the people of Saskatchewan 

were very happy. And they awarded the government of the day, 

the NDP government, 16 years in power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of those 16 years, it took approximately 12 to 13 years to fix 

the mess left by the Conservatives and now, Mr. Speaker, here 

we are in 2013, and they’re back. They’re back, Mr. Speaker, 

because what you’re seeing now is Saskatchewan’s debt is 

increasing at a rapid rate. And a lot of folks don’t realize that 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3439 

when you look at some of the challenges out there in terms of 

the debt, and it all relates to my motion of the Crowns. 

 

Right now if you look at the Sask Party record, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s astounding; it’s discouraging. And people of Saskatchewan 

are going to be hearing more and more about this as the next 

election’s looming in a couple of years. And the fact of the 

matter is that debt now is expected to be at $19.1 billion by next 

year, Mr. Speaker, $19.1 billion by next year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the last three years the budgets have been a 

deficit budget, or deficit budgets overall, Mr. Speaker, the last 

three years. And, Mr. Speaker, where we get this information 

from obviously is from the Provincial Auditor, who is a fiercely 

independent officer of this Assembly and in no way, shape, or 

form is tied to any political party. This particular auditor has 

lambasted the Saskatchewan Party government on a continual 

basis of their problem with debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and the third point I would make, you look 

at some of our partners, whether it’s the universities and in 

particular the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] where they 

have a sky-high debt rate, Mr. Speaker. This government is 

forcing the universities to go into debt. And you look at the 

regional health districts. They’re also into debt. The municipal 

governments are into debt, Mr. Speaker. School boards are also 

facing a debt crisis, and all the partners that are out there — 

municipalities, the institutions, our school boards, many of our 

partners out there — they are also facing record debt levels, Mr. 

Speaker, to a point where many of these institutions and 

organizations and partners in governing Saskatchewan are now 

going into the reserve funding to try and do basic things like 

maintenance, to try and keep programs in place, and to try and 

fix some of their facilities because the Saskatchewan Party 

government is not responding to the challenges that they have 

expressed. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you look at all the debt that’s piling up all 

over the place, that’s my point. Debt is piling up all over the 

place, and the Saskatchewan Party is idly sitting by. And 

they’re so busy with their photo ops and their spin that they’re 

not telling the people exactly the crisis we face in a couple of 

years. 

 

Now how does that relate to the Crowns, Mr. Speaker? There’s 

two points as it relates to the Crowns. First of all, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Crowns generate dividends, Mr. Speaker. They 

generate dividends for the province each and every year, Mr. 

Speaker. As an example for Saskatchewan alone, it is close to 

half a billion dollars this year, in total, that we’ve gotten from 

SaskTel, SaskPower, and of course all the rest of the Crowns. 

Now what is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that over the years 

those Crown corporations have steadfastly been a very strong 

partner in not only growing the economy in Saskatchewan but 

using the profits to help run government services overall, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the second point I think that’s really, really important is 

that the Crown sector itself, Mr. Speaker, not only do they 

create jobs, but they also, Mr. Speaker, create opportunity in 

our communities. And a good example of that is cellphone 

coverage, where we’ve seen on many occasions the private 

sector will not go into certain areas where SaskTel now does, 

Mr. Speaker. So as you look at some of the opportunities, not 

only for a payment in terms of dividends, Mr. Speaker, but the 

jobs and the services that Crown corporations generate on the 

second front. 

 

So there’s two things that people of Saskatchewan ought to 

know when it comes to the future of the Crowns, that not only 

do they create dividends for the province each and every year, 

Mr. Speaker, but they also provide services, employment, and 

they assist the economy and moving that economy forward, Mr. 

Speaker. Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that we look at the 

debt that’s piling up under the Sask Party and we look at the 

Crowns who have steadfastly been a very solid partner in trying 

to build and move this province forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP took over government in 

1991, I think it was $100,000 per hour we were paying in 

interest left behind by the Conservatives. And some of them are 

sitting over there, Mr. Speaker, today. And one of the things I 

think that was important for people to note is that as the NDP 

began to work with the people to try and rebuild the credibility 

of our province, the tattered financial record of Saskatchewan 

in those days, there are three sources of revenue that the 

province used to begin to slay that debt and to begin to control 

spending and to try and rebuild the economy of our province, 

again left in tatters by the former Conservative government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The three sources of revenue, Mr. Speaker, was people paying 

income tax, and that’s why we always say to the taxpayers out 

there that the debt crisis, that the challenge we faced at that 

time, that a huge debt of gratitude should be extended to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Resource development, Mr. 

Speaker, also played a key role in making sure that we 

rebounded as a province. And the third most important partner, 

Mr. Speaker, was the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan. 

Those three sources of revenues that the province of 

Saskatchewan had, Mr. Speaker, allowed us to rebuild the 

economy, rebuild the financial ruin that we were facing, Mr. 

Speaker, and help us build Saskatchewan to where it is today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what happens now in the future is you have a Sask Party 

government that’s racking up debt in every place that people 

can’t see right now, but the auditor is certainly making people 

aware of where this debt is. And the second thing they’re doing, 

Mr. Speaker, is they’re not looking at any way that they can 

generate new revenues for the province. And now they’re 

getting rid of the third particular source of income for the future 

of Saskatchewan, and that is the Crown corporations. 

 

Now if we look at what the issue is and when we talk to people 

about the Crown corporations themselves, Mr. Speaker, they 

have so far made full known their intentions to sell off 

Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker. You look at 

some of the privatization of some of SaskTel services, Mr. 

Speaker. You look at the fact that they’re trying to sell SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], the SGI building, Mr. 

Speaker. And the list goes on. 

 

We’ve got a list of things that they have been doing covertly to 



3440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

try and debase the value and the opportunities that the Crown 

corporations have enjoyed over the past years, and of course the 

people of Saskatchewan have also enjoyed as well. And you 

look at the fact that they use this silly Saskatchewan-first policy 

— to do what, Mr. Speaker? — to hamstring our Crown 

corporations from making profits and opportunities in other 

provinces so we can strengthen our Crown corporations here in 

Saskatchewan. Nova Scotia is a good example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we have the Minister of Industry going to Prince 

Albert and telling the business community the reason why 

we’re selling Information Services Corporation is to allow that 

corporation to grow beyond the borders of the province. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, who restricted Information Services Corporation 

from moving beyond our borders in the first place? It was the 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They also put out this flagship called Saskatchewan-first, when 

the whole intent behind Saskatchewan-first was to hamstring 

our Crown corporations from building successful entities all 

throughout Saskatchewan, thereby building capacity, building 

opportunities for our Crown corporations beyond our borders. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the type of activity that we 

watch and we observe on this side. And we tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that this is what the Saskatchewan Party’s plan is 

all along, and it is to privatize the Crown corporations of our 

province. 

 

Another good example, Mr. Speaker, is the private liquor 

stores. When we sit here and we listen to the minister say, well 

we’d rather build schools and hospitals instead of liquor stores, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know, the people of 

Saskatchewan know that half a billion dollars comes from the 

Crown corporations. Part of the Crown corporations is the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, where we’re 

using the profits of liquor and gaming to build hospitals and 

schools. And they know very well, Mr. Speaker, where that 

money is coming from. But they try and politicize the process, 

and they try and fool the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that kind of activity, the people of Saskatchewan are 

going to find out. 

 

So I’m telling the people of Saskatchewan this today, that 

there’s no question in my mind — and this is the reason why 

we brought this emergency debate forward — that the 

Saskatchewan Party is planning on selling off our Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. They have made the effort. They have shown 

evidence. And they’re doing it below the radar so people aren’t 

paying attention to this, and they’re not watching what happens. 

 

Now there’s two other points that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, 

on this particular issue. The first point I want to make very clear 

to the people of Saskatchewan is do not trust the Saskatchewan 

Party government with the future health and operation of our 

Crown corporations. That’s the one big point that I want to 

make today. And the second thing that I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, is that what the Sask Party wants to do is they want to 

debase the operations and stability of our Crowns so it makes it 

easier for them to sell them off to their insider friends and rich 

buddies, Mr. Speaker. That’s their plan over there. 

 

Now what happens to the future of Saskatchewan when we no 

longer own SaskTel, when we no longer own SaskPower, when 

we no longer own SGI, Mr. Speaker? What price tag will the 

Saskatchewan Party put on those Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker? Because as they sell off these Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker, what they’re going to do is they’re going to use 

the money to pay down some of their debt so they can put us in 

debt further down the line. So once that begins to happen, once 

it begins to happen, what they want to portray in their books is 

saying, look we’ve balanced our budget; we’re paying down 

debt. But in the meantime they’ve sold the farm, Mr. Speaker. 

They have sold the farm to try and again portray to the people 

of Saskatchewan that they’re able to manage the books 

properly. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the furthest thing from the 

truth. 

 

Now one of the things that’s really, really important, Mr. 

Speaker, is that I tell the people of Saskatchewan this: there’s 

no question in my mind that reinvestment into the Crown 

corporations are necessary. There’s no question in my mind that 

we have to strengthen the Crown corporations, and that’s going 

to take some strategic, wise investment. We understand that 

from our perspective. We have a lot discussions as NDPers on 

the future growth of our Crown corporations. We have to 

strengthen them. We can’t hamstring them in terms of their 

future opportunities because any profit, any jobs attached to our 

Crown corporations is of net benefit to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what happens now, that if we invest into the Crown 

corporations, then we’re in essence investing into ourselves, 

Mr. Speaker. Now if the Sask Party come along and sell out the 

Crowns to balance their books, to balance their books, Mr. 

Speaker, then what happens is that these Crown corporations 

become private. They become private, and they’re owned by 

other people, and they’re owned by other corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. Now who do the people of Saskatchewan begin to pay 

for their power, their telephone, and their insurance? They 

begin to pay companies based out of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that investment once again is flowing out of the 

province and not staying here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So that’s why the silliest thing I ever heard the Saskatchewan 

Party mention and the most blatant political ploy that they’ve 

ever employed, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask-first policy, Mr. 

Speaker. It is absolutely a front for what they want to do with 

the Crown corporations. It’s a sham in terms of trying to 

pretend to fool people, Mr. Speaker. And I can go on and on 

and on about how Sask-first was meant to hamper and 

hamstring the Crown corporations from building a solid future 

for the Crown corporations beyond our border. So the Minister 

of the Economy goes to Prince Albert and says, we want to let 

the company grow. It could have grew under government 

ownership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in the future I want to point out that the Crown corporations 

are under attack. The people of Saskatchewan need to hear the 

message, and I’m hoping to employ that opportunity today 

through a private member’s motion. And many of my 

colleagues will speak further on the value of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

On that note, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to support the 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3441 

public ownership of the province’s Crown corporations 

and condemn the government’s privatization agenda. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to support the 

public ownership of the province’s Crown corporations 

and condemn the government’s privatization agenda. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased for the 

opportunity to enter into the debate today regarding the 

opposition’s motion on Crown corporations. 

 

It has been our government’s long-standing position to adhere 

to The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. For one, 

Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy’s capital spending increased almost 

100 per cent under the Saskatchewan Party. Capital spending 

for the last five years under the Saskatchewan Party totalled 

747 million compared to only 377 under the previous five years 

of the NDP government opposite. 

 

In our first five years in government, capital expenditures at 

SaskTel totalled over 1.3 billion. That is 64 per cent more than 

the NDP spent in their final five years. Wireless service for all 

the new businesses arriving in our province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that is a wonderful thing. Wireless revenues increased 

by 39.8 million to 454.2 million in 2012. Internet and data 

services revenue increased 142 million in 2012, up 6.5 million 

for 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all numbers, but there’s a real factor 

here. There’s a human factor, and there’s been significant 

profitability increases in the past few years and investment to 

deliver services to all businesses and consumers, both private 

and Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe in balance — small businesses and the 

Crown corps. The private sector has something interesting to 

offer also. And I can use my own story as an example, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I wouldn’t be able to do my farming business 

at home if it wasn’t for SaskTel and the wireless and the 

high-speed Internet. 

 

I believe private entrepreneurs also bring innovation and new 

and great ideas to Saskatchewan. And one such idea came from 

our own family farm. We were instrumental in creating the 

export of bovine embryos into Costa Rica, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And we met with the dean of the college of agriculture. His 

name was José Moline. And we met with him to discuss 

importation of bovine genetics into his country. Government 

officials in the health of animals negotiated an agreement with 

us on what tests had to be done, what duties had to be paid, 

licences acquired in order to import into Costa Rica. And a 

veterinarian by the name Claudio Quirós received the genetics 

from our herd. That was a purebred registered Hereford cattle 

genetics. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are still there in the 

Americas today. So we’ve made some lifelong friendships and 

contacts. The world wants to do business with Saskatchewan 

and what we have to offer. 

 

[11:15] 

 

So the point being, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is I feel Saskatchewan 

should have a balance of private entrepreneurs and provincial 

Crown corporations. I love being able to work in Saskatchewan 

and the freedom of exploring business ideas. And as a 

government, we realize our Crowns provide a valuable service 

to our growing and ever-increasing versatile province, as well 

as great ideas from the private sector. It’s a balance of both, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

This government realizes our Crowns do provide a valuable 

service to our growing province, and Crowns such as 

SaskPower. And SaskPower is working on many projects. 

There’s new lines and stations to improve reliability in 

Saskatoon and serve new subdivisions. There’s new lines to 

potash facilities across the province. We are reinforcing and 

upgrading lines to northern communities and mines. We’re 

upgrading the Island Falls to Key Lake transmission line, the 

northern mines such as Cameco, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Lots of 

good things are happening. 

 

SaskPower is investing over 9.8 billion in capital infrastructure 

over the next 10 years. From 1998 to 2008, the NDP only 

invested 3.2 billion in its capital infrastructure. So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, with the growth occurring in Saskatchewan, 

SaskPower is trying to do almost four times the amount of 

transmission construction as they did five years ago. SaskPower 

also plans to enter into 3.1 billion in capital commitments with 

independent power producers over the next 10 years. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, Crowns play an important role in helping 

Saskatchewan people and provide a valuable service to our 

great province. 

 

There’s no such thing as a typical resident of Saskatchewan. 

This is a huge, wonderful variation in ethnic backgrounds, 

languages, occupations, ages in this rectangular place we call a 

province. Everyone who lives here is different from their 

neighbours in some way, and we’re all wanting to add their 

dimension to the growth of Saskatchewan. 

 

But Saskatchewanians all have something in common. They all 

have a good sense of humour, a humour capable of appreciating 

a small detail of everyday life, and also the ability to expand 

and grow their businesses. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is a place of extraordinary 

variation. The temperature can and will go from minus 30 to 

plus 30 and/or plus 40 or minus 40 or snow in April and May. 

So that’s why we appreciate our Crowns such as SaskPower to 

keep us warm and healthy, and safe for our hospitals. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this land can go from unending forest and 

lakes to a sea of grass, and temporary inconveniences are 

shrugged off. The Crown corporations do keep us stable and 

warm. People here live and laugh. And they used to be here, 

they live now . . . Those who may live here in the future is what 

we’re thinking about with the Crown corporations. Our Crowns 

do provide a valuable service to all of these people as our 

province has grown. 

 



3442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

Sask Crowns are investing at high levels to ensure 

Saskatchewan’s economy has the infrastructure it needs to 

grow. Capital expenditures have increased significantly to 

replace all the aging infrastructure and meet the demands of 

growth. Crown infrastructure needs to be addressed, and the 

Saskatchewan government has a plan in place to address these 

needs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When our climate or mother nature is in crisis, our Crown 

employees step up to the plate. Whether it be snow or heat or 

flooding, they keep Saskatchewan residents comfortable and 

safe and the lights on. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, increasing Crown investment in our 

schools and communities . . . SaskTel is a world leader in 

telecommunications infrastructure. And under the 

Saskatchewan Party government, SaskTel will increase 

investment in innovative communications infrastructure at our 

post-secondary institutions while expanding high-speed Internet 

access and improving cell coverage throughout Saskatchewan 

for everyone to use. 

 

Five years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 

inherited a massive infrastructure deficit within our proud 

Crown corporations. SaskPower alone faced billions of dollars 

in needed improvements. Capital improvements were required 

across the entire Crown sector to ensure all Saskatchewan 

people were receiving the high-quality, affordable service, 

utility services that Crowns are meant to provide. The 

Saskatchewan Party government put a plan in place to address 

these infrastructure needs and today the results are showing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to recognize our Crown 

corporation, government front-line workers who provide and 

offer a number of services to support our social and economic 

life in our province. Without them we would be in dire need, so 

I do appreciate all the workers from the Crown corporations. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe, working together, we will 

ensure Saskatchewan is the best place to live in Canada. And 

I’m so proud that we live here in Saskatchewan with our Crown 

corporations that provide everything we need, from SaskEnergy 

to SaskTel, SaskPower, all the Internet services. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a SaskPower annual report quote I 

would like to talk about. The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

on April 10th stated in a scrum: “We certainly like the fact that 

SaskPower has done a good job of continuing to provide power 

to the people of Saskatchewan.” And I believe this is very true. 

We are so proud of our Crown corporations, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I am very proud. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to enter in on debate here today on a motion that is certainly 

important to the people of Saskatchewan, to the economy of 

Saskatchewan, to our position in Canada. And I’m really proud 

to take to my feet here today and stand opposed in many ways 

to a lot of the deliberate undermining of our Crown sector by 

the Sask Party government, and to speak to as well the 

important role that these Crowns should be playing into the 

future of Saskatchewan, to the life of Saskatchewan families, 

and to the life of Saskatchewan communities that are growing. 

 

And you know, when I think of our Crown corporations, of 

course we all think back to incredible achievements that they’ve 

made and developing the quality of life that’s been so important 

to generations previous, whether it’s power or whether in a 

more modern sense it’s cell coverage and Internet coverage 

across this province, Mr. Speaker. But we also need to be 

mindful of the importance of these Crown corporations to the 

current economy of today, the communities of today, the 

families of today, and certainly all of those for tomorrow — the 

families of tomorrow, the communities of tomorrow, the 

economy of tomorrow. And our Crowns are so vital to the 

future of Saskatchewan, which is why we expect nothing short 

of a strong stewardship, management of that Crown sector, and 

making sure that they’re able to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people and communities well into the future and 

certainly here today. 

 

And you know, as a province we’re going through a special 

time presenting significant growth opportunities. What we need 

to do is make sure that we’re bringing all the tools forward to 

allow Saskatchewan people and communities to meet their 

goals. And our Crown corporations are such a vital part of 

doing that, so key in meeting our challenges well into the future 

— this year, 10 years from now, 25 years from now, 

generations forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly my perspective of a strong, modern 

economy — that of New Democrats — is one of balance. And 

certainly we embrace and recognize the importance of thriving 

small business, of local economies, of strong, profitable private 

sector within the province, but also, Mr. Speaker — and the two 

don’t happen in isolation — a strong, vibrant Crown sector in 

this province. This is what builds a strong, balanced economy, 

Mr. Speaker. We see that play itself out around the world in 

different nations. We see that in economic analysis. We see that 

by way of who’s weathering what have been some more 

difficult economic times for many countries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we look to the Crown sector in Saskatchewan, a 

Crown sector that was built by Saskatchewan people, a time 

when Saskatchewan people were rolling up their sleeves and 

showing some leadership and building out an economy that was 

going to serve them well into the future and an economy that 

was there to benefit their families and their communities, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to be mindful about making sure they’re in 

the position to do that into the future. So just, of course, 

recognize that certainly we embrace the role and importance of 

a profitable private sector and we need a strong Crown sector. 

And the two go hand in hand to building a strong, meaningful 

economy for Saskatchewan people and a sustainable economy. 

 

Now you know, I’m not going to stand up here and allege that 

government’s going to do this or I’m certainly not going to cast 

fear or suspicion on to what we think they’re going to do. I’m 

going to focus on their record, Mr. Speaker, and the facts. And 

on this file, the facts couldn’t be more clear. 

 

This government, the Sask Party, has failed to support our 

Crown corporations. They’ve undermined directly our Crown 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3443 

corporations and they’ve broken promises, Mr. Speaker, 

including now selling off, privatizing a profitable Crown 

corporation. We see it on many fronts, Mr. Speaker, the actions 

of this government. 

 

I think of the dividend stripping that we’ve seen during these 

heady economic times, Mr. Speaker. Some of the best times 

here in Saskatchewan, this government can’t cover off its 

budget. And we heard from the auditor this week about the 

consecutive deficits. And we heard about the improper 

reporting, the misleading reporting, the reporting that’s simply 

wrong, Mr. Speaker, as she’s laid out. But the consequences are 

felt significantly by our Crown sector because all in its attempt 

to shore up a manufactured outcome and to print the billboards 

that they want for their partisan spin, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been 

robbing our Crown sector of the dollars it needs to invest in 

communities, to invest in their networks, Mr. Speaker, and meet 

the needs of communities now and well into the future. 

 

I think of the over $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, that has been taken 

from our Crown sector over the past five years by this 

government, Mr. Speaker, at a time where you would think that 

government should be able to manage itself in a way that it 

could stand on its own two feet, Mr. Speaker. Yet we see year 

in, year out this government reaching back into our Crown 

sector, robbing it of the dollars it needs to be investing, and all 

for the fact that this government can’t come to terms with being 

straight with Saskatchewan people about their finances and that 

they can’t come to terms with putting together a sound fiscal 

plan during some pretty special economic times in 

Saskatchewan. That’s evidenced of course by the debt growth, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it will astound many, Mr. Speaker, when they read the 

auditor’s report this week, that of course the debt isn’t what this 

government pretends on its billboards and spends public money 

to promote, Mr. Speaker. But our independent Provincial 

Auditor has actually highlighted our total debt has increased 

under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, from the time they took 

office in 2007 until now, and the projections continue to grow. 

Now of course this government plays games and spins a 

different picture to Saskatchewan people. But it should be of 

concern, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of next year, our 

provincial debt will be $19.1 billion, Mr. Speaker. And that 

government, all they do is report a fraction of that, Mr. Speaker, 

to fulfill their partisan self-interest. 

 

But it comes at a consequence, as I say, to our Crown sector, 

Mr. Speaker. And we saw it last year when at the end of the 

year, this government was short on dollars and they reached 

back into the Crown piggy banks and grabbed over $120 

million. We saw it two years ago too, Mr. Speaker, when 

SaskPower, a Crown that truly needs the dollars to be making 

the investments they require to keep rates affordable for 

Saskatchewan people, at the eleventh hour, Mr. Speaker, they 

reached in and took an emergency dividend once again, Mr. 

Speaker, of over $120 million. And then of course the direct 

consequence of that is that the Sask Party hiked rates on power 

for Saskatchewan families, businesses, and communities all 

across Saskatchewan. And that’s just simply shifting around. 

It’s a shell game, and it’s games, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see the Crown first policy that this government has 

imposed, selling off profitable assets, hamstringing and tying 

the hands of our Crown sector, preventing it from acting in an 

independent fashion where it can divest risk and manage itself 

in an independent way like a strong corporate sector should, 

Mr. Speaker. And we see the continued piecemealing and 

outsourcing of so many services that could be done more 

effectively, more efficiently within those Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker. We see the more costly private approach to power 

generation that this government so relentlessly pursues, Mr. 

Speaker, when we can be bringing on power in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, at a more affordable rate and power that’s owned 

and managed by Saskatchewan people. Instead they want to 

ship profits and dollars to Ontario and backstop risk for 

companies like Northland, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:30] 

 

I believe Saskatchewan people believe in the future in this 

province. I believe they can stand on their own two feet and I 

believe they want to have a hand in doing so. And our Crown 

corporations allow us to do that. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, of course we’ve seen the broken promises 

as it relates to privatization. We came through an election not 

much more than a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier went 

out and made pledges that he wasn’t going to sell off the Crown 

corporations, and took that oath and looked people in the whites 

of their eyes, and promised they weren’t going to be selling off 

Crown corporations. And what did he do shortly after that, Mr. 

Speaker, upon being elected? Broke that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

And you have to be true to your word, Mr. Speaker, and 

Saskatchewan people expect nothing less. 

 

And the fact that this government is selling off a profitable, 

dividend-paying Crown corporation in ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], Mr. Speaker, speaks to 

the very short-sighted nature of this government. It speaks to 

their failure to manage our finances. And it speaks to the failure 

to really make the gains they should out of a special economic 

time in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan people are sick of the manipulation. They’re sick 

of seeing their Crown sector undermined when what we should 

be doing is utilizing it to build a future that we all are working 

towards. And you know, Mr. Speaker, as I say, I have no 

interest in standing up here and talking about what they might 

do as a government, what they might do next year, what they’re 

going to be doing with this Crown or that, Mr. Speaker. As it 

relates to our Crown sector in Saskatchewan, the facts speak for 

themselves, and the facts certainly display a government that’s 

failed to support our Crown corporations, a government that has 

directly undermined the viability of those Crown corporations, 

and a government that’s broken their promises and has 

privatized a Crown corporation and privatized and gutted the 

inside of so many of our other Crown corporations. 

 

Saskatchewan people deserve better. They deserve a common 

sense approach. They deserve having the tools that we need to 

meet the challenges of today’s families, today and well into the 

future. And we’re going to continue to speak to that important, 

positive, alternative view and vision where our Crown sectors 

are important and vibrant in Saskatchewan. 

 



3444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into this important debate 

here today. It’s an area that I’m passionate about. It bothers me 

to see a government go off in a wrong-headed, short-sighted 

approach that undermines our economy into the future and fails 

to meet the needs of families. And certainly I’ll be supporting 

the motion here today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to enter into the debate regarding Saskatchewan’s 

Crown corporations, especially regarding their special place in 

contemporary Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to start by paying tribute to one of Saskatoon 

Greystone’s constituents. His name is Boris Kishchuk. They 

come from a very, very talented family. Many people will know 

Tom Kishchuk, his son, who is the president and CEO of 

Hitachi, Hitachi that has moved its Canadian headquarters here 

to Saskatchewan over the course of the last several months. 

 

Boris has just published and actually just launched a book at 

McNally Robinson, also within the heart of Saskatoon 

Greystone, and that book is entitled Crown Corporations in 

Saskatchewan. And so what I’d like to do is, in addition to 

saying congratulations to Boris for this important work and 

contribution, I’d also like to just draw on just a couple of 

quotes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he notes within the book that Saskatchewan has a 

long history of Crown corporations, and we know that. The first 

Crown corporation was established before Saskatchewan even 

became a province. In fact in 1901, hail insurance was sold to 

farmers by the territorial government. And in 1906, just shortly 

after becoming a province, three commercial creameries were 

operated by the government. And in 1907, the government 

developed Eagle Lake coal mine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is significant because we know that Crown 

corporations continue to be and will be a defining feature 

within Saskatchewan. But as we’ve heard, there also has to be a 

balance and that’s going to be very important, especially when 

we consider some of the statements that we’ve heard from 

numerous third party entities about the significance of growth 

within Saskatchewan. We know that the private sector 

continues to fuel and foster that growth, and that complements 

the work that our Crowns undertake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to do is just highlight that what we 

see often from members opposite — often, not always — is that 

the debate is supported by straw man arguments. That is, there 

are fallacies embedded right within their very work. And I’d 

like to highlight a little bit about what this looks like. For 

example, on March 6th we’ve seen the member from Regina 

Lakeview on March 6th say that “And so I want to remind the 

public that when the Sask Party states in the preamble, the first 

paragraph [and this relates to ISC], that it’s desirable, it appears 

to be desirable to an agenda of the Premier and the Sask Party 

government on a bigger issue of privatization of Crown 

corporations.” 

 

He then goes on. Again March 6th, this is page 2571 of 

Hansard and that previous quote was page 2567. I want to be 

crystal clear about this. He says, again the member for Regina 

Lakeview: 

 

. . . for what appear to be crass, political, and maybe 

sneaky policies by that minister and by that Premier, they 

are trying to test the waters around privatizing something 

that people don’t . . . understand. 

 

I want to make sure that that hint that people don’t understand 

what’s going on in contemporary Saskatchewan is a reoccurring 

theme from members that we hear. In fact I think people in 

Saskatchewan do understand public policy. They appreciate the 

gravity of the debate and the seriousness under which we take 

that debate. 

 

On the other hand, there are some examples from members 

opposite. And I’m tempted . . . This is very tempting, you could 

go through a lot of time. But I’ll simply quote one briefly from 

the member from Athabasca who says, “Why would you want 

to sell an impressive Crown corporation like Investment 

Saskatchewan? Because you know why, Mr. Speaker? Do you 

know why?” The member from Athabasca says, “They came 

back to finish off Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, so everything is 

owned by everybody out of the province including the Crowns. 

That’s their job today.” 

 

And that goes on, that kind of language, Mr. Speaker. I think on 

occasion we may agree to disagree, but I think some baseline 

premises will help the debate. And that is we actually envision 

that we’re serving the interests of the people of this province, 

and that’s why we’re undertaking the growth agenda that we 

are undertaking. So where do we stand, Mr. Speaker? Because 

the fictionalizing that we’ve seen from the other side — the 

hyperbole, the straw man arguments — I don’t think really 

contributes often to the type of debate and dialogue that we 

need. 

 

So what we’ve seen and what we’ve said, and that’s important 

to have both, not just what we’ve said but what we’ve offered 

to people is that it has been our government’s long-standing 

position to adhere to The Crown Corporations Public 

Ownership Act. We understand this, and we understand that in 

keeping this commitment, we also have to continue to be 

focused on the growth agenda; that is, we need to continue to be 

pragmatic. This is not new. In fact what we’ve said, going back 

to our 2007 Saskatchewan Party election platform, is that 

keeping Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations public and 

working for Saskatchewan people is an important part of the 

Saskatchewan Party’s plan for securing the future. 

 

In 2004 the Saskatchewan Party voted in the legislature to 

support The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. Lorne 

Calvert and the NDP continued to gamble away the future of 

our Crowns through money-losing investments like SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company]. In fact, 

the NDP have gambled and lost more than $283 million on bad 

investments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see — that comes from our 2007 election 

platform — what we see, Mr. Speaker, is that in fact the former 

premier in The StarPhoenix in the last 24 hours has said this. 

He’s said — and this is Premier Calvert in interview: “I wish 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3445 

more could have been done to encourage more business here.” 

Maybe not regret, but at least reflecting on missed 

opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this last election campaign in 2011 what we did is came 

forward and said, five years ago the Saskatchewan Party 

inherited a massive infrastructure deficit within our province’s 

Crown corporations. This has been reflected and reinforced in 

statements made by the member for Saskatoon Nutana, who on 

April 10th of this year has said that, well we know that there is 

a $10 billion infrastructure deficit, so they’re beginning to catch 

up on that, so that’s a good thing. And that’s regarding 

SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we begin to see that the opposition is actually 

acknowledging the infrastructure deficit. What we also hear 

from the member from Athabasca is in fact a key part of their 

early platforms: the lowest bundle may not have worked; it may 

have been politically popular, but it does hurt the Crowns in the 

end. We see that, Mr. Speaker, April 19th, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our investments have been significant and 

substantial in our Crowns. In fact in our government’s first five 

years, capital expenditures at SaskPower, SaskTel, and 

SaskEnergy will total over 95 per cent more than the previous 

administration that was spent in the previous five years, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the kind of track record investing in our 

Crowns. 

 

What we’ve also seen, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve drawn on one 

of the Crowns to play a key leadership role in a new initiative, 

and that is in response to the Merasty report. Within 24 hours 

we were able to act, and that is through SGI making sure that 

there will be driver education that’s more accessible on our 

First Nations reserves. We were able to do that through our 

Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. That just makes sense. It 

makes sense for those individuals and those communities and 

especially for their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the challenge for the NDP in key areas of this 

discussion is that they’re on both sides, Mr. Speaker. So when 

we begin to talk about what they did in Lloydminster regarding 

the heavy oil upgrader, when we begin to talk about what they 

did regarding the four power purchase agreements that were 

signed by the NDP between 1999 and 2006 regarding 

SaskPower and other private sector partners, we see that the 

NDP has no consistent position. And in fact, instead of having a 

consistent position and working through it, Mr. Speaker, what 

we see is that there continues to be an emphasis on straw man 

arguments, Mr. Speaker, on attempts to use hyperbole, and 

attempts, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that there is a sense of being 

able to manufacture fear. We want to make sure that that fear 

factor is not part of this debate, that it’s rational. 

 

It is an important debate. And, Mr. Speaker, certainly we know 

that there’s a lot more to do when we begin to look at future 

opportunities. We think we’re on the right track, living up to 

our commitment and, at the same time, Mr. Speaker, being 

pragmatic because we know the importance of the private 

sector in fuelling Saskatchewan’s growth. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m glad to join the debate today. It’s interesting listening to the 

members opposite in terms of the points they put forward in 

this debate because of course, I think where the last member 

tailed off, the member from Greystone, he was talking about the 

problems of the NDP in terms of balancing the equation on the 

Crowns. And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get 

into the pop psychology aspect of this debate, but I think the 

member might be projecting. I think that might be the way to 

talk about what’s going on because indeed this Sask Party 

government has had a problem with squaring the circle when it 

comes to Crowns. 

 

Certainly the NDP has long had a belief in a vibrant private 

sector, a vibrant co-operative sector, and a vibrant public sector, 

Mr. Speaker. And in terms of the history of this province, I 

think that is borne out in many different ways, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

not an ideological approach that the NDP-CCF [New 

Democratic Party-Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] has 

taken towards the Crowns. In the main, over the years towards 

Crowns, it has been a very pragmatic approach to the Crowns. 

And in terms of what works best for the Saskatchewan people 

to provide services, to provide revenues back into the General 

Revenue Fund that go to help fund the competitive tax regime 

that we have in this province, to make sure that we have the 

resources there to fund important services like education and 

health care, and that, I think in the main, has been the 

NDP-CCF record on Crown corporations in this province. 

 

I’m not claiming perfection, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the 

record has been a pragmatic one, compared to the different sort 

of ideological perambulations we’ve seen from the members 

opposite. And in terms of just the way that certain of the 

positions have changed, you know, since the ’80s, since the 

’90s, since this last decade, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s going to be 

interesting to see what this next iteration of the Sask Party when 

it comes to the Crowns it really is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And certainly in some of the year-end interviews that we saw 

the Premier conducting with the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] and the way that was commented on — 

Langenegger, Mandryk — in terms of the Premier calling for a 

new debate on what happens with Crown corporations in this 

province, I guess we welcome that debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because it would frankly be a departure from the kind of 

chicanery we’ve seen go on to date in terms of the 

oh-by-the-way approach that members opposite have taken to 

the Crown corporations. 

 

What we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is moving from the Grant 

Devine school of economics where if it was public, you know, 

better sell it off. Certainly we saw how disastrous that was for 

this province in the ’80s. And you know, it took I guess the 

’90s for the members opposite to come to that reckoning in 

terms of, you know, are we for privatization? Are we a bunch 

of mini Margaret Thatchers? Are we Chicago school of 

economics enthusiasts? You know, what’s our approach on the 

Crowns? 

 

So you know, in terms of squaring their right wing soul with 

what the people of Saskatchewan believe to be sensible and 



3446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

common sense, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite had a real, 

real reckoning process to go under, go through, Mr. Speaker. 

And we saw that in the late ’90s where, you know, members of 

the Conservative Party were still calling for the sale of most, if 

not all, of the Crowns. We saw the now member of Kindersley, 

who was at the time the leader of the Progressive 

Conservatives, calling for the sale of SaskTel. 

 

And it wasn’t just limited to him, Mr. Speaker, when of course 

the Sask Party was formed in the later part of the ’90s. We saw 

the member from Saltcoats coming forward saying, you know, 

SaskTel, sell it off. You know, he was afraid that we had 

missed the boat in terms of selling off the SaskTel. We saw the 

member from Wood River saying he would sell all the Crowns. 

We saw the then member from Melfort saying that, you know, 

we’re open for business; sell them off. You know, it was sort of 

that Grant Devine rehash, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course in the 2003 election when the leader from the 

then opposition, the member from Rosetown-Elrose, Mr. 

Hermanson, of course it was a pivotal issue in that election. We 

called those members opposite in terms of what their approach 

to the Crown corporations was, which was an ideological right 

wing agenda. And the people of Saskatchewan weighed the two 

approaches to the Crown sector in terms of, you know, low-cost 

utility bundle on the one hand; you know, privatization, best 

bang for the buck approach on the other side, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of selling them off. Well the people of Saskatchewan 

decided. And that of course left the Sask Party with the ultimate 

reckoning where, of course, they had to swallow their right 

wing selves whole and get religion on the Crowns. 

 

Now I don’t think that conversion really took. I think it was a 

conversion of convenience, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think it was 

a matter of political convenience for the members opposite, 

expediency. And I don’t think it ever quite jived with their 

principles which, of course, go back decades. And you know, 

you look at the Premier himself who spent time in the then 

minister for Public Participation, which is what they called the 

Crown privatization secretariat back in the good old days of 

Grant Devine where many of the members opposite cut their 

teeth. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, the way that they had to square 

those kind of approaches to public policy with what the people 

of Saskatchewan would actually support. So after the 2003 

election, you know, the Premier — I disagree with a lot of the 

things that that individual does, but one thing I know for 

certain, Mr. Speaker, he’s a smart, smart political operator — 

and what he said to his right wing brothers and sisters over 

there is that, look, we got to take the pledge. We got to get on 

the bandwagon. And as much as this offends our right wing 

souls and as much as this, you know, goes against decades of 

previous policy, Mr. Speaker, we need to take the pledge. 

 

And so they took the pledge, Mr. Speaker. But in typical Sask 

Party fashion, you know, they didn’t talk a lot about the fine 

print that came along with taking the pledge in terms of 

supporting the Crowns. They didn’t talk about how that, you 

know, the first term of the Sask Party government, the main 

way to pursue privatization would be to hollow out the Crowns 

in terms of, as my colleague from Rosemont have referred to, 

the Northland Power deal, where they did a deal that didn’t 

involve new technology, Mr. Speaker, didn’t involve 

geographic considerations, didn’t involve a partnership in terms 

of waste energy or waste heat being utilized, as was the case in 

other partnerships that had gone on with SaskPower. No, this 

was something that SaskPower themselves could have done 

straight up. 

 

But why did they pursue this, Mr. Speaker? Because (a) it 

allowed them to push certain debts off the books into the out 

years. It allowed them to pursue their own sort of private 

interests. And it significantly, by hundreds of megawatts, 

undercut the power production possibilities for SaskPower. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of other ways we’ve seen this, we’ve 

seen this with line locates in the way that Ledcor is now doing a 

lot of the installs for SaskTel Max. Of course there’s a lot of 

SaskTel trucks going around. But if you look closely, Mr. 

Speaker — and I guess it’s a good symbol of what’s going on 

with this government in terms of — it says SaskTel on the 

truck, but it’s really a Ledcor operation and it’s privatized out. 

And this has been their approach, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, you 

know, trying to hollow out different functions of the Crown. 

But on the other hand, they’ve come to realize that they love the 

Crowns, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They can’t get enough of those 

juicy Crown dividends year in, year out. 

 

And again as my colleague from Rosemont has pointed out 

very ably, Mr. Speaker, and has been underlined yet again by 

the auditor of this province, they love the Crown to the tune of 

billions and billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. You know, they’ve 

got $19.1 billion of debt. You know, that allows them to stay on 

the General Revenue Fund side of the debt equation. It’s only 

4.1, and we’ll put up lots of billboards, but meanwhile debt is 

going up to $15 billion worth on the Crowns side . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Higher now than Grant Devine. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Higher now than Grant Devine, as my 

colleague from Rosemont points out. So you know, it’s this 

love-hate relationship that we see going over there in terms of 

the members opposite in terms of, you know, how do they get 

true to their own principles yet they’ve come to rely on the 

dividends coming from the Crowns. 

 

And all of this is going to be coming to a very interesting head 

we hope, Mr. Speaker, where members opposite finally get 

straight with the people of Saskatchewan and say what their 

approach to the Crown corporations in this province really is 

going to be. You know, never mind the oh by the ways. Never 

mind the asterisks. Never mind the fine print and we’ll see it in 

the appendix of the agreement, Mr. Speaker. It’ll be real 

interesting to see what their . . . if the Premier does in fact come 

forward with what is the new position for the Sask Party on the 

Crowns. 

 

Because again, Mr. Speaker, since the 2011 election we’ve seen 

with ISC an “oh by the way” where the minister one year will 

be signing off on, you know, we’ve got to keep it public and 

strong, and then the next year the minister’s, you know, we’re 

open for business and selling off a significant chunk of the 

Information Services Corporation and all those sort of intended 

changes they have to make to the legislative regime after that. 

 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3447 

We’ve seen it with liquor stores and I guess, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we hope to see whether or not they will be straight 

with the people of Saskatchewan, whether they will come 

forward with a position that makes sense or if we’ll see the 

continued sort of love-hate . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 

happy to rise today and speak to the member’s motion. And you 

know, right off the start I really need to say right off the start, 

there’s probably no way I can support that motion, none 

whatsoever. 

 

They talk about our hidden agenda, about the privatization, is 

their scare tactic. And it’s been overused . Today the member 

from Athabasca called it a threat, however we need to 

remember that here, here in this Saskatchewan, the new 

Saskatchewan, that hope wins over fear. Hope wins over fear. 

We need to remember that — that hope wins over fear. 

 

The members opposite have had a habit in the past of picking 

winners and losers, and so far they don’t have a very good 

record. And actually it’s really kind of bad. And I’m not going 

to list them all because that list would take me my full 10 

minutes, and I really need to get to the point where I get to 

speak at working at two different Crown corporations while the 

NDP were in power. 

 

So we’ve got 26 million loss to Big Sky Farms. We’ve got 90.8 

million lost at Navigata. And Navigata came in while I was 

working at SaskTel — ninety-eight point million, that’s a lot of 

money. Right off the start without adding up the rest, that’s 

over 150 million. Oh no, 35 million to SPUDCO. That makes it 

over 150 million. 

 

Now they’ve been talking a lot lately about long-term care beds 

and wait-lists and stuff like that. How much would 150 million 

of taxpayer dollars that they wasted . . . how many long-term 

care beds is that? A tremendous amount. A tremendous amount. 

That’s just a small, small sampling of their failures, very small. 

 

They talk about privatization enough. And they should because 

they know how to privatize. They’ve certainly done a lot of it. 

Let’s talk about what they’ve done. 

 

So the NDP sold the remaining interest in the Lloydminster 

heavy oil upgrader in 1998 for $310 million. The NDP 

government completed the privatization of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan in 1993 and 1994 by selling the 

last remaining shares of PCS [Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.]. 

 

So they talk about our hidden agenda of privatization. It also 

removed the requirements that limited the extent of individual 

ownership that non-Canadians — so non-Canadians means 

people that don’t live in our province — that government of the 

day removed that so they couldn’t own more than 45 per cent of 

the stock. That government did that. 

 

Cameco, which was created in 1988, that they say we won’t 

talk about, Cameco was created in 1988 by a merger of the 

Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation and 

Eldorado Nuclear. Originally 62 per cent of that company was 

owned by the people of Saskatchewan. In 1996 the NDP first 

sold 10 million shares, and then in 2002 they sold the remaining 

5 million shares. 

 

So if you listen to those guys talk, by ’02 we’d already turned 

the corner. So why were they selling off the shares? Why were 

they selling off what the people of Saskatchewan already 

owned? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry, I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — And then they talked about, more about 

SaskPower and our private agenda, our privatization agenda 

and how we’re going to do this. Four power purchase, four 

power purchase arrangements were signed between the NDP 

between ’99 and ’06 — four. And it goes on. 

 

Okay. Now right before the November, before the ’07 election, 

right before the November 2007 election, the NDP sold the 

Saskatchewan government’s share — and by the Saskatchewan 

government, that’s the people of Saskatchewan — of the 

NewGrade Energy Inc. heavy oil upgrader. And the Co-op 

Refinery right here in Regina became 100 per cent privately 

owned, 100 per cent privately owned right before the election. 

Wave your arms. Wave your arms. Don’t listen. 

 

Now I really need to . . . because I’ve worked for two Crown 

corporations under the NDP, and we really need to realize what 

lack of investment in those Crown corporations do. My friends 

on this . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There is a lot of conversations across 

the way. I’m having great difficulty hearing. I ask the member 

from Athabasca to come to order, please. I’m having difficulty 

hearing the member who currently has the floor. And I 

recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Well, I’ll try to speak a little louder and a 

little clearer . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Slower? So they can 

pay attention. So while working at the Crown corporation, 

SaskPower, as a lineman during the early ’90s — and this is a 

story that they need to take to heart, and what they don’t realize 

that lack of investment in our Crown corporations really does to 

the front-line workers, the people that work in our unions, 

taking care of our Crown infrastructure. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Southeast of Lampman, in this farmer’s field, there was this 

power pole and it had a red flag tied around it. And what 

happened is the linemen in the districts actually went out, 

marked the poles that needed to be replaced. You know, I 

haven’t been there lately. Okay. So it started out, just got a little 

lean on this power pole. Okay. The next spring, the next spring 

it’s got a little bit more of a lean on that power pole. Three 

years, three years went by. By the end that had about a 

45-degree lean on that power pole in that field, and we were 

told the maintenance budget wasn’t there and it wasn’t an 

emergency at that time because the power pole hadn’t fallen 



3448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

over yet. And that’s just one of the many examples how they 

ignored rural Saskatchewan. It’s only a single-phase line 

running to one farmhouse, but it’s leaning. Chance is it’s 

probably leaning to the left so that’s why we needed to fix it. 

 

One of the members that got up and spoke today talked about 

how Ledcor came in and was working for SaskTel. Well I 

worked for SaskTel when we did the . . . it was called the NGAI 

[next generation access infrastructure] upgrade. And what the 

NGAI upgrade was is when we had to go and replace all the 

cabinets and the infrastructure so we could deliver Max, deliver 

Max, SaskTel’s premier TV Max to the customers. 

 

What did the NDP do? What did they do? They contracted out 

that entire . . . Please. We, as SaskTel employees, did not go out 

and replace those NGAI cabinets. They brought in contractors. 

Not contractors from the province. The guys I talked to — 

which happened to be members of the IBEW [International 

Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] and some CEP 

[Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada] 

members — but they’re from Ontario. They came and they 

brought them out here so they could replace the cabinets that 

supplied the upgrades so we could do Max. 

 

So when I hear members opposite talk about how the Sask 

Party government doesn’t care about the Crowns, I’ve worked 

for two different Crowns under that government, and it really, 

really showed what happens when a government doesn’t care 

about the Crowns. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 

Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP are renowned for using scare tactics as a tool for luring 

voters especially in regards to privatization of publicly owned 

corporations. What they seem to forget, Mr. Speaker, is that 

their own record of privatization during their 16 years in 

government, the NDP sold its shares in companies such as 

Cameco, Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation, the 

NewGrade Energy Inc. heavy oil upgrader. In addition, they 

also talked about privatizing SaskEnergy and ISC. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: when will your caucus stop 

channelling Henny Penny and Chicken Little — the sky is 

falling — and stop using fearmongering tactics of your new 

leader and own up to your own dismal record of privatization? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as soon as the Sask Party come 

clean with their agenda to try and privatize the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. That was the first step. And one of 

the points I would raise with that particular member is that 

denial is not just a river in Egypt, Mr. Speaker. It’s actually a 

state of mind. 

 

And right now what’s happening is I feel very bad, very bad for 

the backbenchers that don’t know what’s going on with their 

front-benchers. The fact of the matter is the vast majority of 

backbenchers don’t have a clue that there is a privatization 

agenda going on and their front-benchers are simply not 

explaining the agenda to these folks. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s the 

conservatives that are allowing the liberals to follow him down 

his garden path, and that member ought to know that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the . . . The 

facts speak for themself as it relates to the treatment of our 

Crown sector by that government. And a specific area that 

we’ve seen is the constant drain on those dividends. 

 

One prime example is just two years ago when that government 

promised not to take a dividend from SaskPower. They need 

those dollars right now to be investing in their infrastructure. 

Well, they broke that promise in the 11th hour of that year and 

took over $120 million from SaskPower. And then just a few 

months later, Mr. Speaker, the direct consequence was felt by 

Saskatchewan people with $100 million rate increase on the 

seniors, the families, the businesses all across the province. 

 

My question to the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow: how 

can he support this sort of treatment and these direct costs borne 

by his constituents in Moose Jaw? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 

thank the member opposite for the question. It’s really a joy to 

get up here and talk about our Crowns. 

 

But the real question here, the real question is why, five years 

ago, five years ago when I worked at one of the Crowns, 

SaskTel, our government inherited a massive infrastructure 

deficit, right? And it was within all our province’s Crown 

corporations. SaskPower alone faced billions of dollars of 

infrastructure deficit — not millions, billions, billions of 

dollars. You guys in the government at that time had left us 

such a massive infrastructure deficit that we had to take care of 

it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. Sorry, Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP’s record on 

investments is nothing but shameful. From the 26 million lost 

on Big Sky Farms to 35 million lost on SPUDCO, the list goes 

on and on. On investing in Navigata Communications, former 

NDP cabinet minister Maynard Sonntag said, and I quote, “It is 

believed this investment will achieve great things.” What 

followed was Navigata losing a whopping $90 million. 

 

The now former leader of the NDP, Dwain Lingenfelter said, 

and I quote, “We’ve identified the importance of pursuing 

opportunities in strategic locations outside the province.” That 

strategic investment resulted in a $2 million loss in supply of 

power to Guyana. This track record of failed and reckless 

investments by the NDP amounts to over $329 million of 

losses. 

 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3449 

To the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre: when it 

comes to our Crowns, why should the people of Saskatchewan 

ever trust your party, given your record of financial 

mismanagement and incompetent investment practices? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s interesting. The members opposite talk about the different 

dividends from the Crown. Of course they hated the Crowns at 

first, and now they love the dividends. They wanted to keep the 

rates reasonable, but the rates seem to keep going up. It’s 

interesting to hear members opposite talk about the Crowns, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But one of the vital pieces of infrastructure that we’ve heard 

different things from members opposite over there — and 

certainly that member from Prince Albert and different of his 

colleagues from Prince Albert — is, you know, before the last 

election they had a lot of things to say about the importance of a 

second bridge for Prince Albert. After the election, Mr. 

Speaker, you don’t hear a whole lot. You know, generally 

they’re hiding under their desk when it comes to the question of 

a second bridge. But I guess if the member opposite is 

interested about infrastructure, maybe he could start with the 

second bridge for Prince Albert. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important 

in relation to the bridge from Prince Albert, which the Crown 

dividends could have easily paid for a bridge in Prince Albert, 

Mr. Speaker. What happened was the people of Prince Albert 

woke up from a honeymoon, and all they ended up with was a 

hickie, Mr. Speaker. There was no long-term relationship. 

There was no lasting romance. And I think, Mr. Speaker, you’re 

going to see that. 

 

Now my question is to the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

I believe you’re a learned man. And do you believe that the 

quality of our staff and management at . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the 

members to address their questions through the Chair and also 

the answers through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Does the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

believe that the quality of our staff and management at 

Information Services Corporation can indeed build a solid 

corporation beyond our borders, that your Minister of the 

Economy, the member from Kindersley, claims can only be 

done by the private sector? Yes or no? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, you know, just last night I was 

looking over my notes from the long-time employee 

recognition event that I attended for SaskPower in 2010, and so 

it is without a doubt that we are very appreciative of our Crown 

employees because we know how significant their efforts are. 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, there is a question about how 

members of the Crown corporations view perhaps the member 

opposite because in 1996, here’s what he said. He said, and I 

quote. The member from Athabasca said: 

 

If I was in government, I would get the taxpayers’ money 

out of businesses and Crown corporations because 

businesses can survive and thrive without government 

interference if the government simply provides the right 

climate, a climate that encourages businesses to seize on 

all opportunities . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m just wondering. You know, the great 

challenge on the Canadian prairies is, when you’re on both 

sides of the fence, the fences are often barbwire. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government has a 

record of strong capital investment in our Crown corporations. 

Just this year alone, SaskTel is investing 319 million in capital 

expenditures. SaskPower’s investing over 8.9 billion in capital 

infrastructure over the next 10 years. 

 

While from 1998 to 2008, the NDP only invested 3.2 billion in 

capital infrastructure. The NDP ignored capital investments, all 

the while talking unsustainable dividends of 181 per cent in 

2001 and 114 per cent in 2002. The NDP record on lack of 

investing in the Crown corporations is clear. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: why has it taken until 2013 for 

your party to recognize the importance of investment in our 

Crown corporations? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government has taken $2 

billion out of the Crown corporations to try and pretend to the 

people of Saskatchewan that they have balanced their books, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the question that I would have in return to that comment, 

Mr. Speaker, is all we see from our perspective the 

Saskatchewan Party has primed the Crown corporations for 

sale. They’ll start investing money into them and borrowing, 

borrowing at an alarming rate, Mr. Speaker. So the point is that 

you take all the dividends out of the Crown corporation. You 

put them deeply in dept. Guess what? If all the profits are out, 

they’re deeper in debt. They’re easier to sell, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’d ask the backbenchers, who are given notes to read from, 

you should approach your front bench and ask them for the 

true, the true plan for the Crown corporations because from our 

perspective all evidence shows . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 



3450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

River Valley. 

 

Motion No. 4 — Abandonment of Health Care 

in Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy and 

privileged to speak to today’s motion which I will move, at the 

conclusion of my remarks. 

 

First off, Mr. Speaker, I guess I have to apologize for my 

speaking abilities because I, you know, I don’t have the 

elegance of the speaker from Athabasca, you know, who’s been 

doing this for eight years. However, Mr. Speaker, I will say that 

I have been taking coaching from my good friend and comrade 

from Wood River who is teaching me how to be very careful on 

what I say and not to have a lot of rhetoric and try and be 

smoother with the application of my speaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion is talking about rural health care and 

how the NDP devastated rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we 

have another word for it in rural Saskatchewan that we called it 

for years; it’s called Roy’s revenge. Mr. Speaker, Roy’s 

revenge, for those of you that don’t know, was the former 

Premier Roy Romanow who decided to go after rural 

Saskatchewan because rural Saskatchewan did not support the 

NDP government. 

 

[12:15] 

 

They did various different things. They ripped up the GRIP 

[gross revenue insurance program] contract. They turned 

around and they put all the onus on the RMs to supply the 

money. They quit giving money to the RMs. They also never 

did anything on the education portion of the land taxes like they 

kept on promising they would. 

 

But one of the biggest things, and one of the major things that 

they did, as they just said, we’re going to close all your 

hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. So that’s what they did. They 

closed 52 rural hospitals in Saskatchewan plus the Plains in 

Regina. Mr. Speaker, this was Roy’s revenge. This was the 

NDP supported by that government over there, devastating rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can talk about Carrot River Valley itself. Carrot 

River Valley, they closed the hospital in Arborfield. Now the 

hospital in Arborfield was where my Grandpa Bradshaw spent 

his last days, and our first born, Lisa. And the NDP came along 

and closed that hospital. And what they said at that time was 

don’t worry about this. You’ve got Carrot River just down the 

road. You can always go to the Carrot River Hospital. Well 

needless to say, it didn’t take very long before they came along 

and they closed down the Carrot River Hospital. That’s where 

my dad spent his last days. Mr. Speaker, there is no compassion 

out of them. And they go and they close Carrot River. They 

said don’t worry; Nipawin is just down the road a few more 

miles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I truthfully think had the NDP stayed in power 

they would have been closing hospitals all over rural 

Saskatchewan right up until there was probably three hospitals 

left. And that would have been Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince 

Albert because that was what they wanted to do to rural 

Saskatchewan. They wanted to stick it to rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is not the proper thing to do. 

 

Fact is, Mr. Speaker, one of their own members, one of their 

own members, Lewis Draper, actually said, he said, “The NDP 

government of 1991 has done the wrong thing with health care 

from day one and caused irreparable damage to rural 

Saskatchewan and so lost the rural vote for so many years to 

come.” A very true statement from one of their own members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government believes in rural Saskatchewan. 

This government believes in moving rural Saskatchewan 

forward, supplying proper health care to rural Saskatchewan. In 

fact we now have, along with our excellent Health minister, our 

regular Health minister, we also have a rural Health minister 

who is going out there. And I’ll tell you what. He has been 

going around to all the different communities in rural 

Saskatchewan. Now he’s not going around there to close 

hospitals, like what the NDP did. Mind you, they never sent a 

minister out there. They just sent their flunkies out there to 

close the hospitals. And I’m just going to give you a list of all 

the different places — and there’s 45 of them so this is going to 

take a little bit of time — of where our rural Health minister 

went. 

 

On July the 12th he went to Biggar and Kerrobert; on the 13th 

to Meadow Lake; on the 16th to Craik; on the 17th to Cudworth 

and Wakaw; 18th, Wadena, Wynyard; 19th, Humboldt, 

Lanigan; 23rd, Leader; July 30th, Tisdale and Melfort; August 

20th, Kindersley, Rosetown; 22nd, Birch Hills, Meadow Lake; 

23rd, Rosthern, Shellbrook; 24th, Spiritwood, Big River; 29th, 

La Ronge; the 30th, Ile-a-la-Crosse and Buffalo Narrows; on 

September the 10th he went to Melville and Esterhazy; 

September the 11th, Canora and Preeceville; September the 

14th, Balgonie and Coronach; the 21st, Maidstone and 

Turtleford. Excuse me, that was on the 21st. 

 

On the 24th, Grenfell and Moosomin; October the 1st, Nipawin 

and Hudson Bay; on the 2nd, Redvers and Arcola; the 4th, 

Balcarres and Lestock; the 23rd, Fort Qu’Appelle. And then in 

’13, last winter: January 30th, Cumberland House and 

Creighton; February 4th and 5th, Whitecap Dakota, Maidstone, 

Turtleford, Esterhazy, Arcola, Kindersley, Kipling, Melfort 

again, and Moosomin; and February the 15th, Kelvington, 

Foam Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this shows the commitment that this government 

and this minister has to rural Saskatchewan, going out there. 

The fact is, I’ll tell you what. This minister went out and 

worked so hard that he continually comes over to my condo to 

get fed to keep his energy up, Mr. Speaker. And believe me, he 

can eat a lot, but he has to, he has to, to keep that energy up and 

going. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let us talk about some of the things that have 

happened within this government, in our tenure, since 2007. 

 

You know, we talk about wait times. Back in the dark days of 

the NDP, patients faced the longest waiting time for surgery in 

Canada. And in 1999 they promised cuts to wait time by 30 per 

cent, but actually increased it by 61 per cent. This government, 

this government set ambitious goals to reduce wait to three 

months by 2014. 



May 2, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 3451 

Now since 2007, the 12-month waits are down 82 per cent; 

6-month waits are down 58 per cent. We put in an extra 186 

million total for the surgical initiative. We’ve reduced wait 

times using third party delivery within the public system, 

something that the NDP would never dream of doing. They 

didn’t care. If a person needed a knee, they just basically said, 

suffer; we’ll get to you someday. Those days got longer and 

longer and longer, as it was well proved in the Fraser report that 

said the wait times during the NDP tenure was the longest in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP failed to deliver on promises to fund the 

children’s hospital. They had a lack of investment and 

maintenance, creating a huge backlog of needed repairs to 

improve health and safety of facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on. You take a look at what this 

government has done — $975 million invested including 215 

million for the children’s hospital, something that was long 

needed; $118 million on unprecedented investment in badly 

needed safety and emergency repairs for facilities throughout 

Saskatchewan; 20 major capital projects under way across the 

province. 

 

And when I speak of that, Mr. Speaker, we can talk about our 

long-term care. Now you know we have 13 new long-term care 

facilities going up within this province. We’ve changed the 

funding formula on them. Under the NDP, they expected the 

communities to come up with 35 per cent. Under this 

government, the communities only have to come up with 20 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. One of these facilities is being built in the 

Carrot River Valley constituency in Tisdale where it is 

desperately needed. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, and we kind of question when the 

NDP starts talking about health. You know, their leader the 

other day was talking about how there were 47 people waiting 

in the hallways in St. Paul’s Hospital. And when we get back 

and actually do the checking, yes, it was only four or five. And 

the only reason that happened is because they had to close 

down one of the wings so they could have a little bit more room 

there because of a virus. So it was in one of the wings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then to top it all off, not to be outdone, the 

member from Athabasca comes up and talks about the firing of 

90 Highways workers when none were fired. Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t know. Possibly, you know, they’re just not getting their 

facts straight. I don’t know if it’s due to the research that’s 

going on over there or what it is, or possibly maybe their noses 

are just getting a little long, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about nurses and we talk 

about positions, let us remember that the NDP in their watch, in 

their watch in the last five years lost 455 RNs and RPNs 

[registered practical nurse]. They had Canada’s worst nurse 

retention record. You know, this government when we got in, 

we promised 800 new nurses. Of course the NDP just kind of 

sat back and laughed. 

 

The member from Lakeview when he was Health minister said, 

well why should we train nurses in Saskatchewan because all 

they do is leave here. Mr. Speaker, that was the attitude, that 

was the attitude that the NDP had . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . I get some chirping from across the way that that’s not even 

true. I do believe that I actually have it coming right out of 

Hansard here somewhere, and if the member from Lakeview 

wants to see it, I can find it and give it to him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also on the doctor, we . . . Anyway I went . . . I 

got disturbed there for a second from the chirping across the 

way. But we’ve now got over 1,000 new nurses in 

Saskatchewan since this government has taken power. We also 

have 270 more physicians in this province since this 

government has taken power. So while the NDP likes to sit 

there and chirp about health care . . . And we will be the first 

ones to admit there is more work that needs to be done, Mr. 

Speaker. We will admit that. But I’ll tell you, it’s a far cry 

better than when that government over there was sitting on this 

side of the house, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about this, we also talk about our 

initiative for our physicians and for our nurses as far as the 

training goes and as far as monetary end of it goes. Mr. 

Speaker, this government, to help out rural Saskatchewan 

where we do have a shortage of physicians, where we do have a 

shortage of nurses, this government has moved forward on an 

initiative to pay any new physician coming out of training up to 

$120,000 if they will serve in the rural and unpopulated areas. 

And the other thing we will do is we will come up with $20,000 

for any nurses or nurse practitioners that come out and work in 

our rural areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is actually a kind of a twofold thing. What 

would really be nice, what would really be nice is if we could 

get some of those physicians that were fresh out of school, if 

they would move out to rural Saskatchewan. Maybe they 

wouldn’t be attached and they’ll meet somebody out there and 

find out that they wanted to stay out there. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan — contrary to what 

the NDP . . . trying to run it into the ground — rural 

Saskatchewan is a wonderful place to be. And I can say 

wholeheartedly that Carrot River Valley has to be one of the 

best places to live, work, and play in all of Saskatchewan, in all 

of Canada, and in all of the world, Mr. Speaker. This is where 

we need, this is where we need physicians, nurses that the NDP 

cut, never dreaming that this province could grow like what it 

has. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, apparently my allotted time is basically up, so 

I would . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Keep going. You’re doing great. Keep 

going. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Okay. Mr. Speaker, I actually have 

permission to keep rolling for a while here. But, Mr. Speaker, 

when you go back and you look at this, there was another 

Health minister — he’s not here anymore — who came up with 

the statement that he would not set targets for nurse 

recruitment. He said, and I quote, “Even if we put a number on 

it, there’s no guarantee that we would be able to meet that 

number in any case.” Now this was made by the former Health 

minister, Len Taylor, in 2006, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

that was their attitude. Our government’s attitude is far different 

than theirs. 



3452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2013 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also would like to . . . And I’m actually 

looking through my notes here. Mr. Speaker, it was said in 

Hansard on March 31st of 2003, where the member from 

Lakeview says, “. . . there is no advantage to training more 

nurses if other provinces can hire them when they graduate.” So 

there is my stuff out of Hansard, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

from Lakeview said that he didn’t say it. It was there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you also talk about the various different things 

such as cancer care. Ninety-one per cent of invasive cases are 

treated within six weeks, and 90 per cent of slower growing 

cancer cases are done within three months. Mr. Speaker, this is 

the way that this government is moving this province forward 

and looking after the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also want to talk about the $10.5 million in 

continued support for STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society] helicopter ambulance service. Mr. Speaker, back in the 

old days, back in the dark days of the NDP when STARS was 

talked about, when it was working in Alberta, the NDP said, 

well no, that could never work within Saskatchewan because it 

was too costly. Even though Alberta was working on getting 

different companies who really wanted this service to be able to 

put money in, they never ever thought that, hey, we could work 

this together with companies and do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, STARS has been a great success within this 

province. It has already saved many lives. And a lot of these 

lives, there again, Mr. Speaker, they’re out in rural 

Saskatchewan. But that was okay. The NDP didn’t worry about 

it, even though, even though there are no potash mines on the 

main street in Regina. There’s no oil wells in the middle of 

Saskatoon. There’s no uranium in downtown Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the initiative to put together and to put 

forward new initiatives to move the health care of this province 

forward. And I go back again, STARS is one of those great 

initiatives. Getting more nurses is one of those great initiatives. 

Getting more physicians is also a great initiative. Increasing the 

seats for the physicians by 40 more seats at the University of 

Saskatchewan — that’s initiative. That’s initiatives that this 

government, this government is willing to take, Mr. Speaker. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to move this motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the policies of the former 

NDP government which, by reducing access to services, 

abandoned health care in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion by the member for Carrot River 

Valley is: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the policies of the former 

NDP government which, by reducing access to service, 

abandoned health care in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. This House stands 

adjourned to 1:30 p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:35.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3427 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3427 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3427 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3427 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3427 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3428 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3428 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3428 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3428 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3428 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3428 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Essential Services 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3429 

 Regina’s Youth Week Celebration 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3429 

 National Youth Arts Week 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3429 

 North Battleford Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3429 

 Lashburn Sportsplex Mortgage Burning 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3430 

 KidSport Month 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3430 

 Economic Growth in Saskatchewan 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3430 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3430 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3431 

 Provision of Midwifery Services 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3432 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3432 

 Reporting of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3433 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 

 Performance of Government 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 

  Krawetz............................................................................................................................................................................................ 

 Support for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3435 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3438 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3435 

 Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3436 

 Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3436 

 Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3437 

 Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3437 



 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3438 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3437 

 Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3437 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3438 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Crown Corporations 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3438, 3448 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3441 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 3442, 3448 

  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3444, 3449 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3445, 3449 

  Lawrence ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3447, 3448 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3448 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3448 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3449 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 4 — Abandonment of Health Care in Rural Saskatchewan 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3450 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


