




















































Hansard: March 12, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 31B  TUESDAY, MARCH 12, 2013, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2659 

 March 12, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 7 

o’clock, we will resume adjourned debates, Bill No. 49, The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012. I recognize the 

member from Cumberland. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

having a lunch, I feel refreshed. And a phone call from one of 

the constituents saying he got only two minutes of what I was 

saying, and he was interested. He would like me to repeat some 

of it. So I said, for you, I will do that, but only for you. So here 

we go. 

 

I’m going to go through this all over. I was very clearly trying 

to show what Bill 49, what I think the minister was trying to do 

or the message he was trying to get across or legislation we’re 

trying to fix. It’s a certification, it’s showing how the foresters 

will deal with the profession. And it talks about a seal and being 

certified, making sure they’re qualified to give their opinion 

about the forest. 

 

And I made it very clear that a lot of people rely on the forest, 

people that go out there. It’s about the environment. There’s a 

lot of conditions that can be impact if we lose our forests. And 

we know exactly what the forest does. 

 

Now I went back to that, and I talked about the duty to consult 

and accommodate our traditional trappers because the forest 

and most of the forest area are covered by a lot of the trapping 

in northern Saskatchewan. And there are individuals who do 

respect the forest, who are stewards of the land, stakeholders. 

They want to be consulted. They want to make sure. 

 

You know, it’s interesting. We have an organization like the 

northern trappers. We also have the Saskatchewan Trappers 

Association, and I know they had their meeting last weekend or 

so, or last week. They had their Saskatchewan Trappers 

Association. We are talking about the Northern Trappers 

Association. Their meeting is just coming. But having said that, 

they raise a lot of the concerns. And it’s good to go and listen to 

them at their meetings, whether you go to a trappers’ meeting 

or you go around the table and you talk with some of the 

trappers and you watch how they handle their grandchildren, 

their children. And they want to pass on their traditions. 

 

But having said, you know, the concerns, they want to make 

sure that whoever, whether it’s the forestry industry, whether 

it’s the environment, Department of Environment, the ministry, 

whether it’s the officials, whether it’s the minister, whether it’s 

the Sask Party government who are failing to deal with the 

issues that are at hand to our northern trappers. And it’s about 

the environment. It’s about the quality of life. It’s about 

survival. It’s about the customs, their tradition, the culture. It’s 

so vital to so many northern people who live off the land, who 

live their traditional lifestyle. 

 

They’re so compassionate, and when you listen to them and you 

hear their stories of our elders and you talk to the mushom and 

the kohkom and they express what their life was growing up on 

the trapline, and you listen to the stories. And so many of them 

share the stories of a good quality of life, the life they had. But 

today it’s being impacted in so many different ways, whether 

it’s the mining industry, whether it’s individuals wanting to 

harvest the forest where their traditional lands are, where the 

wildlife that they trap live. And they need the forest and they 

need that for the wildlife, to make sure that their . . . And I 

talked earlier about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about clearly they are 

stewards of the land. They know exactly how many certain 

animals to trap and the way they do it, and I watch the stories 

they talk about. 

 

And you talk to people who have relationships with the trappers 

and have a good understanding, and it takes a government 

who’s willing to consult, to understand, not just to hear them, 

but to listen and respond to their concerns and their issues in 

northern Saskatchewan when it comes to the trapline. 

 

Clearly, you know, clearly the concerns need to be raised in this 

House. And the government has legislation coming forward, 

and it has regulations that will impact those communities and 

the northerners — First Nations, Métis, non-Aboriginal — that 

trap. 

 

And it’s not always just First Nations and Métis, and I 

understand that, that trap. There are non-Aboriginal people who 

are northerners who trap. Some of them have been born and 

raised in the North. That’s all they know, and the lifestyle is all 

they know. And they’re proud of that and that culture, the 

heritage, and they share that openly with people. And they try 

to educate people from their side of it. And they want to make 

sure people understand — whether it’s harvesting berries, 

mushrooms, fish, whether it’s a deer, the meat — they truly live 

off the land and live a traditional lifestyle. 

 

And there are many who do that, who want to share that to the 

next generation. And they do that. And when you go into 

communities throughout the North, you’ll see that, whether it’s 

Wollaston Lake, Southend. There are so many. Whether it’s 

Stanley Mission, you have so many — Pelican Narrows, Sandy 

Bay — you have so many individuals. Whether it’s Hull Lake, 

whether it’s Deschambault, Hull Lake, whether it’s 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. You know, there are so many northern 

communities, Green Lake . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, 

you can’t drive into Wollaston. I’m sorry, my colleague said, 

drive into Wollaston. Unfortunately that can’t happen because 

the government made a promise to them and then, you know, 

after the election said, no, we’re not going to do that. And that’s 

pretty sad. 



2660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

But anyway, we’ll go on. I want to talk about Bill 49, just using 

that. And we’re going to talk about Bill 49 very clearly. And 

I’m getting a little bit of help over there and I appreciate that. I 

like that when they get in on it because they’re concerned about 

it. But I wish they would get a little more concerned about it 

and actually act on some of the issues rather than just talk about 

them and put out press releases that they’re going to do stuff, 

and then the Finance minister doesn’t do anything about it. 

Pretty sad. They announce it, then he doesn’t follow through on 

it. Pretty sad. 

 

But anyway having said that, clearly, you have a bill that is 

supposed to certify. And they talk about the seal, and I’ve 

talked about that. And it’s clearly that they want to make sure 

that this group is organized, that they’re trained to deal with 

forestry — which is a serious issue, what impacts our forestry. 

It is amazing how that helps our environment to clean the air. 

And people talk about that, and I think that’s important. 

 

Now having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted the chance 

to come back and, you know, just to highlight a little bit about 

this. We went for lunch; we come back. The seriousness of 

these issues. There are so many serious issues facing the 

northern people. And they’re raising those issues, whether it’s 

our trappers, our commercial fishermen, whether it’s the 

wildfire management policy this government doesn’t want to 

review or change. Those are the issues that are affecting 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, and when we have our trappers and we have 

individuals asking for a little bit of money, a little bit of help 

from the government who talks about all the money it has, but 

no. There’s more money to do other things, more money to do 

other projects that they think are a priority. And northern 

Saskatchewan, our trappers are not a priority. Like hardwood 

floor, advertising — get ready for a bad budget — $92,000. 

Those are the type of things that the people back in the rural 

areas that are struggling in northern communities, the middle 

classes, a lot of people struggling and they don’t understand the 

priorities of that government. And that government needs to 

respond better. And we’ll continue to work on these files and 

do that. 

 

But having said that, I’ve got a chance to express some of the 

concern for the North, about the forests and the way they’re 

going to bring in these regulations. So we’ve got a lot of 

questions and we will have in committee and we’ll continue. So 

at this time I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 49. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 49, The Forestry 

Professions Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a pleasure to weigh in here 

this evening here on Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2012. This bill brings forward a couple 

different changes that are of interest. What I did find 

noteworthy, and something that I’m always looking for when 

I’m looking towards legislation, is what’s caused this 

legislation to hit this floor and what sort of consultation has 

occurred. 

 

And when I look here, certainly at first glance and taking the 

minister at his word, it seems that there’s been significant 

consultation. That’s important. We know that on many fronts 

this government has rejected consultation with those who are 

impacted, haven’t listened to stakeholders and people that are 

directly impacted by the choices that they’ve made. 

 

But in this case it would seem that stakeholders have been 

engaged. And I’ll just reference some of those stakeholders that 

have been consulted as it relates to this Act, that the minister 

has referenced. And certainly we’ll be following up with our 

own consultation and our own listening with each of these 

stakeholders and of course our province as a whole, the people 

and communities all across our province. But specifically it’s 

been referenced that the College of Physicians and Surgeons 

has been consulted, so has the Saskatchewan Registered 

Nurses’ Association; the SMA, the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association; the Association of Licensed Practical Nurses; the 

Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists; the Registered 

Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan; and all of our 

regional health authorities. 

 

Now that’s what has been put forward as some of the 

consultation conducted by that minister, that ministry. I suspect 

that the scope of consultation is broader than that as well, and 

the minister has referenced that those organizations have 

certainly put forward contributions and insight into this process. 

Now it’s going to be important for us to fully understand their 

thoughts on this legislation, any of their analysis they have as 

well. Because what we do know is that sometimes when this 

government pushes forward in a bit of a rush with legislation 

that they’ve often neglected to do that thoughtful listening and 

then have created a whole set of unintended consequences, Mr. 

Speaker, with their legislation. 

 

When I look the couple of changes that are being brought 

forward here, I see that some of these relate to registered nurses 

and broadening, expanding the scope of practice for nurses. 

This is something that, done in a responsible way, it’s 

something that I certainly support. Certainly I want to make 

sure through consultation that this is exactly what’s been done 

in this case. But it also, as I understand, will allow the college 

to be able to respond more quickly to some national changes as 

it relates to nursing, and that’s important. So it seems that some 

of this may have come at the direct request of the registered 

nurses. That’s important. 

 

And I’m very interested in what this means fully on the 

expanded scope of practice piece, Mr. Speaker, but certainly 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

I’m a supporter of looking at making sure that we can ensure 

accessibility to primary care for all Saskatchewan residents, 

something that’s being denied to far too many in Saskatchewan 

right now, Mr. Speaker, under this government. And we’re not 

making the progress that we should. 

 

And in many ways, Mr. Speaker, as I listen across our province, 

I know that far too many communities, far too many people are 

struggling to access those very primary care services that are 

important to our quality of life, that are important to peace of 

mind, that are important to the protection that communities are 

needing. And of course this is to be true in rural Saskatchewan 

in many circumstances, Mr. Speaker, but it’s also to be true in 

many of our urban circumstances where one of the challenges is 

access to a family doctor for far too many. So the whole 

concept of primary health care teams and fully utilizing the 

health care professionals to their fullest extent in a safe way, in 

a coordinated way, and finding synergies within them and best 

meeting the needs of patients is something I support. 

 

So I want to fully understand what the minister is putting 

forward here by way of discussion of scope of practice for 

registered nurses. That may be a start. I want to understand 

what this means on the ground, in communities, in addressing 

those challenges that exist. But certainly I’m supportive of 

discussion with our medical professionals as to how do we fully 

utilize their skills, their abilities, their knowledge to meet the 

needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And of course our focus when we’re looking at health care as it 

relates to legislative changes has to be towards the quality of 

care to the patient, has to be towards the safety of that patient, 

and then there also has to be a consideration towards the safety 

of the health care workers, the health providers, the 

professionals in the field, in practice in communities across 

Saskatchewan. And these health providers, through the full 

range, through our physicians through to our licensed practical 

nurses and all through the full range of health professionals, 

provide such vital services to the people of this province. And 

certainly to them I say thank you for the work they do on a 

day-to-day basis providing the safety, the security, the health to 

Saskatchewan people that they deserve. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So that’s certainly aspects that I’ll be following up, both with 

our health professionals and certainly we’ll be following up as 

well through the committee process with the minister, just 

asking him to flesh out just a little bit more as to what this 

means in a practical way on the ground in the delivery of 

primary care, and making sure we can do a better job of making 

sure that whether you’re in Kamsack, or whether you’re in 

Torquay, or whether you’re in Estevan, or whether in Regina, 

the access to those services are there for Saskatchewan people 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And one of the ministers 

suggested, I just heard something, or a member suggested 

something about shutting hospitals. And I wouldn’t that 

recommend that to the members opposite if that’s what they’re 

contemplating. 

 

And one of the challenges that the members need to realize is 

that many of these emergency rooms, many of our health 

centres, many of our hospitals are currently strained right now 

because of a failure to meet the challenges and properly 

providing the resources, the human resources needed to keep 

those services available in communities. 

 

I call on this government, and if they’re suggesting that they’re 

going to be further constraining those services, I’d suggest they 

need to be stepping it up in the other direction and making sure 

that we’re able to provide those services. And I think certainly 

the scope of practice of professionals is part of that and to be 

done in a respectful way, to be done in a respectful way and to 

be done in a way that makes sure that quality of care of patients 

is our number one focus. 

 

It’s kind of an interesting group across the way here tonight, 

Mr. Speaker, heckling from the other benches when we’re 

talking about a piece of legislation that should be about 

providing solutions to Saskatchewan people. And you know, I 

guess this is, you know, this is coming from the government 

that’s running a set of ads to say that they’ve got a bad budget 

coming and that communities should brace for the budget that’s 

coming and the potential cuts that might be in place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what we need to make sure is that we are taking the 

opportunity that exists in this province and addressing the 

challenges that communities are facing and the opportunity that 

exists, and that’s going to be about making sure we’re building 

those healthier, stronger communities for tomorrow. Certainly 

making sure the provision of health services and quality health 

care is something that’s critical on those, those fronts. 

 

Another aspect that’s important in this piece of legislation for 

us to fully understand what’s being contemplated is that of the 

privacy and the storage, the transfer and the disposal of medical 

records. And this is important; it’s something that’s certainly 

arisen at various times when sensitive, private, sensitive 

information has become available to the public or has in some 

cases been found in dumpsters, Mr. Speaker. And we need, we 

need to make sure that we’re doing all we can as a legislature, 

as a government, to be making sure that the piece of mind of 

residents is certain around the storage of their private, sensitive 

health data. 

 

And what I see here is, I understand, some improvements to 

ensure just that. And certainly if that’s the case — and we’ll 

make sure that these measures are as strong as they can be, as 

effective as they can be — but it’s certainly something that we 

would support because this is something really important to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And it’s not just the storage of those records or the transfer of 

those records or the disposal of those records. Also I’m thinking 

about, how are we protecting those records by way of disaster 

and what protections are we putting in place to make sure that 

residents have the piece of mind, as I say, that they should 

deserve. 

 

And in many ways, if you think in the era, the digital era that 

we live in, we really have to do all we can to make sure that 

we’re not putting the information of Saskatchewan people, their 

private information in a position that’s compromised or 

threatened. And any attention that government can be putting 

forward here and any broad consultation with all stakeholders 



2662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

to make sure they’re being as effective as they can be is valued. 

 

So this is, I would hope, a positive step, I believe, in 

recognizing this challenge. Part of what they’ve set out to do is 

to have better access to the information of our physicians and 

where they’re practising and making sure that there is better 

dialogue, better communication with physicians, whether a 

physician is joining a practice or leaving a practice. And this 

has been identified as something that can put data at risk, or I 

guess strengthen the protection of that data. And in that case 

certainly I would be supporting any reasonable provisions that 

have been built out in consultation with Saskatchewan people, 

with our important health care stakeholders, to make sure we’re 

protecting our data to the fullest extent. 

 

I’d also want to make sure that I had the full opinion of the 

Privacy Commissioner on this front. And we’ll be seeking that 

through this process as well and, as I say, listening to all 

stakeholders to make sure that this legislation is as effective as 

it can be, whether it’s the changes to the scope of practice to 

make sure that we’re able to effectively deliver primary care to 

all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Far too often I hear about inadequate access to family doctors. I 

hear about lack of access to emergency rooms and to services 

that are needed, even some of the counselling services that are 

required. And we need to do a better job as a province with 

tremendous opportunity in making sure that Saskatchewan 

people derive those benefits by way of their quality of life. And 

that access to those health care services are something that’s so 

important. 

 

And by way of the improvements to protecting the data — 

private, sensitive data — of Saskatchewan people, we certainly 

need to make sure we’re doing all we can to do just that. And 

certainly this looks to be a step in the right direction, but we 

need to make sure we’re doing our thoughtful consultation with 

stakeholders. 

 

At this point in time, without further discussion required in this 

Assembly, I would like to refer this bill to committee. And that 

being Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 

2012, I now move to committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 50, the 

medical professions Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 51 — The Public 

Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter in on discussion of Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 

2012. This bill relates specifically to commissions, to public 

inquiries that are taken on by the province. And I understand 

that it’s in many ways been pushed to make sure that it’s 

adhering to uniform national legislation, also making it 

bilingual, which is in compliant with the national legislation. 

And so in this case it seems to be federal changes or national 

body changes that are causing us to make changes provincially. 

 

But when I go through the piece of legislation it actually seems 

that what’s being put forward seems to be quite reasonable. I 

want to make sure as we go through this process that we’ve 

done the broad consultation that we need to as it relates the 

rights of individuals and making sure that this is the most 

effective and fair way to provide justice to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

But certainly it’s fair to say that I understand that the former 

Act hadn’t been changed for quite a few years, for many 

decades. And certainly I recognize the vital importance of 

public inquiries to providing a service to Saskatchewan people, 

protection to Saskatchewan people, fairness and justice, and 

recognizing that in reading some of the justifications for the 

changes that there seems to be strong rationale for many of the 

changes that have been put forward. 

 

Now of course what we’ll need to do as well with this piece of 

legislation, as we do with all pieces, is to do broad listening and 

consulting with stakeholders, with Saskatchewan people and 

communities, to make sure we fully understand the impacts on 

those that are on the ground. 

 

And we’ve also recognized that this is a very important process 

for us as an opposition because often we’ve noticed a 

government that’s pushed ahead with a rushed agenda or its 

own agenda with a selective hearing if you will, Mr. Speaker, 

only hearing from a selective group of stakeholders and pushing 

forward their agenda. Now I don’t think that’s the case with this 

piece of legislation, but certainly with any piece of legislation 

it’s important for us to make sure that thoughtful, broad 

consultation has occurred and that it’s not selective hearing and 

an agenda simply of members opposite that’s driving changes. 

What I recognize is that this provides some policy as to the 

governance of inquiries in Saskatchewan, also providing them 

statutory powers to conduct those proceedings. That’s 

important. 

 

We recognize as well that the changes that are being put 

forward have been recently reviewed by the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada and that the new public inquires 

legislation was in fact recommended for implementation across 

Canada. So that’s what the minister has told this Assembly and 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

sort of the impetus for this legislation. 

 

I also recognize that this is about modernization of public 

inquiries and making sure that they have the structures, the 

framework that they need to deal with the various and broad 

circumstances that they deal with but also have the flexibility 

required to respond to scenarios that are relevant to today and to 

our future. 

 

Certain provinces, I understand, have enacted legislation, such 

as British Columbia and Newfoundland, and I understand that 

this is in many ways based on that Act. So certainly it might be 

worthwhile as well to do some consultation with those 

jurisdictions to understand what their experience has been from 

a practical perspective on these ends and whether or not public 

commissions or public inquiries have been commissioned or 

put forward since legislative changes have, and what learning 

they’ve maybe had by way of the changes that have been 

brought forward. 

 

I understand the current Act has five sections, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that they’ve been in force for nearly a century, as 

I’ve said. So certainly a modernization to this process would 

seem to be reasonable, would seem to be common sense. And 

the current Act provides only a bare framework of powers for 

the implementation of a public inquiry. And a detailed order in 

council is required to set out the terms and conditions and 

operational mandate for any public inquiry, and this is based on 

the information provided by the minister opposite. 

 

And so what the challenge is is that there’s a very base 

framework in place, and then a lot of this is being driven by 

order in council directly by executive government. And you 

know, I think there is some merits in making sure that there’s a 

strong framework that’s in place that’s well understood, that’s 

transparent, that’s consistent, that can be applied to multiple 

scenarios and then just making sure that the flexibility is still 

there for the inquiry to have the scope and the role and the 

mandate that it must. 

 

I understand that the new Act contains specific provisions that 

change some of the authority in a few different areas and, as 

stated by the minister opposite, “These include standing and 

participation, procedure, evidence, compellability of witnesses, 

investigations, search and seizure, and reporting.” 

 

So that’s what the new legislation brings forward and, as I say, 

brings I guess a framework that’s stronger than it was before 

and possibly more clear to the public as to how a public inquiry 

could be applied. 

 

I also understand that the new Act creates two types of potential 

commissions, one of which allows it to not be a full judicial 

inquiry. And I understand that government is suggesting that in 

certain circumstances, a certain study or examination or 

analysis is sufficient as an inquiry. And you know, at first blush 

that seems to make sense. And certainly we’ll continue to 

ensure that’s the case through consultation, but reflective as 

government saying that certain scenarios that a government 

may wish to apply a public inquiry, don’t mean necessarily the 

full judicial inquiry to be applied. 

 

So the two types that they’ve put forward, now the one type 

would be of the nature of this study commission to research or 

examine and provide advice on public policy. And this could be 

really useful on a whole host of areas and certainly, depending 

on the area that they’re entering into, certainly a full judicial 

inquiry may be something that’s not required. 

 

And then there’s a second sort of hearing which would be a 

commission to investigate and make findings in fact, in matters 

where there’s a possibility of finding of misconduct. And that 

would be, I would suspect, where the full judicial process 

would be afforded and made fully, fully available. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Maybe those larger scale type inquiries where there’s, as it said, 

a question of misconduct, that’s important. But then for some of 

the smaller scale ones where, you know, there’s a study inquiry 

and able to examine an aspect of public policy, I think certainly 

it makes sense to have a different structure to those inquiries 

and not, not necessarily require all the resources of the other. So 

that’s important. 

 

And it would as well I guess, I recognize that the minister 

suggested is that this leaves less to the order in council and 

creates stronger terms and conditions, but also does the 

flexibility required based on, based on specific circumstances 

around the matter in question. And something that’s going to be 

important is to make sure that this is the type of a piece of 

legislation that will allow us to work with other jurisdictions. 

There’s a passing mention to that in this piece of legislation, but 

certainly that’s something we’re going to want to make sure is 

practical in the way this legislation is laid out. How do we work 

with another jurisdiction, federal or provincial, in a public 

inquiry? And making sure that this legislation allows and 

enables that sort partnership is something that is important. 

 

Another piece that’s very important by way of a public inquiry 

of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that of public reporting, the 

timeliness of that public reporting. Of course that information is 

very valuable to a government to make sure that they’re able to 

make the steps, make the changes, make the protections that are 

required, hold the accountability in place that’s required. 

 

But also it’s important for the public to be fully aware. And 

anything that’s examining a circumstance by way of an inquiry, 

it’s important to have timeliness of that reporting. And certainly 

I support that this calls upon, after two weeks of that being 

received by government, to then be shared with the public at 

large. So that’s something that I value. 

 

I recognize that the minister goes on to talk about the important 

flexibility that’s in place for a specific scenario and for the role 

of executive government to exercise its flexibility, and that 

seems reasonable. 

 

The other aspect here is it talks about making sure that there’s, 

when a public inquiry is finding misconduct against a person, 

that that person has been given reasonable notice of the 

allegations and has been provided the opportunity to respond to 

those allegations. That’s an important consideration in ensuring 

justice and ensuring fairness. I guess my question might be 

who’s deciding that, what’s reasonable, and what mechanisms 

or opportunities exist for someone who’s responding to 



2664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

allegations. 

 

And also the fact that this makes, puts provisions in place to 

make sure that inquiries are done in the public light, under the 

spotlight — that’s important. It does highlight that it has the 

ability to make sure that certain matters that could be dealt with 

privately. And I guess it states here just that the consequence 

. . . that the hearing be public except where considerations of 

privacy, the consequence of disclosure of personal information, 

public interest, or the right to a fair trial weigh in favour of 

closing a hearing. So that’s the statement there. It’s maybe a bit 

broad yet, and I’d want to have a full understanding of who’s 

making those decisions to possibly close an inquiry and not 

make that available to the public. Certainly for many matters 

the public involvement and access is important. 

 

This Act puts forward the authority for the communication of 

an inquiry with the public, the transmittal of that information, 

and has put forward a bill as well that has consequential 

amendments, and I’ll be speaking to that. 

 

So what I see here is a bill at first blush that seems to be 

reasonable. Wanting to make sure that where there’s areas of 

discretion, that we understand who’s making those decisions 

and making sure that that’s as fair as it can be. Making sure that 

the framework that’s been built out is a framework that can 

apply to all scenarios, and then that the flexibility that’s 

afforded is a flexibility that’s going to be as effective as it can 

be and to make sure that the administration of public inquiry is 

as effective, as fair as it should be. 

 

So you know, certainly making sure that a public inquiry 

moving forward is enabled and supported is something that’s 

important to me. It’s certainly an important aspect of protecting 

the public and providing fairness, providing justice. And the 

steps that have been put forward seem to come from a 

reasonable perspective. And we’ll be just making sure through 

our consultations that we fully understand the impacts on all 

stakeholders, the views, the analysis of all stakeholders that are 

impacted — making sure that this government has listened in 

this case. It seems as though that may have occurred in this 

case. 

 

We know far too often with that government, Mr. Speaker, they 

exercise selective hearing, that they only listen to a select few, 

those that may be close to them, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the 

many and to all, and making sure they understand all the . . . not 

just the intended consequences but also the unintended 

consequences in driving legislation, making sure that we are 

building legislation that’s going to serve the best interests of all 

Saskatchewan people, not just today but well into the future. 

And that’s certainly the consideration and the lens that we’ll be 

applying to our further analysis to this piece of legislation. 

 

I believe we’ve had enough discussion of this bill on the floor 

of this Assembly. What I do look forward to is further 

discussion, consultation with stakeholders — or this side of the 

Assembly does — and certainly we look forward to having the 

minister clarify some of what is broad right now and making 

sure he’s specific as to the changes. And so as it relates to Bill 

No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012, I would now move it to 

committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the Minister of Justice that the Bill 

No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 

shall this bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012 be referred to 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

Bill No. 52 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 52 — The Public 

Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

weigh in on Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act. Of course this is in direct response to Bill No. 

51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012, consequences of that 

legislation, and so as such it’s practical in nature, changing 

Acts, various Acts, doing so I understand in English. The other 

one was bilingual. And really it’s simply a consequence to 

make sure the Act can be applied. And this Act again is driven 

by national recommendations to ensure uniform legislation 

across Canada. Other provinces have stepped forward, as I 

understand, and have brought forward Acts to provide some 

refinements to their Acts by way of how public inquiries are 

managed, how they’re struck, how they’re mandated, and 

certainly recognizing that the legislation that’s in place has been 

in place for many years. 

 

And the rationale that’s been laid out by the minister seems to 

be quite rational, quite reasonable, quite common sense. We 

certainly see merit in the changes. The question is just making 

sure that the changes as described by the minister don’t come 

with some unintended consequences that aren’t described by 

way of his comments in the Assembly, and making sure we’ve 

done so in full consultation with all those that are impacted. 

 

But making sure that we have our public inquiries in a position 

to be effective today and well into the future is something that 

is important. The changes that allow both flexibility of 

executive government but less flexibility than has been in place 

in the past and a broader framework that applies to all 

circumstances is something that I value. 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2665 

And one of the other aspects that seems to make a lot of sense 

is to break out two different types of inquiries. Those that 

require the full judicial inquiry, those of the larger scale 

consideration, those that are considering findings of misconduct 

— making sure that all resources are available for those types 

of inquiries are certainly important, Mr. Speaker. And then 

understanding that inquiries are helpful, useful, important to 

Saskatchewan people and the government on other matters of a 

policy nature sometimes or other circumstances, that those 

types of study commissions or those that are there to examine, 

research, and make recommendations back to government 

aren’t necessarily required to have the full judicial inquiry is 

something that seems to make sense to this member of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the days, weeks, months ahead, we’ll certainly be conducting 

full consultation with all stakeholders to make sure that that’s 

their analysis as well, to make sure that the kind of consultation 

that we’d expect has occurred on this legislation. I’ve said a 

few times, Mr. Speaker, that often we’ve been disappointed. Far 

too often we’ve been disappointed by this government for 

utilizing selective hearing, Mr. Speaker, only listening to those 

sometimes that are close to them, Mr. Speaker, not listening to 

those on the ground, all those that are impacted, people across 

our province, the communities across Saskatchewan. And we’ll 

be making sure that’s not the case with this piece of legislation. 

 

It does seem to be driven by very reasonable changes on a 

national agenda in being uniform with other jurisdictions on 

this front, but also to respond to some of the practical, modern 

challenges that we face in conducting public inquiries. 

 

So at this point in time . . . We will certainly spend time in 

committee, certainly be spending time with listening to 

stakeholders as it relates to this legislation, listening to 

Saskatchewan people and communities, Mr. Speaker, to make 

sure we’re able to bring forward their voice; to make sure we’re 

building legislation that’s as effective as it can be; to make sure 

we’re doing all we can to make sure that public inquiries are in 

a position to serve the public’s interests in the way that they 

should be; making sure that that reporting is done in a timely 

way back to the public and that governments are going to be in 

a position to have that information, but the public’s also going 

to be in that position to have that information; and being willing 

to understand the kinds of changes that we need to be working 

towards together in this province. 

 

But at this point in time, I thank the minister for the comments 

he’s put on to the record. We will certainly seek further clarity 

from him and his officials at the committee structure. But at this 

point in time as it relates to Bill . . . I’d like to move in fact Bill 

No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 

2012 to committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 

52, The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

be read the second time. Is it the pleasure of this Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 

shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 53 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll join in 

on debate on Bill 53. And looking at this bill, it’s housekeeping 

items that they’re going to clear up and repeal some of the 

legislation that’s in there maybe for years. But I’m going to go 

through line by line with these because they’re interesting, 

because I can use these to talk about some of the conditions that 

are happening in our province. And some of these programs, 

you know, they’re repealing them but it’s exciting to hear. And 

I think I want to show some examples, like in one of the areas 

where right away I’m thinking about. 

 

[19:45] 

 

There are some federal regulations, and it seems like it’s simple 

housekeeping. You don’t want to be . . . When we talk about 

fruit, vegetables, and honey, the sale in our province, and we 

realize there’s federal regulations and inspectors so they’re 

repealing some of the legislation. Makes sense. It’s 

housekeeping, you know, pretty simple stuff and we’ll go 

ahead. But you know, that’s one area and that’s fine, and I 

understand there is still protection for people so citizens of our 

province will know that the federal regulations come into play 

and they will protect the fruit, the vegetables, and the sale of 

honey. And that’s pretty simple. 

 

But you go into some of the ones, the other ones that they’re 

going to repeal. And it’s interesting, just the wording that they 

talk about. And it’s interesting to see. You know, you talk about 

municipal development and loans, like interesting time when 

we have our municipalities in northern Saskatchewan. And I’m 

going to show some of the problems that the infrastructure, the 

challenges that our leadership . . . And they’re doing an 

excellent job; I want to say that. Municipalities are working 

hard on behalf of the people that elect them and they trust them 

to take care of their dollars and the funds, the public dollars, tax 

dollars that are given, just like they’ve given the government, 

Sask Party government, the opportunity in the election. And we 

know it. Nobody, you know, disagrees with that. That’s fine. 

They’re there. But they also make it very clear: take care of the 

dollars. Trust that’s put in, and repealing this one . . . And I 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

want to show the example, and I want to show reference. 

 

And you know, you want to build bridges to communities to 

make sure they have the infrastructure. Oh, except for in Prince 

Albert. You can’t build, you know; there’s not enough push to 

do that. You can’t build. And to the North — no second bridge 

for there to go towards the communities in the North when we 

have an industry. 

 

And they talk about, they talk about the booming economy. 

This government talks about the booming economy. In northern 

Saskatchewan where there’s an opportunity, P.A.’s [Prince 

Albert] working hard. And I give credit to the community of 

Prince Albert because the citizens are not going to stand still 

anymore. The leadership, the mayor and his council are 

working hard to make sure. 

 

So when I see a bill like this being repealed, it’s just interesting 

to see it’s being repealed when it’s something that could help 

communities, but we’re repealing it. And I understand there 

might be reasons because they’re saying they’re housekeeping 

items, and I understand that. But I see the good work that the 

good people of Prince Albert, the mayor and council and the 

citizens . . . And not only in Prince Albert; in the North relies 

on that bridge, and if that bridge goes down . . . 

 

So when I see about them repealing certain things, that’s very 

concerning to me, you know. And I know they’re saying — 

again I want to go back — these are housekeeping items that 

they’re taking care of. Well why don’t they take care of . . . 

And maybe it’s time that the members from Prince Albert fight 

for a second bridge for the municipality of Prince Albert, but 

they don’t, and the MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] in the surrounding areas. They’re quiet, very quiet, 

you know, the members in the area of Prince Albert. 

 

Who’s fighting for them? We have to. Our critic for Highways, 

myself, the mayor and council are doing an excellent job. The 

community, the petition, they’re raising a lot of concern. 

 

That second bridge would have given opportunity to northern 

Saskatchewan as well with the economy booming. And we 

keep hearing about the jobs and the mining. And you know, the 

government likes to have photo ops and brag about it. They 

take care of their inner friends and we know that. So there’s an 

opportunity here for the government to do the right thing. Will 

they? No, because they made their decision. P.A. and area is not 

important. 

 

It’s not a priority for this government when the government has 

more money than it knows what to do, more money except for 

— you know what? — except for very clearly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker . . . They do for hardwood floors, and I’ve said that — 

22,000 for the Premier’s office, hardwood floors. They have 

money, lots of money for advertising, 92,000 to tell the people, 

get ready for a budget that may not be so good. That’s pretty 

sad. That’s their priorities. Or they’ve got millions for more 

MLAs. 

 

Now I want to come back to this bill. And you know, just 

talking about Bill 53, they’re repealing things, and we don’t 

know exactly what communities will be impacted by repealing 

these loans to municipalities Act that they’re repealing. It’s 

very concerning. Could the community of Prince Albert, could 

maybe they have got the government to come up with some 

money to help them? I don’t know if that loan would have 

helped them, but it’s in there. We’re repealing it. 

 

And it’s interesting when I see . . . Now here’s the other one: 

“The Municipality Improvements Assistance (Saskatchewan) 

Act is repealed.” They’re going to repeal that. Now assistance 

— oh, like the community of Air Ronge, La Ronge, whether 

it’s infrastructure, whether it’s in our smaller northern 

communities, whether it’s in our rural communities that are 

struggling with infrastructure — could that have assisted those 

communities? But we’re repealing that because we don’t need 

that program anymore. 

 

Well that’s odd. Could that program have worked? And what is 

in place? And I think in committee we have to ask these 

questions. What is in place then to cover off the lack of the 

Sask Party government’s responding to the municipalities and 

the infrastructure in our province? 

 

Now you’re repealing this Act. Now by repealing this Act, does 

this really leave the municipalities stuck now, holding the bag 

with infrastructure because maybe this provision assistance 

program that we’re repealing could have actually assisted those 

municipalities with infrastructure and helped those community 

members have the quality that, in a province of ours with the 

growing economy and everything going really good, here’s 

where we go? And here’s the problem where people are saying 

the Sask Party government is not in touch with the people of 

our good province, whether it’s middle class, whether it’s 

people living in poverty, whether it’s people who are working 

sometimes two and three jobs to make ends meet. Our young 

people, our seniors on fixed income, how are they being helped 

by this government’s priorities? That’s the problem. They’re 

not. They’re not. 

 

So when we look at them repealing certain areas of legislation 

because they’re saying, well we don’t need those, so I 

understand the vegetables, the fruit, and I understand the honey 

because the federal regulations cover that. So I understand that. 

They’re the federal government’s responsibility and they’re 

covering that, so we can repeal it. But here’s what I’m saying: 

you’re removing loans and assistance to municipalities. You’re 

repealing. So is the federal government the one that’s going to 

kick in the money? How are those communities like Prince 

Albert to build a second bridge? And other communities, how 

does that happen? 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the realities. 

Those are the challenges that we’re being faced with. The 

government misses the responsibility to the people. It’s pretty 

sad — pretty sad that, you know, you’re removing provisions 

that would have given the municipalities what they’re asking 

for. And that’s what the municipalities are asking for, is support 

by a government when the government has so much money. 

And they keep talking about that, yet they’re spending $92,000 

to advertise, get ready for the March 20 budget. It’s not good. 

It’s not good. 

 

People are wondering about how can your priority . . . Or more 

MLAs. It’s shocking. It’s just shocking to see a government 

willing to repeal assistance programs, loans to municipalities. 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

Now they say they’re housekeeping. Well while they’re 

cleaning up these housekeeping items, who is going to assist? 

Who will assist the municipalities and the community members 

who are struggling? Who do we know? Who do we know? It’s 

pretty sad, pretty sad. 

 

You know, at the end of the day, here we have a Sask Party 

government who doesn’t care about municipalities, about the 

people. Look at Prince Albert’s second bridge. Look at before 

the election. Oh yes. And you had the Premier of the province 

going there for a sold-out supper. And I think his words were, 

yes, P.A. needs a second bridge. It was something like that. I’m 

not sure exactly the quote, but people are saying that. 

 

So that was before the election. But after the election . . . 

Members said, oh yes, yes, P.A. needs it. P.A. needs a second 

bridge. Now the election’s over. They were elected and what 

happens? Those poor communities, municipalities, that this one 

may be assistance program that they’re going to repeal, or a 

loan. I don’t know. They’re going to get a loan? Were they 

going to give them money out of their pocket or what to loan 

them to build a bridge? Like who knows? 

 

But you know, people in Prince Albert, you know, deserve 

respect — the citizens, our seniors that work hard. Northern 

communities deserve to have access to Prince Albert, and they 

do. They work together. Those communities work together. 

They see the need. And you’ll see northern municipalities 

supporting the industry. You’ll see the New North doing its job 

to bring awareness to this government. And I hope the 

government will listen to them when the New North brings . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

When you look at the mining industry, you know, all you’ll 

have to do is have one accident on the bridge, Prince Albert 

bridge, and then what happens? One accident of one of the big 

trucks, and then what’s happening? So is it time for a second 

bridge? And I mean the government says they’re not going to 

support a second bridge for P.A. 

 

Well before the election . . . Like I want to be clear, and this is 

really, you know, this is really frustrating. I’ve talked to some 

people from the P.A. area just recently this weekend and 

they’re very frustrated. And they’re saying they’re not going to 

sit back. They’re going to do something. And they’re saying, 

where are their MLAs? Where are the surrounding MLAs in the 

area? How come they’re not fighting for P.A.? How come you 

don’t hear a word from them? Not a word anymore. Where are 

they? 

 

Well you know what? Why don’t they talk to their . . . I guess 

they can go bang on the table if they would like to. Go do 

something at least. Stick up for the people of Prince Albert and 

say, let’s develop a loan. Let’s get assistance program for the 

municipality of Prince Albert to build them a second bridge. 

Let’s do that. Could they do that? But no, here they’re repealing 

stuff. 

 

So I’m really curious. And we’re going to go through these 

because these are going to give us an opportunity to discuss. 

We see communities struggling with infrastructure. We see 

constant communities asking for more help from government 

because of the infrastructure need. And we see some of the 

infrastructure that’s falling apart in some of the cities. And the 

cities are doing a good job of trying to balance out the 

resources, and I give them credit. They’re doing what they can, 

but unfortunately when you see a government that has the type 

of priorities that the government has . . . [inaudible] . . . When it 

had money coming in, there was so much money in the coffers, 

they were just spending it wherever they could spend it, their 

priorities. 

 

But if you’re not . . . Well I guess if you’re not in the inner 

circle, if you don’t have the right connections I guess you don’t 

get any of that money. It’s only for, you know, what is that? I 

guess the inner circle group. And if you’re connected, then you 

might get some of that money. If you’re not connected, maybe 

you don’t get any of it. 

 

So when we look at municipalities and the repealing of these 

Acts, it’s kind of, it’s alarming I think to a lot of people out 

there who are truly struggling, whether our seniors, whether it’s 

municipalities. 

 

And you look at — I want to talk about a little bit about 

because I think this is good — the rural municipalities, they’re 

doing an excellent job. You know, we look at farming families 

out there. And unfortunately since the Sask Party has taken 

over, let’s look how many farm families have left the farm. 

Does anyone know the numbers? We’re doing a little bit of 

research and people are giving me some numbers, and those 

numbers are alarming, small farm families that are leaving the 

rural areas. Why is that? Why are so many families in the rural 

area and farm families struggling today? They’re small farmers 

trying to make ends meet. So we’re hearing those kind of 

stories and they’re sharing that. 

 

And that’s pretty sad, pretty alarming. So nobody, nobody can 

say, you know . . . Clearly there are some families out there, 

and there are big farm companies out there doing quite well. 

We know that. Some of the bigger producers, we know that 

they’re doing well. But there are small farm families out there 

that are struggling. 

 

And I know the Sask Party are bragging and they want to yell 

that they’re all doing good. Well maybe they need to go back to 

their rural communities and find out exactly what’s going on. 

Like it’s time that they ask, because I heard some of the farmers 

out there. And the small family, the small family farm are 

struggling. It isn’t as good. So we see that. 

 

So talking about that, somebody has to stick up for them 

because you don’t hear much from the members opposite. 

They’re in government, and some of the backbenchers at the 

cabinet table, they don’t get a chance to say anything. They say, 

well we can’t say anything because we’re not a minister. Well 

what are you doing then? Like, do something. Speak up. Fight 

for the constituents that are struggling in this province. Do the 

right thing. Don’t just worry about the little clique. There’s a 

little clique and a little group of ministers that get to make the 

decisions. Fight — stand up and do something. Say you need to 

fight for those individuals. That’s what you were elected to do 

to come here, not sit there and be quiet, sit on your hands, read 

a member’s statement every once and a while. Do some 

fighting for the people that asked you to represent them. 

 



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

And I talk about trust. You know, just keep doing what you 

guys are doing as a government, the men and women on that 

side. Just keep doing what you’re doing, the members opposite. 

Keep doing, the members of the government, and you will pay 

a price at the end of the day. The people will hold you to 

account. They will. They’ve entrusted you. You were elected 

here, and you are trusted. Just remember that. 

 

And you know what? Maybe the Premier won’t be as popular 

as everyone thinks in the next election, and maybe there aren’t 

going to be so many backbenchers sitting around here. You 

made it in. Remember that. Remember that. The people decide 

who comes here — the people. And they trust, and they put that 

trust in individual candidates. You have to earn that trust, and 

you have to be able to fight for them. And that’s what they ask. 

 

It’s a simple thing. Go to their doors, and you tell them what 

you’re going to do for them. And you say, yes, here’s what I’m 

going to do, and if they try to get more MLAs, I will fight for 

them. You share that information with them. You don’t not 

share that with them. Everyone’s expecting good times. So it’s 

interesting to see. 

 

Now at this time I’ve got more I want to say and I would like to 

say because there was an opportunity to go through some of the 

. . . and show comparisons. And you know, people just 

sometimes they just want to know that somebody is speaking 

up for them, somebody is fighting for them. And I’ll do exactly 

that — bring in the concerns here. And my colleagues do that, 

and they do a fine job to raise the concerns, not like the 

government. We hear what the people are saying. They raise 

the issues, and we bring those issues here, and we try to fix 

those situations with the government. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And sometimes we work in co-operation with the government. 

Certain legislation, it make sense for Saskatchewan people. 

And I’ll be the first to say that. I’m willing to work. 

 

But I’ll tell you one thing: when a government doesn’t want to 

work and take care of certain areas — whether it’s northern 

Saskatchewan, whether it’s the rural area, whether it’s urban, 

whether it’s First Nations, Métis, whether it’s any of our 

citizens in this province, whether it’s our seniors, our youth, our 

young students — when a government turns their back and 

quits listening to the issues and doesn’t support the working 

men and women of this province, then, you know, we will bring 

those issues. And we will speak loud for them. We will make 

sure their concerns are raised in this House. 

 

And those are the individuals that, come the day for an 

evaluation, will evaluate every one of you sitting on that side of 

government and how your track record is. And trust me, you are 

developing a record. People are watching. And it’s taking one 

stone in your backpack at a time. Just keep doing it. But you 

know, you keep talking about . . . And you know, they can 

chuckle some days when we raise issues, and the members 

opposite will laugh and they think things are funny. And there 

will be a price for that. There will be a price for that. Mark my 

words. And my colleague from Athabasca says that. 

 

You know, you’ve been granted the trust of the people, and I’ve 

said that I’m sincere when I say that. You have. And I fight for 

the people back home. And I will work with the government 

when I can, in co-operation. But when the government won’t 

listen to the issues, whether it’s facing our northern trappers, 

our commercial fishermen, our First Nations, our Métis 

communities, our municipalities, our students, our mushom, our 

kohkom, when they won’t respond to the issues facing northern 

Saskatchewan and you can’t work with them in co-operation, 

then you have to do what you can to make sure people hear the 

issues and fight the government and get people to vote against 

the government. 

 

And I want to say one last thing about this, and it’s in a 

movement, you know, the movement that’s very clear that’s 

going on, the Idle No More movement. Those are issues that 

people are raising, concerns. And they’re doing an excellent job 

in this province and all over Canada of raising the issues, 

raising the issues that mean something to people. If you think 

that the people are sitting quiet, they are silent no more. They 

are going to raise their voice. And if you look at social media, 

you look at all the areas where the Idle No More movement is 

moving, it’s amazing to watch. 

 

And maybe the P.A. second bridge needs to get that group 

saying, help us with this; how do you do it? Because it’s 

amazing the way that grassroots movement is moving. It isn’t 

leaders. It isn’t, clearly, it isn’t the leaders. It isn’t. It’s the 

grassroots movement that’s leading it. And it’s got support by 

many leaders supporting it, supporting the Idle No More 

movement. And it’s amazing to watch. They’re moving forward 

and they’re getting ready for a battle. And they’re going to be 

silent no more. 

 

And they’re going to vote. Come provincial and federal 

elections, they are going to vote. They’re youth, and they’re 

sitting no more. There’s so many of them. And they’re going to 

wake up and they’re going to send a message to governments 

who have not responded to the needs of their communities, of 

their grandpas, their grandmas, of the next generation. They 

will voice their concern. So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I’m prepared to adjourn on Bill No. 53. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Cumberland has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 53, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 54 — The Seizure 

of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure to rise this evening to speak to Bill 54, The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012. And sadly 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

I won’t be able to be nearly as informative and entertaining as 

my predecessor colleague in his comments, the member from 

Cumberland. And I’m sadly going to have to get into the nuts 

and bolts of this bill and just look at it clause by clause because 

that’s the way I roll, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So first of all just some general comments on the comments of 

the minister when he introduced the bill back in November. 

And what he indicated here was that the bill was passed 

originally in 2009, so this is a new bill that’s now being 

amended — or newer bill anyways — is now being amended. 

 

When that bill was passed, it gave the provincial government 

authority to take responsibility for seizing criminal property 

processed from the police services. What he indicated, the 

minister indicated that there have been some successful seizures 

under the legislation since it’s been enacted, but the council for 

the ministry and the operational staff have identified a number 

of changes to make it more efficient and effective. 

 

So the first thing he indicates the bill does is change the 

definition of instrument of unlawful activity, so I will get into 

that in a little bit. The second big change is that the director 

now is allowed to make application to the courts by way of 

statement of claim, and prior to that it was only through a notice 

of motion. So I’ll speak to that in a minute. And further the bill 

will make procedural changes allowing for a sealing order 

regarding the respondents’ affidavits. So I’ll get into that a little 

bit as well. 

 

And his closing comments — and his comments were quite 

short on the bill — his closing comments indicated that the 

legislation represents a balance between due process for 

individuals who may face an allegation of holding criminal 

property and ensuring that criminals do not benefit financially 

from their criminal activities. So that was the essence of the 

comments of the minister when he introduced the bill in 

November. 

 

Certainly this type of legislation is no stranger to Canadian law 

and indeed a number of provinces have some form of civil 

forfeiture Act or civil remedies Act. We know that Ontario was 

one of the first to do that, but since they passed their bill back in 

2007, I think — or no, sorry, 2001 it first came into force — a 

number of provinces have also passed similar bills including 

British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 

Quebec. 

 

So if we want to just take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the 

actual changes that are being proposed, the first major change 

that we see is a change to the definition of instrument of 

unlawful activity. And in order to look at that, we’ll take a look 

at what it said originally, and that is found in the 2009 bill 

under clause 2(i). So what this bill does is add some substance 

to that. And what it does, originally the clause said, it was an 

instrument of unlawful activity was property that was used to 

engage in unlawful activity, and they’re adding “. . . or was 

likely to result in or was intended to result in the acquisition or 

production of property . . .” 

 

So I think what this does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it allows for a 

bit more flexibility and actually quite a bit more breadth of 

scope for the director when they are trying to determine 

whether there is an instrument of unlawful activity. So I think 

you could imagine there’s a number of things that could be fit 

into that definition and it gives a lot more breadth for the 

enforcers in this particular Act. There may be some concerns on 

the part of civil libertarians to say that this could infringe on 

people’s personal rights because not only is it property that has 

been actually used to engage in unlawful activity, but it’s 

property that “. . . was likely to result in or was intended to 

result in . . .” So you’re taking away certainty there and adding 

a lot more of a vague definition. 

 

Now I assume this was done because the actual enforcers of the 

law and, as the minister indicated, his lawyers and his 

operational staff have indicated these changes. I’m pretty sure 

the minister wouldn’t have heard these changes from people 

that are actually engaged in unlawful activity because it 

definitely expands the scope of what can be seized under the 

law. And when cars are being seized and homes are being 

seized, in this case you could seize a home if it was used or if it 

was — what’s the word again? — was likely to result in 

unlawful activity. So that’s a pretty broad scope for some very 

significant seizure abilities on the part of the ministry and the 

director. So I think that’s something that needs to be watched as 

this bill, if it is passed and when it’s passed, how the courts will 

interpret these clauses because it is much broader than it was 

prior in 2009. 

 

There is a change to the definition of defendant. There is a new 

definition that’s being added, and that’s the new clause 2(e.1). 

So there is now a definition of defendant, and that isn’t 

anything particularly significant. I think it’s probably helpful 

for interpretation. 

 

The definition of respondent has been amended in this case to 

include applications for notice of motion and possible 

respondent, so the definition of respondent under section 2(t) 

has been expanded. 

 

The next clause that’s being amended is clause 3, and in clause 

3 there is a new clause being added after subsection 3(1) and 

that’s subsection 3(1.1). So section 3 is about how to apply for 

a forfeiture order and it’s all part of part 2 of this Act, which is 

how property is actually taken by the director. 

 

So in order to seize people’s property, the director has to make 

an application to the court, and they’re applying for a forfeiture 

order. So the director just can’t go in and take your house, for 

example. He would have to go to the court first, give his 

evidence, and then the court would make the order. So the new 

clause that’s being added there is . . . well, the existing clause is 

he can apply to the court if he’s satisfied that the property is 

proceeds of unlawful activity or an instrument of unlawful 

activity. And now it’s saying this can be made by two ways to 

the court. You can either do it by way of notice of motion or 

statement of claim. So it’s up to the director; he has the 

discretion to determine how the action is, how the application is 

made to the court. So that’s a change now. 

 

It’s not clear to me from the minister’s comments why a 

statement of claim is preferable to a notice of motion and why a 

notice of motion wasn’t sufficient, so that is something that 

maybe would require some clarity when we get to the 

committee stage. Maybe we could ask at that point just for 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

some clarification on that distinction. 

 

Section 3(3) of the existing Act details how you would make an 

application or how the director would make an application for a 

forfeiture order. There are a number of things he must do. He 

has to describe the property for which the forfeiture order is 

sought with enough detail, and then he would name the 

respondents or defendants as the case may be. So if it’s notice 

of motion, it would be the respondent, and of course if it’s a 

statement of claim, it would have to be a defendant. So that 

change was required to bring in the statement of claim 

provisions that are being introduced. 

 

And what this clause also does — and if you look at the 

explanatory notes that were provided with the bill, we’re 

describing what has to be in the application — what this is 

doing is removing reference to the owner of the property as an 

individual that must be named as a respondent. And what this 

does is allows the director to proceed where it’s difficult to 

determine who the actual owner is or how to serve them for the 

purposes of an application under the Act. 

 

Quite often when there’s . . . I think the law enforcement 

officers might know there is criminal activity going on but they 

don’t know who the owner of the car or the house or the 

activity, when they can’t easily determine the owner, this will 

still allow for an application to the court to forfeit even though 

it’s not absolutely sure who the owner is. So I think that’s 

something that will greatly assist the law enforcement people 

and the director himself or herself when they are trying to 

forfeit this property. 

 

Again I think civil libertarians will probably take exception to 

this type of broad clause where you can actually apply to forfeit 

property where you can’t even say who the owner of the 

property is. And certainly it’s a broad power and it’s one that I 

would hope and anticipate that the law enforcement people and 

the directors won’t take advantage of unduly, because this is a 

really sweeping, broad power when it comes to seizing people’s 

personal property. And I expect the minister will get some 

pushback from the civil liberties groups who are concerned 

about freedom of the individual and their property. When we 

start talking about seizing people’s property, this is a fairly 

broad and maybe invasive clause. So we’ll see how this is 

interpreted by the courts. 

 

[20:15] 

 

The next change that we see in the bill is in clause 3(3). No, 

that’s the one I just referred to where we now are taking out the 

requirement for the owner to be identified. We’re now going to 

look at clause 6(1)(a) of the old Act because that’s the next 

change in the new Act or the new bill. And in 6(1)(a) there’s a 

change there because it’s no longer just a respondent. It could 

be a respondent or a defendant. 

 

So this is regarding ex parte applications. Ex parte applications 

are applications made where, I believe it’s where the defendant 

or the respondent are not able to be served. They’re not 

locatable. So we go back to where there’s no clear certainty as 

to who the owner of the property is so there’s no real, actual 

name to put there, or that there’s no one to serve. Then the 

application can be made ex parte which means the other party 

isn’t actually there when the court is hearing the application. So 

there’s a change here in 6(1)(a) where we’re taking out the 

word “respondent” and adding “. . . the person named in the ex 

parte application as the respondent or defendant.” So that’s 

another change. 

 

Then if we’re looking at clause 6(5), there’s an extension of 

time here. So clause 6(5) is how long the order can be made for. 

And originally it was 30 days, and it’s being changed to 60 

days. So I’m assuming that the ministry’s officials and the 

lawyers are finding that that’s just not enough time for the order 

to be in existence. So it’s being doubled to 60 days. No further 

comment there. 

 

Clause 6(6)(b) has been repealed now, and there’s a change 

which allows an extension of the order. So 6(6) is how you 

would get the order extended. And in this case, the first part of 

the section, 6(6)(a), talks about how the notices have to be 

going out. But in (b), it used to say “for a further period not 

exceeding 30 days from the date that the extension is granted.” 

So the original clause limited the extension to 30 days. The 

wording that’s being suggested here is that the period “. . . be 

determined by the court or until there’s a further order of the 

court.” So this gives the court the discretion to extend the 

application or the order . . . Sorry, the application to extend the 

order can be for a period of time that would be determined by 

the court, and it would be entirely in their discretion to decide 

what the appropriate term would be. 

 

Further in section 6 . . . which I didn’t really talk about what 

this section is about. It’s about how the orders, interim orders 

regarding the property are made. It’s a fairly long section, and 

probably one of the key sections of the original bill. So we see 

that they’re adding or suggesting that we add two more clauses 

to that procedural clause. 

 

6(11) is a new clause, and this is one that the minister referred 

to about a sealing order. And what he said is this will now 

provide for the order to be sealed regarding the respondent’s 

affidavits, provided that they’re not charged with an offence. So 

if we look at the explanatory notes for this new clause, it says, 

well basically it just says it “. . . provides for a sealing order 

with regards to a respondent’s affidavits.” 

 

So this is something we may have further questions for the 

minister on in terms of how and why a seal would be necessary 

in this type of application or affidavit. So I guess what it’s 

saying is that when they’re responding or defending the order, 

the court could allow their affidavits to be sealed and not 

reviewable by anyone except the court or a party to the 

proceedings. So that may protect their identity, I suppose, if 

they’re people that aren’t actually involved in the crime but 

somehow became peripherally involved. I assume this is a 

protection for the individuals, but that’s something that the 

minister didn’t clarify in his comments, and we would look for 

further clarification on that once this bill is being reviewed in 

committee. 

 

Following that there’s another new subclause and it’s basically 

an ability to change the orders. So the new subclause 6(12) 

reads, “On application by the director, the respondent or 

defendant, the court may vary, amend or rescind an order 

granted pursuant to subsection (11).” And that’s the order for 



March 12, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

sealing. So just a basic procedural clause there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Section 7 of the original Act talks about forfeiture orders and 

that’s not being changed. Section 8(1) deals with protection 

orders and 9(1) or section 9 deals with protected holders of 

prior registered interests. That’s not being changed. Section 10 

is other people entitled to a protection order. That is not being 

changed as well. 

 

The next part of the Act is the conduct and the proceedings 

themselves. And in this case there are a few changes that are 

being made, one fairly substantive and the rest are rather 

procedural. So the first change is in clause 12, and 12, section 

12 is entitled the “Proof of offences.” So in this case if an 

application is made: 

 

In an application pursuant to this Act: 

 

(a) proof that a person was convicted, was found guilty, or 

was found not criminally responsible on account of mental 

disorder, with respect to an offence is proof that the 

person committed the offence. 

 

So because this kind of action can be taken with civil courts, 

there has to be a way to bring in proof from criminal courts as 

to the culpability of the individual or, as it says, as to the mental 

state of the person named in the application. So it allows for 

proof there. 

 

The second part of the clause currently says that: 

 

(b) evidence that a person was charged with and acquitted 

of an offence, or that such a charge was withdrawn or 

stayed, is not relevant in making a finding of fact. 

 

So although we can bring in proof when they are actually 

convicted and that’s something that supports the case, the judge 

is not entitled to take into account if a person was found not 

guilty or the charges were stayed. And this goes quite a bit 

further; the change that’s being proposed at this time is to add 

another part to that clause. So here we’re saying now the new 

changes, that even if they weren’t even charged with an 

offence, that can’t be taken into account in this civil procedure, 

which goes pretty far. When you think about the burden of 

proof or the test that’s used in civil courts, it’s far lesser of a 

test than what you would find in the criminal courts, which is 

beyond a reasonable doubt. In civil trials we’re only looking for 

reasonableness or a balance of probabilities. 

 

So in this case, someone’s house could be seized, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and if it can be shown they were charged with a 

criminal offence and found not guilty or that the charges were 

withdrawn or that they were even never charged, that kind of 

information cannot be used in making a finding of fact. So I 

would think again civil libertarians are going to take a very 

close look at this kind of bill and see whether it actually 

infringes people’s personal rights because it’s a very broad, 

broad — especially their property rights — it’s a very broad 

application and there could be some concern from people’s 

property rights where, you know, it’s an important right for 

people to have. And for courts to be able to come in and take 

people’s property is of concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we’ll 

have more questions for that when we get to the committee 

stage. 

 

We’re also looking at a change to section 17, and this is the 

new process. And I think it’s the most substantive change in the 

bill because, as I indicated earlier, prior to this amendment the 

only way for the director to bring an application was by notice 

of motion. And now we’re adding section 17.1, which is 

entitled proceedings by statement of claim. And it’s a fairly 

long clause. I won’t get into the details on that, but it just sets 

out the rules for that kind of procedure. I think that’s the biggest 

change to the Bill for sure. 

 

Section 35, now we’re going to jump ahead. The rest of the 

clauses that I’m not referring to are basically procedural. But 

there’s a wee change being made in section 35, and that’s the 

addition of 35.1, and it’s just a limitation on the proceedings. 

So we’re saying that an application can’t “. . . be commenced 

after two years from the day on which the director becomes 

satisfied that the property is proceeds of unlawful activity or an 

instrument of unlawful activity.” So what that’s doing is just 

saying the director only has two years to bring the application, 

and that’s within . . . notwithstanding The Limitations Act, 

which I believe is six years now, but I’m not exactly certain 

about the length of time in The Limitations Act. So 

notwithstanding The Limitations Act, the director must bring 

the application within two years. 

 

There’s a new section being added after section 38. And section 

38 is whether or not the director could be compelled in any 

other proceeding to give evidence. And it’s saying it cannot, so 

you can’t force the director to give evidence in a criminal 

procedure, for example. 

 

The newest section that’s being added is 38.1, and that’s 

evidence based on information and belief is admissible with 

respect to any application pursuant to this Act. So I’m assuming 

that there was some clarity required for the type of evidence 

that is being allowed. Again, the minister did not talk about this 

a whole lot, other that evidence is now admissible based on 

information and belief, and this is in order to lessen the burden 

on testifying police officers. So, that’s something that obviously 

the council responsible for this bill have thought as appropriate. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, basically those are my comments on 

the individual clauses in relation to this bill. As I indicated, I 

think there is some very broad sweeping powers that are found 

within the original bill in 2009, The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Act where people’s property can be taken on 

application to the court by the director. And the director, I 

believe, is identified in section 6 of the Act and that would be 

somebody appointed by the minister to act as the director. And, 

I’m just going to back to the definition of director. Sorry, 

section 22 of the Act is where you find the appointment of the 

director. I’m just going to make a quick reference to that as 

well. The minister can appoint anyone as the director and may 

appoint one or more people as deputy directors. So it’s entirely 

within the minister’s power to appoint a director who can go in 

and seize people’s personal property on the belief that they’re 

involved in criminal activity. 

 

It’s a broad power, and it’s one that I think could be subject to 

review under the courts. As far as I know it hasn’t yet, but this 



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2013 

is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and my colleague is referring 

to the money. There is some numbers in on terms of how much 

money this government has taken in. As of the year-end, to 

March 31, 2012, we see there is about half a million dollars 

already that’s been put in the revenue fund, $500,000 for these 

properties that have been forfeited. Now naturally, this is also 

intended to assist law enforcement people from sophisticated 

criminals who are able to distance the proceeds of their crime 

from the actual criminal activity. 

 

So it’s always a balance. I think that’s what necessary. I think 

this bill is trying to find that kind of balance, but we see a 

broadening of the powers of the director here. We see a larger 

scope for the director to make his applications. And those kinds 

of things, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, really need to 

scrutinized and looked at closely by us in committee and also 

by the courts because these are people’s personal rights that are 

being affected. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that’s the extent 

of my comments on this bill. And we’re looking forward to 

having an opportunity to talk to the minister and his officials in 

committee, so I would like to refer this bill to committee. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The question before the 

Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 

54, The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — To which committee 

shall this bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 

54, The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — This bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the attendance by members at this evening’s meeting 

of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — It has been moved that 

this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. This 

Assembly now stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2659 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2660 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2662 

 Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2662 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2664 

 Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2664 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2665 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2665 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2668 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2672 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


