




















































Hansard: March 04, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 26A  MONDAY, MARCH 4, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2447 

 March 4, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Page 

 

The Speaker: — Before we start the proceedings today, I wish 

to inform the Assembly that Kayla Malinowski will be 

returning as a Page for the spring session. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and all 

the members of the Assembly, today I have two fine Regina 

citizens in your front row, Mr. Speaker, Dwight and Lana 

Siman. They’re constituents of Regina Dewdney. If you could 

give us a little — there you go — a little wave. Not only do 

they live in Dewdney, they have a small business in our 

constituency, Siman Auto Sales. And just like a lot of 

businesses in Saskatchewan, they’re expanding throughout the 

province as we speak. We’ll hear more about them in a few 

minutes, Mr. Speaker, but I’d ask all members to welcome them 

to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the legislature, I’m pleased to introduce 

two folks in the west gallery, Tracy George and Layton Burton. 

They are members of the film community who, up until last 

year, were earning a pretty good living here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately that hasn’t been the case since 

the cut to the tax credit. So they’re here today as a reminder to 

the Premier and to the ministers that perhaps they could keep 

them in mind in this upcoming budget, that we need a real film 

incentive here. So I would like to ask all members to join me in 

welcoming Layton and Tracy to their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

the members of the Assembly, an individual in your gallery 

who will be introduced more formally later is Simon Hutton 

from Yorkton. His family is a very well-known family in 

Yorkton, and I’d just like everybody to welcome Simon to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act in this 

session. And we know the proposed Saskatchewan employment 

Act, introduced in December 2012, is a sweeping rewrite of our 

labour laws including, but not limited to, The Labour Standards 

Act, The Occupational Health and Safety Act, health relations 

reorganization Act, and The Trade Union Act. 

 

And since the Act was introduced in December, literally 

hundreds of hours of study and comparison have been carried 

out in the interest of due diligence. We know that stable labour 

relations in all sectors run the risk of being thrown into turmoil 

as a result of the bill’s sweeping changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

too rise to present a petition. And the prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, along with the hamlet of 

Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nations and the 

community of Turnor Lake, including the neighbouring 

communities in each of those areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have got support for this petition to 

provide those cellphone service coverage from all throughout 

the province. And the people that have signed this petition 

today are primarily from this particular city and Saskatoon as 

well. And I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Telemiracle 37 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today to recognize the success of the 37th annual 

Kinsmen Telemiracle held in Saskatoon this past weekend. 

Once again demonstrating the spirit of generosity that exists in 

our province, Saskatchewan families, organizations, and 

corporations came together to raise more than $5,546,000. After 

this year’s event, Telemiracle has raised more than $100 million 

over the years for people across Saskatchewan. 



2448 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

Mr. Speaker, Telemiracle 37 was made a success by the 

generous efforts of Saskatchewan people. The numerous 

talented performers from across the province were also 

instrumental in Telemiracle’s success. This year’s impressive 

lineup included the likes of Bob McGrath, Beverley Mahood, 

Brad Johner and sons, and Donny Parenteau. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all the funds raised by Telemiracle stay in 

Saskatchewan and support individuals and families who require 

special assistance and medical treatment. Regardless of the size 

of the donation, all contributions to Telemiracle and the 

Kinsmen Foundation make a real difference in the lives of the 

recipients and are greatly appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will ask this Assembly to recognize another 

hugely successful Telemiracle and invite all members to join 

me in thanking all of the volunteers, all of the performers and 

donors that made Telemiracle such a shining success. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatoon this 

weekend we celebrated an event of which we were all proud, 

pulling together for a common cause — the 37th annual 

Telemiracle. For the goal of raising money to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people, Telemiracle showcases the generosity of 

our province. The 20-hour, on-air event raised over 5.5 million 

to help Saskatchewan residents in need. These funds, Mr. 

Speaker, are put towards an array of special needs expenses, 

from wheelchairs to medi-vans. The money raised will also help 

those who have to travel for surgeries and exams and helps with 

their costs. 

 

Each year local talent and those from further afield perform to 

help make the event a success. The cast of performers included 

Victoria Banks, Andrea Menard, Jeffery Straker, Donny 

Parenteau, alongside others like Prism and the indie rock group 

The Sadies, who recently opened for Neil Young. 

 

After 37 years, Telemiracle and Saskatchewan citizens have 

raised over $100 million. This incredible milestone is made 

possible by our province’s people showcasing the best of 

Saskatchewan — community, caring, and kindness. We thank 

all those who have donated their time, money, and energies to 

make this year’s Kinsmen Telemiracle another success. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Online Campsite Reservation System 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 

government is pleased to remind campers that today marks the 

first day of our online campsite reservation system for the year 

2013. 

 

The Saskatchewan parks reserve-a-site system allows campers 

to book a campsite and pre-purchase their park entry permit, so 

they can travel to their favourite park with the confidence of 

knowing their site is assured. More importantly, campers can 

use the online service to view campsites, check maps and 

availability, reserve a site, and manage their bookings. 

 

Now in 2012 there were 60,000 online reservations made, with 

13,500 being booked on the opening day. This unprecedented 

level of interest has provided us with an opportunity to improve 

this year’s online reservation system experience. 

 

We’re going to be opening up the site with staggered launch 

dates to improve the system and spread out web traffic. 

Reservations will commence on three separate dates. First, 

March the 4th: today reservations for provincial parks in the 

north and northwest areas will begin. This will be followed on 

March 6th by reservations for parks in the southwest and west 

central areas. And finally on March 8th, reservations will 

commence for parks in the southeast and east central areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to visit saskparks.net to 

book their site for this summer. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Carpeting in the Premier’s Office 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Today, Mr. Speaker, we would 

like to take a moment to remember one of our own. On July 

20th, 2012, we said goodbye to an indispensible part of our 

legislature, one who literally laid oneself out for our premiers 

for over 25 years. Mr. Speaker, we would like to recognize the 

role of none other than the Premier’s carpet. While the 

Premier’s office did not put out the usual official press release 

notice of the funeral which cost over $22,000, a freedom of 

information request did detail the event. It said: 

 

The existing carpet was well over 25 years old, second 

only to the Legislative Chamber’s, and was long past the 

product life cycle. Further attempts to repair open seams 

and worn-out areas were becoming futile. The seam 

problems were also becoming a tripping hazard and the 

carpet could no longer be cleaned effectively. The 

condition of the carpet that had exceeded its life cycle did 

not present an opportunity for reuse. As a part of the 

installation of the new flooring, the contractor was 

required to remove the old flooring. 

 

On July 20th, Mr. Speaker, we lost a friend. We are also 

comforted to hear of its replacement — hardwood flooring. My 

colleagues and I would like to recognize the contribution of the 

Premier’s carpet, and for the sake of the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan who paid over $22,000 for the replacement, hope 

that the new flooring does not share a similar fate. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Constituent’s Heroic Act 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 

pleasure to rise in this House today to recognize the brave and 

heroic acts of one of my constituents. Mr. Speaker, on the 

evening of January 30th, Dwight Siman and his wife, Lana, 

were on their way to pick up their son from basketball practice 

when they encountered a four-vehicle collision at a busy Regina 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

intersection. One of the involved vehicles caught fire as a result 

of the collision. 

 

Upon witnessing this, Mr. Siman immediately sprung into 

action to assist the occupant of the burning truck while Lana 

called 911. Because the truck body was bent in the crash, Mr. 

Siman was forced to pry the door open using his bare hands. He 

was able to free the occupant of the vehicle seconds before it 

burst into flames, preventing this serious accident from 

becoming far worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Siman’s quick reaction to rescue the trapped 

occupant, who happened to be an off-duty police officer, was 

both selfless and courageous. An official at the Regina Police 

Service commended Dwight Siman’s actions as nothing short of 

bravery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that this Assembly commend the 

brave and selfless actions of Mr. Dwight Siman. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

University of Regina Cougars Win Canada West 

Championship 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

very happy to rise today to recognize the University of Regina 

women’s basketball team. This Saturday the Cougars won the 

Canada West championship in Calgary, beating out the 

University of Calgary Dinos for the win. Friday night they beat 

Fraser Valley to advance to the Saturday’s final. 

 

The Canada West conference is made up of 16 schools from the 

provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and BC, so this 

conference title is a huge accomplishment for the University of 

Regina. Their hard work and determination undoubtedly helped 

them bring home the gold, and now they can proudly bring the 

championship banner back to the U of R [University of Regina]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also very proud to say that my niece Madi 

plays guard for the Cougars. This makes me a little more than 

Cougar-biased. The Cougars are also one of only six teams to 

qualify for 2013 national championships which will be hosted 

by the U of R March 15th to 17th. The Cougars’ next challenge 

will be to win the prestigious national championship on their 

home court. I’d like to congratulate the U of R on the Canada 

West Championship win. I wish them the best of luck in a few 

weeks. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

We Day 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Wednesday, Saskatoon had the good fortune of hosting its first 

We Day. Over 15,000 youth attended and was brought to 

Saskatchewan by PotashCorp. Mr. Speaker, We Day is an 

annual event organized by the international charity, Free The 

Children. This event brings together a generation of youth 

through an inspirational event and year-long educational 

initiative. I had the pleasure of facilitating leadership sessions 

with an organization called Me to We that supports the work of 

Free The Children. They facilitated discussions with youth and 

leadership workshops for First Nations and Métis youth in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On the Saturday I, along with many First Nation youth, 

wrapped up the We Lead program. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

program that is designed to develop leadership and community 

engagement amongst self-identified Aboriginal youth. During 

this program, students outline challenges as well as prospective 

solutions to these challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, We Day is so inspiring that one active Yorkton 

student hopes to raise $10,000 by the end of the next school 

year to build a school in Africa. CEO [chief executive officer] 

of PotashCorp of Saskatchewan, Bill Doyle, also participated in 

the event. He used this opportunity to outline the importance of 

food security. He said of the 860 million people going hungry 

in the world, half of these are children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly, I would like to 

congratulate the organizers of this event, and more importantly 

I would like to acknowledge the charitable spirit and inspiring 

actions of Saskatchewan’s youth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 and Climate Ventures Inc. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s pet project, 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, helped create Climate Ventures Inc. 

in 2008. In February of that year, the cabinet set up that 

for-profit company with a $100,000 grant. The Minister of 

Finance’s signature is there as part of the approval. A month 

later they gave a second sum of $99,979, just $21 shy of the 

public disclosure threshold — information that’s only been 

exposed through an investigation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has spent $200,000 to set up CVI 

[Climate Ventures Inc.], which has served as a contractor to 

another organization the Sask Party government has also 

arranged and funded, which is IPAC [International Performance 

Assessment Centre for geologic storage of CO2]. 

 

A slow leak of disturbing information and investigations has 

exposed unacceptable conflicts and allegations of millions of 

dollars wasted. To the minister: why was public money used to 

set up IPAC . . . or to set up CVI? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2008 there 

was indeed an OC [order in council] of funding that was 

provided to the University of Regina from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to develop a strategy and business plan for a 

public-private sector entity to help early stage technology 



2450 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

ventures in Saskatchewan with financing and expertise to 

commercialize their product. 

 

The U of R [University of Regina] was the entity that hired Mr. 

Jaffe for this initiative and that is where the creation of Climate 

Ventures Inc. did come from, under the U of R. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question, Mr. Speaker, was why did 

this government set up CVI using $200,000 of taxpayers’ 

money. Last June 19th, the minister told the legislature’s 

Crowns committee that, “CVI’s a private company. I don’t 

know its structure at all.” 

 

That’s funny, Mr. Speaker, because her government set it up. 

She went on to tell that committee, “. . . the money that was 

spent on this contract delivered the service and goods.” That’s 

wrong, Mr. Speaker, because there was no written contract, as 

exposed by the investigation. And an internal memo said that 

more than $2 million was spent on CVI and that most it was 

“spent for no acceptable business reason.” Mostly waste, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact, loads of unneeded computers and equipment 

still sits in boxes, Mr. Speaker. Why did this minister cover up 

the facts in committee when asked about her government’s role 

and responsibility as it relates to IPAC and CVI? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was 

issues, and our government did not deny that there was issues 

when IPAC was under the management of the U of R. The 

member opposite alludes to the fact that we were holding it a 

secret. And yet when I go through all of Hansard in committee, 

when we were answering the members’ questions and through 

the public when it has access to those committees, we said that 

it was a sole-source contract that was a concern. We said that 16 

times, Mr. Speaker. We said that there was a conflict of interest 

with that contract five times, Mr. Speaker. We said that the 

contract was high-priced two times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also said that once IPAC incorporated and a board was 

formed, there was issues identified. They took a number of 

steps. They severed the arrangement with the U of R. They 

secured the asset of the IT [information technology] equipment 

and software, Mr. Speaker. They called for a forensic audit, Mr. 

Speaker, of what happened while it was under the management 

of the U of R. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that 

the minister is reading through Hansard because we have been 

as well. That minister testified in committee and repeatedly 

referenced a contract that never existed. In fact in testimony, 

that minister spoke of a contract 52 times, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister herself testified on June 19th, I quote, “There was a 

contract with CVI.” 

 

We’ve since learned through investigation that that wasn’t true. 

No contract existed and it’s been described as the CEO of IPAC 

as nothing more than a handshake to flow money. Despite her 

testimony in committee, the minister has since admitted to a 

reporter that she knew there was no contract. Question to the 

minister: why did she clearly testify there was a contract when 

there was no such thing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the forensic audit done 

by Meyers, Norris and Penny references the contract. Whether 

it was verbal or written, you could call it a contract. I made a 

mistake when I was interviewed by Geoff Leo on when I knew 

whether or not there was a signed contract and I mistakenly said 

to him . . . First of all, after saying I’d have to go back through 

all my notes, I did, after the interview, go back through all my 

notes, and nowhere in my notes was it indicated that it wasn’t 

signed. 

 

However, you did only have to go to the Provincial Auditor’s 

audit of the agreement between the U of R and IPAC-CO2 in 

which case she identified quite clearly in her audit that there 

wasn’t a signed contract. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that 

government, that minister, has had ample time to do the right 

thing. We’ve had three committee hearings on this matter. And 

back in June, twice we put forward a motion calling on the 

Provincial Auditor be tasked with an investigation and review 

on this front. The government members on that side of the 

Assembly rejected that motion twice, Mr. Speaker. They pushed 

ahead with their own agenda, Mr. Speaker. They’re pretty 

stubborn. 

 

We called again just a short time ago for the auditor to have a 

look at the IPAC cover-up. The government sits silent. This 

government has refused to admit its mistakes, refused to come 

clean and to provide the answers and accountability that are 

deserved by Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, why is the 

Sask Party government opposed to calling on the Provincial 

Auditor for a full investigation and audit of its IPAC cover-up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Again I have to say that 

the former CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] minister and myself are very, very poor at a 

cover-up because . . . I’ll go through it again. We told the 

committee that it was a sole-sourced contract that was a concern 

while it was under the management of the U of R. We told the 

committee 16 times that it was a sole-sourced contract that was 

a concern. We told the committee five times that there was a 

conflict of interest with that contract, Mr. Speaker. We also said 

twice that it was too highly priced. 

 

So when all of this was discovered when IPAC became 

incorporated and there was a board formed of there — there 

were CIC members on that board as well as industry and U of R 

— this was identified and steps were taken. The management 

agreement was severed. The agreement with CVI was severed. 

They did a forensic audit to identify where all the money had 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

gone prior to it becoming a stand-alone entity, Mr. Speaker. 

There was a number of audits done. There was an audit done by 

the Provincial Auditor. And the member opposite should read 

that because it was an audit of the agreement between the U of 

R and CVI. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Surgical Initiatives and Funding for Medical Services 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the electrophysiology lab at the 

Mosaic Heart Centre at the Regina General Hospital provides 

diagnostic testing and treatment for patients with abnormal 

heart rhythms. Is the minister aware of patients who have 

recently been notified that scheduled procedures have been 

cancelled and postponed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I do not at this time have 

information that procedures have been cancelled at that facility. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill Edwards is here 

with us today in the Assembly. He has an abnormal heartbeat 

and was scheduled for heart surgery on March 27th to correct 

the arrhythmia. Receiving this surgery would mean a significant 

reduction in the number of prescriptions that Bill would have to 

take. It would improve his overall health and his quality of life. 

 

Bill received a call from the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

informing him that his procedure, scheduled on March 27th, 

was cancelled and that it would be tentatively rescheduled for 

April 9th. However he was told that that April 9th surgery was 

dependent on the spring budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: are surgeries at the Mosaic Heart Centre being 

cancelled because of a lack of funding? And if so, why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when you 

look at surgical procedures in this province and setting a goal, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that no government in the history of 

this province have set goals to deal with surgical wait times like 

this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working very hard to ensure that patients 

have access to surgery within six months by the end of this 

fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. We know that right now we’re at 

about 90 per cent of the way there, Mr. Speaker. Ultimately we 

want to get to a position where we can offer surgery within 

three months by March of 2014. Mr. Speaker, even today we’re 

at 78 per cent of the way there. 

 

But we still know that there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker, 

particularly here in Regina Qu’Appelle. That’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to meet with the board and 

the CEO to work with them to ensure that they’re getting back 

on track in terms of their capacity issues, as well as on track on 

their surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s fair to say 

that no government has worked as hard as this one to get our 

wait times down across Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a specific individual here 

in Regina who was told that he only had a tentative date for 

surgery because of budget concerns. In 2009 the 

electrophysiology lab opened, largely due to the generosity of 

Kinsmen Telemiracle, Mr. Speaker, that donated $1.25 million 

to the Hospitals of Regina Foundation. And this weekend we 

once again saw the unmatched generosity of Saskatchewan 

people in looking out for their neighbours. 

 

Saskatchewan people have made a commitment and have given 

to this project, Mr. Speaker, and they expect the government to 

do the same. My question to the minister: is the future of the 

electrophysiology lab at the Mosaic Heart Centre uncertain or 

will the necessary funding be provided in the spring budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly we want to 

make sure that we’re able to offer surgery within our system 

here in Saskatchewan in a timely fashion. That’s why we’ve 

worked with health regions across this province, within the 

health system, with health providers in providing to date over 

111 million additional dollars for surgeries in just the past three 

years, Mr. Speaker. And certainly I think members opposite and 

the public will see that this government will continue its support 

of the surgical initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so while we certainly . . . Mr. Speaker, certainly we want 

to make sure that people are offered surgery in a timely fashion. 

I think it’s fair to say that, Mr. Speaker, when you look, for 

example — just picking out a number in terms of the 

benchmark — when you look at people waiting longer than 18 

months for surgery in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in 2004 

when the government of the day finally got around to 

publicizing the waits in this province, there were nearly 6,000 

people waiting more than a year and a half for surgery, Mr. 

Speaker. That number we now count by the dozens, not by the 

thousands, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to continue to make 

progress where that government failed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister was clearly asked if 

the future of the electrophysiology lab at the Mosaic Heart 

Centre was certain and he did not answer that question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout Saskatchewan, patients and families 

are concerned about the possible reduction of health care 

services, especially as this relates to the spring budget. Today 

the example, Mr. Speaker, is the Heart Centre but we are 

hearing rumours of other cuts and reductions and services 

across Saskatchewan coming through the budget. My question 

to the minister: what other services and procedures, Mr. 

Speaker, are up on the chopping block as a result of the 

upcoming spring budget? 



2452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, well certainly we’ll make 

the offer to look into this particular situation with the gentleman 

that is here in the Chamber, but to specifically answer the 

member’s question, he asked what else is up in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I can tell you this. The number of surgeries that 

are going to be performed in this province this year going 

forward are going to be up, Mr. Speaker. The number of 

diagnostic procedures that are going to be performed in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, are going to be going up this year. And, 

Mr. Speaker, certainly we’ll stand on our record in terms of the 

surgical initiatives. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been able to recruit one 

of the leading neurologists, Mr. Speaker, to the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]. He’s the head of . . . the new 

unified head of surgery for the U of S and the Saskatoon Health 

Region. And he said this, and I quote: Mendez — Ivar Mendez 

is his name — said to The StarPhoenix, was “tremendously 

impressed with the provincial government’s surgical wait time,” 

said, “This has never been heard of in the country . . . I think 

that this will be the model for the rest of the country,” Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Insurance Rates for Motorcycles 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On February 15th, 

SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] released its 

proposal for a new tax on every driver in the province and a 77 

per cent increase on motorcycle licensing. Under this totally 

unreasonable plan by the Sask Party, motorcycle riders with 20 

years of riding experience, with accident-free records, and who 

paid out of pocket to take a motorcycle safe driving course, will 

see their rates skyrocket. This increase may force motorcyclists 

to sell their bikes and could kill local small businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does this minister believe the 77 per cent increase 

is fair for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as it has been quite clearly explained that within insurance, the 

premiums that are collected is supposed to cover the claims that 

come in. And in the case of motorcycles, that hasn’t been the 

case. There has been a $9 million shortfall. However, Mr. 

Speaker, we too have heard from different motorcycle riders. 

We know that what SGI has proposed is quite considerable hike 

for a number of riders, and we’ll be looking at a number of 

options. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — The fact is the Sask Party government doesn’t 

listen and does not consult. The last time the Premier made a 

huge mistake, he refused to listen to those most impacted, to the 

film industry. People in Saskatchewan take the Sask Party 

consultations with a block of salt. 

 

With this massive rate hike and new tax already on its way to 

the Saskatchewan rate review panel, now we hear that the Sask 

Party hadn’t done its homework. They didn’t listen, didn’t 

consult, and didn’t consider other common sense options for the 

Crown insurance company. 

 

To the Premier: other than checking Twitter on his iPad, what is 

his plan to listen to the people of Saskatchewan? Will the 

Premier definitively, definitively state today he is pulling his 

totally unreasonable application? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister in charge of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the mechanism that the Crowns use in order to look at different 

rate increases or decreases is the same process that was used 

when the NDP [New Democratic Party] were in government. 

We have a rate review panel that does public consultations. 

They come forward with recommendations and then the 

government as a whole takes a look at those recommendations. 

 

There is obviously going to be issues with the motorcycle rate 

increases. And our government has, even though there will be 

public consultations that will take place, it’s already said we’re 

going to be looking at options, obviously. But however, those 

public consultations, as it was when the NDP were in 

government, is conducted by the rate review panel. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Or on Twitter as we heard last week, Mr. 

Speaker. New Democrats listen to Saskatchewan people, and 

what we hear is that they want safer roads and they want to be 

rewarded instead of punished when they are making safe 

decisions. Currently one only needs to take a written exam to 

get on a motorbike. There is no additional road test or safety 

training expected. In fact if motorcycle riders want a safety 

course, they pay for it out of pocket. With a 77 per cent increase 

in their insurance, I don’t see any middle-class families having 

the money left over to pay for the $400 safety training course. 

 

Will the minister consider rates that encourage safe rider 

training rather than discourage safety training courses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer 

is yes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Standardized Testing and Student Achievement 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education 

has been making a lot of claims while defending his agenda 

with his push towards standardized tests for students as young 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2453 

as grade 4, Mr. Speaker. He says standardized tests won’t be the 

only tool that’s being used. He said the program won’t be used 

to compare schools. He said funding won’t be tied to results. He 

said this will not be the American model. 

 

He’s been saying all sorts of things about his agenda, about 

what it isn’t, Mr. Speaker, but he hasn’t said very much about 

what it is. Mr. Speaker, quite simply, why is the minister 

pushing forward the Sask Party’s standardized testing plan for 

Saskatchewan students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite for the question. I’ll tell you what the 

student achievement initiative is. The initiative is about early 

learning. It’s about student engagement. It’s about student 

transitions. It’s about consistency and standards. Mr. Speaker, 

we have 28 school divisions in our province, and across the 

province we have a great deal of absolutely fine work being 

done by the 13,000 teachers that are in those school divisions. 

Work that’s taking place now, for example, is examples of 

testing material that goes on absolutely every day, and those 

school divisions are quite anxious to share that information with 

us. They’re very proud of those results and I’ve got to tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, that the results are actually dramatic. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — That’s strange, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister says this is about early learning. Yet, Mr. Speaker, it 

doesn’t start till grade 4, and in fact under that budget and that 

minister, early learning is being cut in this minister. Could he 

explain more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this government is very concerned about student outcomes and 

increasing student outcomes for children. The student 

achievement initiative begins with the early years. In fact, we 

use a couple of tools, one of them the early development 

instruments which helps identify those children that are most 

vulnerable. Secondly, we’ll be using an early years evaluation 

tool that will help kindergarten and pre-kindergarten teachers 

ensure that students, before they enter the grade 1 program, are 

ready for learning. We have increased the number of 

pre-kindergarten programs by 85 per cent since coming into 

power, for a total of 286 kindergarten programs in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Early years is just the beginning of 

the journey to student success. High school completion is the 

end product. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister was 

asked by the media to explain what evidence there was to 

support his standardized testing plan, he said there was none, 

Mr. Speaker. He said explicitly he didn’t have any evidence. 

And that’s why people in Saskatchewan are questioning this 

government’s push towards standardized testing without any 

rationale, and without listening and consulting with 

Saskatchewan teachers and parents. Despite all of this, the 

minister is already spending taxpayer dollars on his agenda. Mr. 

Speaker, why is the minister diverting already thin education 

dollars away from real learning for his standardized testing 

agenda in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s all about student outcomes. The evidence to support 

enhanced outcomes is evident. Mr. Speaker, the good work that 

teachers are doing in our classrooms manifests itself time and 

time again. This is not a high-stakes American model that will 

be attached to funding or ranking schools or ranking teachers. 

It’s a Saskatchewan product for Saskatchewan students 

developed by Saskatchewan teachers, and we will be using that 

evidence to improve student outcomes. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s common sense and 

known across Saskatchewan that students from lower 

socio-economics need support to do better in schools and that 

cutting resources and straining classroom impacts all students. 

There’s evidence to support that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it just doesn’t make sense to be pushing 

standardized testing instead of supporting the classroom and 

students’ needs. That includes educational assistants to help 

children with special learning needs, and proper education 

funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would the government spend precious 

taxpayers’ dollars on standardized testing instead of putting 

those funds into where it’s most needed and directing it to work 

for Saskatchewan students all across Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s already happening. Chinook School Division, for example, 

has been using a balanced literacy approach to improve student 

outcomes in reading. 

 

Year 1 of the program, 63 per cent of the students assessed 

achieved grade level. Four years later, that number rose to 84 

per cent. Mr. Speaker, for us to want to even go there and 

remove that would be foolhardy. Those kind of results in our 

classrooms are dramatic, and I salute the teachers for achieving 

those results. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting time in 

education and the stakes are high. This is a time where there’s 

strain on the classroom, where we see cuts to educational 

assistants, where we see classes that are bursting at the seams. 

We have schools that are unbuilt, where we aren’t properly 

funding educational as an additional language. And this 

minister’s going to invest in testing instead of teaching, Mr. 

Speaker, in a very narrow-minded pursuit, with no evidence to 

support what he’s doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government pushing forward its own 



2454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

agenda that’s been proven to be ineffective and narrow-minded 

and not in the best interests of students in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this is not about process; this is about the students. We have a 

70 per cent high school completion rate across the province and, 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that’s not acceptable. Furthermore 

we have a 30 per cent high school completion rate for our First 

Nations and Métis children and that’s not acceptable. We need 

to do better than that, Mr. Speaker, and we will. 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to table a 

communiqué from the Lieutenant Governor: 

 

Pursuant to section 67 of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007, I hereby inform the 

Assembly of the membership of the Board of Internal 

Economy effective February the 7th, 2013: Hon. Dan 

D’Autremont, Chair; Hon. Nancy Heppner; Hon. June 

Draude; Jeremy Harrison; Doreen Eagles; David Forbes; 

Warren McCall. 

 

Yours sincerely, Lieutenant Governor, Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield. 

 

I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I ask for leave to move three motions 

regarding amendments to the standing orders, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

asked for leave to move three motions regarding memberships. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Membership of the Standing Committee 

on Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That notwithstanding rules 121 and 141(1), the 

composition of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts shall consist of eight members, including two 

opposition members, for the duration of the 27th 

legislature. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 

House Leader: 

 

That notwithstanding rules 121 and 141(1), the 

composition of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts shall consist of eight members, including two 

opposition members, for the duration of the 27th 

legislature. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All opposed say nay. The ayes have it. 

Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly be amended by adding the following after rule 

15(5): 

 

15(6) Any item of business standing in the name of a 

minister may be moved by any other minister in 

accordance with the conventions which permits ministers 

to act for each other on the grounds of the collective 

nature of the government. 

 

15(7) Paragraph (6) of this rule shall apply to the 

Government House Leader when he or she is not a 

minister but is a member of Executive Council. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 

House Leader: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 

be amended by adding the following after rule 15(5): 

 

15(6) Any item of business standing in the name of a 

minister may be moved by any other minister in 

accordance with the conventions which permits ministers 

to act for each other on the grounds of their collective 

nature of the government. 

 

15(7) Paragraph (6) of this rule shall apply to the 

Government House Leader when he or she is not a 

minister but is a member of Executive Council. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? All those in favour say 

aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. The ayes have it. 

Carried. 

 

I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly be amended by adding the following after rule 

19(4): 

 

19(5) When the Government House Leader is a member 

of Executive Council but not a minister of the Crown, he 

or she may be permitted to answer questions in 

accordance with rule 19(2). 

 

I so move. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 

House Leader: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 

be amended by adding the following after rule 19(4): 

 

19(5) When the Government House Leader is a member of 

Executive Council but not a minister of the Crown, he or 

she may be permitted to answer questions in accordance 

with rule 19(2). 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All opposed say nay. The ayes have it. 

Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 76 — The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to speak to Bill No. 76, An Act to amend The 

Municipal Board Act and to make related amendments to other 

Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we all know, legislation related to 

municipalities, to the boards, all of the Acts related to 

municipalities usually arises when there’s been a request from a 

municipality or a request from somebody within the 

bureaucracy here in Regina around a particular problem that has 

arisen. So normally the way to look at these bills is to try to 

figure out what the problem is and how that problem is going to 

be solved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in looking at this particular legislation the minister 

does set out some rationale for proceeding with the legislation. 

But I’m not certain that the specific incidents or situations that 

have triggered this request for legislation have really been laid 

out in this second reading speech by the minister or in the 

legislation and the explanation itself. And so what that means is 

we need to speculate about why this particular legislation has 

been presented today. 

 

So let’s first take a look and see what the minister says it’s 

about. And then we’ll see whether the request that he’s made 

matches with what we see in the bill or what we don’t see in the 

bill, which is probably more the problem or difficulty that we 

have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister said that it’s going to first “. . . 

improve the Saskatchewan Municipal Board’s processes and 

abilities related to municipal boundary alteration applications or 

annexations where the municipalities involved cannot reach 

agreement.” Now that looks sort of straightforward, but what 

we need to look at is what are the particular problems that have 

triggered this particular legislation and what are the suggestions 

that have been made by the minister to try to fix some of these 

things. 

 

Now the other area that appears to be identified, although it’s 

not as clear, is that there’s been requests from boards and from 

the ministry to update the appointment provisions around 

part-time members, members’ pension plans, and to correct 

some wording and remove outdated references. Now that looks 

to me like it might be some of the standard changes that are 

requested by people within ministries when legislation is 

opened for amendment. But let’s go and take a look at the bill 

and see what it is that’s being done and whether or not this can 

accomplish that. 

 

But before I do that, I want to see if some of the situations that 

we know have happened in the province are the situations that 

have triggered this legislation. So is it the situation around the 

city of Yorkton and surrounding rural municipalities, where 

there’s been some dispute as to where the boundaries should be 

and how services should be provided as new subdivisions or 

new housing developments are created on the edge of the city of 

Yorkton? So it could be that there’s something that comes from 

there. 

 

Or it could be the very public issue that arose between the city 

of Regina and the rural municipality of Sherwood around the 

development of some of the industrial lands around the city of 

Regina and the fact that there were some fairly direct and major 

disputes where the minister of the Government of 

Saskatchewan was required to step in and see if something 

could be done to resolve this, especially as it related to the Kal 

Tire operation. So it may be that some of this relates to that. 

 

It may also relate to some of the issues around the city of 

Weyburn with municipalities in that area. And clearly, I think, it 

also relates to issues around the city of Saskatoon and the rural 

municipality of Corman Park. All of those particular situations 

have their own unique characteristics, but the question is 



2456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

whether this change will assist in dealing with some of those 

issues. 

 

Now on the practical side, this legislation does go, it appears to 

me, and attend to a number of the issues that have been raised 

by the Municipal Board itself. It talks about how members’ 

pension plans are changed if they get appointed to this 

municipal board. Many of the people that are appointed to do 

this particular work come from municipalities that have their 

own pension plans, and the question is whether they’re required 

to go into the provincial pension plan or whether they can stick 

with their own plan that they’ve had from before. And it 

appears that the legislation itself will allow for that particular 

continuation of the old pension plan to take place. 

 

And so what we have then is under, I guess it’s section 10, the 

amendments to section 10 of the legislation. It allows for 

appointees to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board to continue to 

contribute to their previous plan if they so choose. That’s an 

option that looks like it can make some sense. We may end up 

having to ask some questions about that to totally understand 

what the consequences are for individuals who are in that 

particular situation. 

 

There’s also provisions that relate to wording in reference to 

other particular pieces of legislation. We see that the references 

that are there have been corrected to take into account that there 

have been changes in quite a few pieces of legislation since this 

legislation was last presented in the legislature. 

 

Now the major issue appears to be the ability of the . . . relates 

to the process that the Saskatchewan Municipal Board has 

whereby it adjudicates municipal boundary alteration. And as 

we all know, that normally would and most often is a situation 

where a city or a town — but most likely a city — annexes 

some land next to it for its future development. And I know that 

it’s always a curious situation, but when you talk to various 

levels of government, it’s the municipalities, the cities, that 

have the long-term plans, the 50-year and the 75-year plans, 

because their plans always include annexation of land from 

their neighbours. 

 

As a province we aren’t in the situation where we can annex 

land from Alberta or Manitoba for the long-term economic 

viability of the province. But what this particular legislation 

does, it allows a city to expand the boundaries, to annex land 

next to them to, well you know, for their long-term economic 

and social viability. 

 

Now when I looked at the legislation, the very first change 

that’s been made is to say that the Lieutenant Governor . . . 

Right now the situation is such that the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, in other words the Premier and his cabinet, will 

appoint the members of the Municipal Board. What this 

amendment proposes is that there be part-time members 

appointed to the Municipal Board and that these members be 

appointed by the minister without having to go to cabinet to do 

it. 

 

Now it’s not entirely clear what the purpose of this process is, 

other than it appears that it would be possible for the minister, 

without publicity or without the full transparency that comes 

when an order or a decision is made by order in council in the 

cabinet, it would allow the minister to appoint people on a 

part-time basis to deal with a specific problem. Now it’s not 

entirely clear from the legislation that this provision is there for 

other than trying to break impasses on the Municipal Board. 

 

It’s a bit unusual that you would appoint a board which is to be 

independent and then have the ability to remove members or 

add members to change how that board works, on a part-time 

basis and maybe only for a very specific decision that needs to 

be made. I think that that’s the area where this legislation is not 

as clear as it could be. Because if the intention is to give the 

minister the power to influence or override the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board, I think we as legislators need to ask quite a 

few questions. 

 

We know that there can be frustrations that take place within 

the ministry when these decisions don’t go as smoothly as 

people like and that other remedies can be created to deal with 

that. But if this change around the part-time members of the 

board and the ability of the minister to appoint these without 

having to go through cabinet and all of those types of activities 

are there to circumvent what is effectively an independent body 

set up by legislation, then I think we need to ask quite a few 

questions about this. 

 

Now there are attempts to make sure that the people who are 

appointed as part-time members have the same qualifications as 

full-time members, but it still raises this issue of what is the 

purpose of having the part-time members added into the mix to 

make these important decisions. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Let’s talk about a hypothetical situation because we don’t know 

specifically what this legislation is designed to deal with. But 

say we had a situation with the city of Moose Jaw and the rural 

municipalities around the city of Moose Jaw, and the matter 

was quite contentious politically because it involved a major 

industrial site that was going to be located in the RM [rural 

municipality] that the municipality wanted to have, the city of 

Moose Jaw wanted to have within their taxation base and this 

particular annexation request had come to the municipal board 

and there was an impasse at the board. 

 

Is the new legislation set up so that the minister can overcome 

the impasse by appointing part-time members to change the 

composition of the board to allow for a decision to be made 

either for the city of Moose Jaw or against the city of Moose 

Jaw? I’m not sure we can tell from how the legislation is set up 

whether that’s the intention of the minister. 

 

One of the things that may have helped when we had the second 

reading speech from the Minister of Municipal Affairs was that 

we had some actual examples of what they were trying to 

correct. But it really does raise the question of whether this isn’t 

an administrative or ministry attempt to influence or affect the 

ability of the Municipal Board to make decisions in contentious 

situations. Because if in fact it is set up in a way that the 

part-time members can be appointed in sufficient numbers to 

override the full-time members, it does always hang as a cloud 

over their ability to do their work on a day-to-day basis. So we 

will be requesting further information about this to make sure 

that we understand the full effect and full import of that 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

particular clause. 

 

Now it’s clearly set out that this power can be used in 

appropriate situations where there’s vacancies created by death 

or resignation or some other reason, but it still is not entirely 

clear, I don’t think, to us or to the public that this particular 

provision will not be used, or maybe the better word is abused, 

to override decisions made by the board. We do have the 

information from the minister that 88 per cent of the boundary 

alteration and applications are straightforward and agreed to by 

everybody, and they don’t end up really having to come to this 

board. But it’s clear that it’s these contested order alterations 

that are the ones that are causing the difficulty. 

 

Now where it’s clear that there’s been much discussion about 

this, and I know that any time there’s been as many, I think, 

years of discussion around provisions that are changed, there 

will be people who disagree with the direction that the ministry 

has taken. At this point we don’t know whether there’s broad 

agreement with this or whether there are some people who 

disagree with it, but we’re clearly going to go ahead and take a 

look at this to make sure that everything is being done 

appropriately. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation has positive aspects 

that we will be supportive of. There are some areas where we 

have some questions. We’re also concerned about the types of 

situations where the extra power given to the minister outside of 

the order in council process through cabinet, where that 

particular process is used, we will want to know why and in 

what situations that will be used. But, Mr. Speaker, at this point 

I would adjourn debate on Bill No. 76. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 76. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 77 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 77 — The 

Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 77, An Act to amend 

The Horse Racing Regulation Act and to make consequential 

amendments to The Revenue and Financial Services Act and 

The Revenue Collection Administration Regulations. And really 

it’s relatively straightforward; what it seems to do is repeal 

certain things. And as the minister made in her comments, that 

really this focuses around the parimutuel tax that’s on horse 

racing and the amount that’s been collected. And I guess over 

the course of the years, it’s been then turned back to the 

operators of the horse racing tracks. They’ve been collecting it 

and remitting it, and traditionally it’s been returned to the 

industry in the form of grants to track operators. 

And interestingly, the minister mentioned in her opening, her 

comments back in November 26th, that actually the amount in 

2011, the total parimutuel tax collected was $857,000, all of 

which was returned to the industry. So, Mr. Speaker, that must 

mean that well over $8 million dollars, if this is a 10 per cent 

tax, then I would . . . From my math, there must be 

approximately or more than $8 million dollars collected from 

the racetracks, and this is actually a significant economic 

activity in our province. And of course we know that, we’ve 

often hear about that. And it’s an exciting time when people get 

out to the horse races, and it’s one that has grown up over time, 

you know. We all get pretty excited about that and watching the 

horses and what this implies. 

 

Interestingly though, you know, as we often think that when 

you take out a tax — and maybe that’s a good thing, and 

apparently the horse track operators have been asking for this 

— but I’m curious, now that the tax is gone, and my member 

from Athabasca actually raised this, is what will happen to that 

whole in which that tax was collected? Now it won’t be 

collected. Are they anticipating that that will create more 

income and will take the place of the 857,000, 800,000-plus a 

year? That’s a significant amount of money; that’s obviously 10 

per cent. How do the operators plan on covering that? Now 

obviously they were wanting this. 

 

But again we often see second reading speeches not as full, not 

as complete as they might be. Because again we want to make 

sure that these operations are sustainable, that they’re viable, 

that they continue on, our job is to make sure there’s not 

unintended consequences. So when you take away this amount 

of money — and maybe it shouldn’t have been a tax in the first 

place, and that can be debated, but it is what it is — but when 

you take away that kind of money, nobody’s collecting it, how 

will they make up that difference? It’s a significant amount of 

money, and it’s really important that we ask that question. And 

I know we will be curious about how will that be made up. 

 

And it is unfortunate that the minister wasn’t more forthcoming 

in her comments. I mean she does say that. Essentially this is 

what she said, and I quote: 

 

Our government remains committed to fiscal 

responsibility and I believe the repeal of the parimutuel tax 

is a win-win for both government and the horse racing 

industry. Eliminating the parimutual tax will allow the 

horse racing industry to determine how to use the funds 

for the benefit of the industry. 

 

But the question is the funds won’t be there anymore, from 

what we gather. Maybe they will be. But if there’s no tax 

collected, there will be no tax given, no grants given I assume 

unless — and this is maybe what we’ll find out in the budget 

coming shortly — is that the grants actually will continue and 

that it will be costing the government $850,000. I’m not sure if 

that’s the case. It’s unclear because the minister talks about 

these funds but doesn’t say where the funds come from. And I 

hope that there’s not a misunderstanding that the grants will 

continue. It’s not clear at all. And we know that if a tax viability 

is no longer there that maybe it is time to take a look at it. But 

10 per cent is a significant amount of money — $850,000 on a 

$8 million industry, it could have significant impacts. 

 



2458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

So while it seems straightforward and it is, as I look at the Act, 

it is relatively straightforward. You know, the short title, it’s not 

much, and then it talks about that transitional part but doesn’t 

talk about what will replace the $850,000. It does talk about 

what every operator will do in the transition and how they must 

keep and “preserve for six years all books, accounts, records, 

and documents required by the former provisions” and all of 

that kind of thing. 

 

I also found it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in fact this Act 

will come into force in less than a month. And what it says is: 

 

Subject to subsection (2), this Act comes into force April 

1, 2013. 

 

[and] If this Act is assented to after April 1, 2013, this Act 

comes into force on assent but is retroactive and is deemed 

to have been in force on and from April 1, 2013. 

 

So this is a bit of presuming that many things will go forward. 

And I mean, clearly the government has a majority and will see 

that this Bill will be passed. I’m not sure if this has been 

designated as a priority bill or not, but it is interesting that it is 

doing that. But I can see the point. Clearly the point is that 

when the horse racing season starts, you want to be on a level 

playing field, or a level racing course I guess, and so you want 

to make sure that you don’t change things up halfway through a 

season. So it does make sense. 

 

But as I said earlier, we will have many, many questions about 

this bill when it comes to the committee, but we’re not ready to 

send it there because I think many of the others will have some 

points to make. But as I said, it’s about the viability, 

sustainability, because clearly we want to make sure there’s no 

unintended consequences that you’re creating an industry up to 

some significant challenges when they’re trying to make up 

over $800,000. 

 

Now maybe it’s all been worked out, and if it has been worked 

out it’s just really unfortunate that the minister wasn’t more 

clear in her comments to the House when she refers to the funds 

and when she says eliminating the parimutuel tax will allow the 

horse racing industry to determine how to use the funds for the 

benefit of the industry. And as I say, if a tax is not there, then 

I’m not sure what it means that there will be a pool of funds to 

distribute. Or are they talking about some sort of a granting 

system? 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know there are many bills before 

the House today that we will want to get to. This isn’t a long or 

elaborate bill, and there’s many points and I know that many of 

my colleagues have many other debates that they would like to 

get to. And in the meantime, while I continue to talk about 

horse racing, this race is not over apparently. I’m not near the 

finish line on this. It may be a photo finish. But as I said, this 

has a long history in Saskatchewan and you’ve got to make sure 

when you have things like horse racing that it’s done well. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I have to say as I was preparing for this, you know, some 

of the other regulations that happen that are very interesting 

about horse racing . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you 

know this but there should be only one horse racing track in 

each municipality. I did not know that. But that is the law, that 

you can only have one horse racing track in each municipality. 

And I’ll just read that: 

 

In any city, town, or village or rural municipality, 

horse-race meetings or horse-racing may be held at one 

but not more than one race-course or track in each 

calendar year. 

 

So this is quite something. So this is again talking about 

sustainability and viability, that sustainability of the industry. 

And so clearly we’ve taken this and we’ve thought a lot about 

this and how important it is to make sure that horse racing is 

done in a way that everything is on a level playing field. 

Because when you’re having this, a lot of work and energy goes 

into the training and developing of the horses, but also the 

jockeys and everything, and so you’ve got to make sure that it’s 

all on the up and up. 

 

I did not know this either, Mr. Speaker, but interestingly the 

interval between meetings, between horse race meetings, and 

I’ll read this: 

 

Subject to subsection (2), no horse-race meeting shall be 

opened or conducted upon a race-course or track within 

ten days of the conclusion of another horse-race meeting 

or horse-racing upon that race-course or track. 

 

Now I don’t know if that rule is still in effect. I mean the track 

that I keep track of more often than not is Marquis Downs. But 

I’m not that current that in fact that I attend more than once 

every couple of weeks or the 10-day rule doesn’t really apply to 

me. And so I feel that it’s really, it’s interesting. 

 

But this is an important industry and it’s important that we get it 

right. And so as I said, Mr. Speaker, in my earlier comments, 

and while . . . And I have not got the whole set of regulations 

before me and I’m not sure if that’s the whole set. It might be 

the whole set, but the one that is really before us is repealing 

section 6, and that is the tax on parimutuel bets and how that is 

done and how it’s collected and how that process goes. And 

now they’re eliminating that process of the tax. So it won’t be 

collected anymore, but we know that the operators of the horse 

races, of the tracks, think that’s a good idea. 

 

Our question though will be, what happens to that fund of 

money, that $850,000? Is there a replacement that they will be 

getting grants in lieu of? Or are they just counting on business 

being 10 per cent better and therefore they will have that looked 

after? 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move adjournment on 

Bill No. 77, An Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation Act 

and to make consequential amendments to The Revenue and 

Financial Services Act and The Revenue Collection 

Administration Regulations. I believe I’ve hit the finish line. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 77, The Horse Racing Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 78 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 78 — The Social 

Workers Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and join debate today for the second reading 

debate of Bill No. 78, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 

2012. It’s made for an interesting read, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the legislation itself, the way the different bodies have weighed 

in on it such as the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers. And at its base though, Mr. Speaker, I think it seeks to 

bring more resources to bear through changing the credentialing 

requirements for social workers, bring more resources to bear in 

the struggle, in the work to confront mental health treatment in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mental health generally is one of those issues that . . . it’s an 

interesting one in public life, Mr. Speaker. Everybody is 

affected by mental health issues, but it’s often the case that 

stigma or the fear of being associated with mental health issues 

for people in the public eye that can serve as a deterrent or as a 

barrier to participating in raising that awareness and raising the 

sort of consciousness that should be there around mental health 

issues. 

 

And so on the one hand, Mr. Speaker, we have tremendous 

need in the community in terms of mental health issues and the 

need for treatment and the need for awareness and the need for 

education. On the other hand, the very sort of 

consciousness-raising or the public education work that goes to 

bringing those resources to bear is oftentimes hindered by, 

again, that fear of engaging on the issue or that the stigma that 

can surround mental health issues. 

 

So just in that regard alone, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to be here 

today to participate in this debate. I’m glad to have the 

opportunity to speak about the importance of bringing resources 

to bear to help individuals deal with mental health issues and to 

do a number of things in this debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First I’ll speak to the content of the bill as I understand it 

myself, Mr. Speaker. But before I get into that, I’ll talk a little 

bit about the important work that people are doing on the front 

lines in terms of meeting and treating and counselling and 

diagnosing and the myriad of work that goes into helping 

people not just cope but to live successfully and to live up to 

their potential when dealing with a mental health disorder. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of meeting with 

individuals at the Regina branch of the Canadian Mental Health 

Association. And certainly the staff and the people that I and 

the intern that I’m working with under the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Internship Program, Jenna Orban, they gave us a 

great tour of what’s going on at the branch. But they gave us a 

real insight into the kind of safe place that it is for people, the 

positive place that it is for people, the way that people feel like 

they belong and feel like they’re valued there, but also that in 

terms of getting that stability, getting that security, Mr. Speaker, 

that is so critical when it comes to dealing with mental health 

issues. 

 

If you don’t have that sense of belonging or people alongside 

you to help cope, it can be a very difficult and very lonely and 

very . . . oftentimes destructive path of trying to cope, and 

trying to not just hold your life together but to advance, to meet 

those goals that we all have, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

employment or in terms of family or the way that we interact 

with community or the many, many things that we all take for 

granted. 

 

But when you’re confronted with a mental health disorder or an 

illness, that can become not just a challenge in terms of the 

various diseases or disorders themselves but again, Mr. 

Speaker, what both staff and people, members at the branch, 

what they spoke of was that stigma, that perception that is out 

there on the part of too many people in our society, Mr. 

Speaker, about people that are going through mental disorders 

and the way that that can take a problem and make it worse. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I think of the people out there on the 

front lines that are doing the work to help with healing, to help 

with stability, to help with the treatment, and again, Mr. 

Speaker, not just that sort of stabilization work but also to 

successfully re-transition and the kind of work that the branch is 

doing around employment and helping doing some of the 

mentoring and job shadowing and preparing, and also the actual 

partnerships that are out there in the community. 

 

And again I want to go on record thanking very clearly those 

that are stepping up in the business community, in the broader 

community, to join alongside these efforts and to make sure that 

there are those opportunities of employment. And again, I don’t 

think I need to say too much, Mr. Speaker, but we all know the 

sense of value that comes from bringing home that paycheque, 

that sense of accomplishment. And, you know, it’s not just that, 

Mr. Speaker, but there’s just the simple basic truth of being able 

to put bread on the table and keep a roof over your head. And 

roof over the head, Mr. Speaker, I think about the work that the 

branch is doing with other community-based partners around 

providing shelter for those that can be hard to house, Mr. 

Speaker, but again, some really, really encouraging, really 

positive work that is taking place at the branch. 

 

So I just want to . . . I know for me they’re representative of a 

lot of other community-based organizations, non-governmental 

organizations, people in government that are working to help 

those with mental health disorders to make a better life for 

themselves. So oftentimes we talk about the helping 

professions, Mr. Speaker, and certainly social workers are there 

and amongst the first rank. 

 

And so about the bill itself, Mr. Speaker, again referring to the 

actual items in the legislation and what is being proposed here, 

again referring to the minister’s second reading speech, and I 

quote, “allow . . .” The minister states, and I quote, “allow 

qualified clinical social workers to diagnose mental health 

disorders.” Moving down in the speech, Mr. Speaker, “By 

granting qualified social workers registered with the 



2460 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers or SASW the 

authority to make mental health related diagnoses, we can 

improve client services throughout our province.” 

 

Moving further on in the speech from the second reading 

speech of the minister, “Currently there are only 78 

psychologists and 36 psychiatrists working in the Saskatchewan 

mental health outpatient services.” Continuing the quote: “The 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers has told us that 

they’re up to 50 social workers who may currently qualify to 

perform diagnoses.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, if we can bring more resources to bear in 

aid of those that are faced with mental health disorders and 

mental health diseases, that is as it should be. And again, 

making changes in the standard of care such as this, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not something that is done lightly. 

 

I know that the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers 

has given this a lot of thought. What is required is continued 

scrutiny and careful consideration of how this will be 

implemented, how this is or is not taken up on by the potential 

out there in the social worker community. But again, making 

sure that you have not just the right skills but the right sort of 

mix of skills is, you know, an ongoing concern. There will need 

to be careful monitoring of this change to ensure that this is not 

a downgrading of the standard of care that is provided to 

individuals — that again that care is being provided in the 

appropriate manner and to those in the time of need. 

 

So this would, on the face of it, Mr. Speaker, seem to be a 

positive step. But it’s always on how that foot lands and how 

the next step is taken after that and the one after that. So we’ll 

be watching very closely to see how this impacts the wait-lists 

that we know are out there in terms of people with a mental 

health disorder or mental health issues that are waiting for that 

treatment, waiting for diagnosis. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We will be looking very closely to see that the Saskatchewan 

College of Psychologists is worked with very closely in this 

regard, and as well that this is an improvement, Mr. Speaker. 

Because that is of course the main point in these things, is to 

make sure that we as government are working in conjunction 

with community and with those who have the expertise, 

particularly when it comes to something like health care, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that that knowledge and that wisdom that 

is there, not just with the professionals but in the community as 

well, to make sure that that is properly marshalled and brought 

to bear, and that again people are getting the care they need in 

the time they need it. 

 

So we’ve got more questions about this. But on the face of it, 

again, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be a positive step. And 

we’ll be watching to make sure that this is in fact what it seems 

to be as a positive step. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

other colleagues of mine are interested in participating in debate 

on other items before the Assembly. So with that, I would move 

to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78, The Social Workers 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 78, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 79 — The 

Representation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on the discussion on this piece of legislation, 

Bill No. 79, The Representation Act, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation of course was the surprise 

that no one asked for here in Saskatchewan. Following the last 

election, Mr. Speaker, we learned that members opposite had a 

plan in place in order to add three more politicians to the 

Legislative Assembly — something, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t 

recall Saskatchewan people asking for, something that is 

contrary to what Saskatchewan people have asked for. And it 

was indeed a surprise that was not welcomed I think by the vast 

majority of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And when this issue was raised following the election, Mr. 

Speaker, of course it was a topic that was discussed and brought 

forward through question period. It was an issue where we saw 

people signing petitions and people contacting members of the 

Legislative Assembly, saying how wrong-headed this approach 

was. And we as an opposition most certainly brought those 

concerns forward, and we had good debates here in the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Despite all of that, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party was determined 

to plow ahead with this plan to add three more MLAs [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly], three more politicians to the 

Assembly at a cost of millions to the public purse. And at the 

same time, Mr. Speaker, that this decision was made, we saw 

other decisions at that time which were asking Saskatchewan 

people to receive inadequate funding or cuts to important 

programs or to pay more. 

 

I remember the discussion at the time. There was a large 

discussion or a large focus on the Western Development 

Museum and issues with funding at the WDM. There was the 

request by the Sask Party government to change the rate that 

seniors would pay for prescription medication. That was a 

concern. And so what we had, Mr. Speaker, was a situation 

where it didn’t add up. The Sask Party government was asking 

seniors to pay more, asking agencies to receive less in order to 

do the important work that they do. But at the same time they 

were more than happy, more than pleased, more than willing to 

spend millions of dollars to increase the size of the legislature 

on a permanent basis. 

 

And I think that is a real concern, Mr. Speaker, because it talks 

about the misplaced priorities. There, in my opinion, Mr. 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2461 

Speaker, was no good reason to increase the numbers of MLAs 

here in Saskatchewan. If you looked at Saskatchewan vis-à-vis 

other provinces, we were in a situation where we had a low 

ratio of constituents to elected representatives. So there was not 

an argument made when looking at other jurisdictions, and I 

think that’s an important point. So this piece of legislation 

increases the size of the legislature from 58 to 61. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, in order to do this, the Sask 

Party changed the formula that determines the calculation of 

constituencies and the size that is needed. And what they did at 

that time, Mr. Speaker, was also bring forward their plan to take 

those who were under 18 years of age, those who are not 

eligible voters, take them out of the equation to determine the 

size of the constituencies. And that’s a concern for a few 

reasons. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, we know as MLAs we have a variety of 

topics and concerns that come into our constituency offices, a 

variety of issues that we debate here on the floor of the 

Assembly, and we don’t discriminate, Mr. Speaker, based on 

age. When a young person comes into one of our offices, most 

of us do not turn that young person away because of the fact 

that they’re not 18 years of age. Many of the issues that we’re 

facing, Mr. Speaker . . . Today we had a very good discussion 

about the future of education, the Sask Party’s plans for 

increased standardized testings on the one hand, while not 

providing the necessary supports to teachers and those in the 

classroom. So the issues that we focus on, the issues that we 

talk about here of course involve those who are under 18 years 

of age. 

 

So tied into this discussion of adding three more MLAs, we 

must not forget the other aspect to the negative changes that 

have been made with respect to taking those who are under 18 

years of age out of the equation for determining the size of 

constituencies. Because I think that is ultimately where the most 

political and the most destructive actions, Mr. Speaker, I think 

were through that component, in my view. 

 

But this is looking at the product of those changes, Mr. Speaker, 

the idea of adding the three more MLAs, to changing the 

formula for how the size of constituencies are determined. And 

this is the result of the Boundaries Commission that did their 

work, did their work on the rules that were set by the Sask Party 

government. And that needs to, I think, be addressed and stated 

upfront before we have any discussion about the particular 

details of this legislation. We have to ask ourselves why did the 

Sask Party government increase the size of the legislature by 

three MLAs, something that no one asked for in the provincial 

election, something that I’ve never received an email, Mr. 

Speaker, from an individual saying that it was a good idea to 

increase the number of politicians. 

 

I haven’t had a good, in my view, reasoned argument as to why 

they ought to go down, why we as a province ought to go down 

that path. To me it would suggest that there were other motives, 

perhaps motives, Mr. Speaker, with the boundary calculations 

of not having Sask Party MLAs fight over certain boundaries 

and seats. It could’ve been some internal politics to do with the 

party as one option, Mr. Speaker. But whatever the motive that 

caused this, whatever the desire and the behind-the-scenes 

actions that were occurring, what we know, Mr. Speaker, is that 

ultimately this is not something that Saskatchewan people want. 

This is not something that sits well with Saskatchewan people. I 

talked about the issue of minors coming into our constituency 

offices and seeking help or seeking advice on a variety of 

topics. So that’s an important point, a very important point, Mr. 

Speaker. And also very important . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’m having some difficulty hearing 

the member. I would suggest that the discussions across the 

floor should be taken behind the bar. 

 

And I recognize the member from Saskatoon . . . whatever. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

continue speaking on this piece of legislation. And now I 

understand why there’s noise from members opposite because I 

think many of the members, especially those in the 

backbenches, don’t like this as well. They see how it is not a 

wise approach to be adding more politicians to the Assembly. 

They see how it’s a misplaced focus of what the priorities are 

for Saskatchewan people and what really matters. They see, Mr. 

Speaker, that it would be better to put the millions of dollars 

into health care, into education, as opposed to increasing the 

size of the legislature. 

 

I think many of the members opposite realize this, so the 

pushing back that we hear from them now, Mr. Speaker, is 

because there are perhaps a few brave souls on the backbenches 

of the Sask Party caucus who understand what this was really 

about, who understand why this was really done, who 

understand that it is contrary to what they put forward in the 

election platform, and who understand that this is an action that 

is not in the best interest of Saskatchewan people, 

Saskatchewan voters, and Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

I think a few of them understand that, Mr. Speaker, but I 

understand why members of the front bench would be so vocal 

right now because they have to pretend that this is actually a 

positive development when everyone in the province, 

practically everyone in the province, Mr. Speaker, understands 

and sees what this truly is, and this is the Sask Party being 

motivated by a cause that is more about what they would see as 

their own self-interest as opposed to what is best for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So the Boundary Commission did its work, Mr. Speaker, and 

came forward with a recommendation adding three 

constituencies, taking us from 58 MLAs up to 61. The addition 

of the three more seats, two urban and one rural which is part of 

Saskatoon and part rural . . . I think the name of that 

constituency is, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota, 

so it takes in one new suburb and then pies out into a rural area. 

And so that is the sort of the rural component. 

 

There are a number of changes that are brought forward here, 

Mr. Speaker, with the boundaries and with the addition of these 

seats. It of course has adjusted some of the boundaries in 

particular areas and there’s been some changes, based on the 

review that I’ve done of the proposed borders, some change in 

the rural area and most certainly in the city as well. So we do 

see a few renaming of constituencies based on what might make 

a little bit more sense given the changes to the boundaries, and 

we see the addition of some different names as well. 



2462 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

So, Mr. Speaker, following this, following the next election, we 

will have to become accustomed to some different names for 

constituencies, and I know whoever the Speaker is at that time, 

Mr. Speaker, will certainly be up to the challenge of getting that 

all straight and we’ll become familiar with the names as well. 

 

My own constituency, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatoon Massey Place 

right now, is suggested that a change will occur to Saskatoon 

Westview and that has to do with some of the boundary changes 

in the constituency. I actually, with the proposed boundaries, 

will be losing part of Massey Place proper, the neighbourhood 

of Massey Place to the member from Fairview right now, Mr. 

Speaker. So there’d be a minor adjustment there and I think 

changing the name to Westview, in my view, is an appropriate 

decision because it could reduce some confusion for voters, for 

constituents in living in a neighbourhood that’s called Massey 

Place, but not having that tied to their actual MLA who goes by 

the constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

So for my own situation in my constituency that I’ve been given 

the honour to serve, Westview makes it a bit more sense, I 

believe, because it’s central to the entire neighbourhood. It’s the 

name of a number of landmarks in the area. It is on the west 

side of Saskatoon and the name of a school, so there’s a good 

reason, I think, as to why Westview’s an appropriate name for 

the constituency. 

 

So I don’t have a particular quibble or problem with that aspect 

of it, of this change brought forward in Bill No. 79. My 

problem, Mr. Speaker, goes back to the decision that Sask Party 

government members made and have the buy-in of least the 

majority of their caucus that they ought to change the formula 

for how we calculate the numbers for constituencies and that, 

Mr. Speaker, we ought to add three more MLAs — something 

that no one in Saskatchewan has ever approached me about it 

being a good idea other than certain members from the Sask 

Party caucus and staffers. 

 

Other than that, Mr. Speaker, I think most people see this as an 

approach that doesn’t make sense, an approach that’s more 

about the Sask Party trying, trying to push their own agenda, 

stubbornly refusing the criticism from the general public, 

stubbornly refusing any sort of sound argument as to why this is 

not a good approach, but just plowing ahead because the 

political decision had been made to add three more MLAs. So 

to me it doesn’t make sense. I have major problems with the 

approach. 

 

And with that I will conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 

move to adjourn debate on this piece of legislation. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 59, The 

Representation Act, 2012. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 80 — The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to wade into the debate on Bill No. 80, The Power Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2012. One of the things that this bill is 

proposing to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to increase 

SaskPower’s borrowing limits to . . . the Minister in his opening 

comments or his second reading comments had said that 

SaskPower is making a multi-million-dollar capital investment 

of over 10 to 13 billion to renew and develop necessary 

infrastructure. 

 

So one of the things this bill is doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

increasing the borrowing needs, borrowing ability of 

SaskPower which is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Borrowing, not boring. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Borrowing. It’s the first day back, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker; I’m not fully in gear here with my speaking 

ability. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s one thing to 

borrow if you’re investing in infrastructure, but it’s another 

thing when you’re borrowing to be able to pay dividends when 

you’ve stripped your Crown, when you’ve stripped your 

Crowns. 

 

In the 2011-2012 third quarter there was a $120,000 raid of 

SaskPower, 120 million raid in 2011-2012, which was . . . What 

happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that means that’s increased 

rates, this means that there will be increased rates to 

Saskatchewan citizens. For example, on January 1st, 2013, 4.9 

per cent increase as of January 1st. So what we do is we 

increase the borrowing, we strip Crowns. We increase the 

borrowing capacity and don’t allow the Crowns to be 

sustainable and do what they need. 

 

Why do we have Crowns, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We have them 

to ensure that people here in Saskatchewan all have access to 

services. One of the goals is to keep rates reasonable, which 

isn’t the case here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one of the other 

goals of having a Crown corporation is to support being able to 

pay a dividend. A dividend is a completely reasonable thing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but when there are additional raids, as I 

said, in 2011-2012 of 120 million, that’s problematic. 

 

In my own constituency last year that received SaskPower — in 

the city of Saskatoon, it’s one of the areas that actually gets its 

power from SaskPower — we had stories of this time a year 

ago where pizza shops, one pizza shop in particular, there were 

constant power outages. So this business owner was losing 

product, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the power was not being 

reliable. We have stories of people who were bathing their 

children by candlelight, which might be kind of fun once or 

twice, but when you’re in the rush of a day, at the end of the 

day, it quickly looses its lustre after a few times, Mr. Deputy 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

Speaker. 

 

So we have some concerns that the government instead of 

strengthening the Crowns is in fact weakening them and making 

them less viable and is using them to buffer their budget, which 

they seem to have some serious difficulties with. It is a 

complete mess, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So rate increases. I know 

on the SaskPower website it talks about over the next 10 years, 

and this coincides with the minister talking about over the next 

10 years, 13 billion to renew and develop necessary 

infrastructure. But what comes with that? It will be increased 

rates to Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is 

one of the reasons we have Crown corporations is to ensure that 

rates are reasonable for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

So we do have some concerns. Perhaps it is a good business 

decision to raise the borrowing capacity. And the minister 

referenced that in his remarks, that because of our growing 

province and the growing demands, we need to invest in 

infrastructure. But it is a problem when a government sees a 

Crown as its own piggy bank and decides that this is something 

it needs to dip into, which then weakens our Crown sector, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So I think that 4.9 per cent increase on January 

1st, I know that there is many middle-class families who don’t 

think that 4.9 percent is certainly not going to make life any 

easier for them. Increases all across the board makes things 

more difficult actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I do know that I have colleagues who will be wading into the 

debate on Bill No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 

and we have much more to say about this. Again it is one thing 

to increase borrowing if you’re making smart decisions with the 

money, but we have some concerns that the government is 

using the Crowns as their own piggy bank. So with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill 80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 81 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 81 — The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to rise today to speak about Bill 81 in relation to 

the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just very quickly if I can for those that are watching and 

wondering what the debate is all about, I think it’s important 

that we give, just from our perspective as an opposition group, 

just to let them know exactly what the bill is all about and what 

I think what we think that the province and the government is 

trying to do here, Mr. Speaker. And of course at the outset I 

would say that once again they are failing miserably on trying 

to figure out the challenges attached with the Global 

Transportation Hub, or GTH as I will keep referencing this 

point. 

 

And the reference, Mr. Speaker, the concept was very simple. 

There was rumours as far back as ’03 and ’04. And certainly 

those rumours got stronger in ’05 when the NDP government 

was aware that there was an investment opportunity here within 

the city to make sure that there was an opportunity to 

regionalize transportation needs and to attract a bunch of 

companies and to develop what they would simply call as a 

global transportation operating base or the Global 

Transportation Hub. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in ’05 those discussions became very, very 

apparent. We know that the city was involved. We know that 

there was meetings, that there was some discussions. And of 

course the provincial government at the time, the provincial 

NDP certainly had a lot of discussion and points that were 

raised. And I remember having a chat with the Regina South 

MLA at the time, Mr. Andrew Thomson, Mr. Thomson. And 

Mr. Thomson was really, really excited about the project. And 

he was aware what was going on and, Mr. Speaker, he was 

aware that there was a lot of discussion and talks and a lot of 

vision plan. 

 

And again the idea was very simple. When we began the 

process to unveil the Global Transportation Hub, the GTH, we 

simply wanted to make sure that we’d done all that we can as a 

province — and certainly the city was involved as well, as well 

as the RMs — in trying to see how we could not only have 

strategic, smart investment into the Global Transportation Hub, 

but how we can make sure it’s coordinated and that we don’t 

leave anybody out in the cold, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The concept was very simple, as I said at the outset. You simply 

put land aside — and in this case it was 2,000 acres of land. 

You have the partners involved, not only just the city but 

certainly have the provincial government, certainly have the 

companies involved and the RMs that skirt the city to be part of 

this massive opportunity to create a central global transportation 

centre, so to speak, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that you’re 

highly coordinated because there’s a number of main highways 

that run in that area. And it’s an excellent, excellent opportunity 

to showcase the city and to showcase the co-operation of all the 

players involved and to make sure that Saskatchewan continues 

to build for years to come and for future generations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as I look at the bill itself, Bill 81, what really jumps out at 

me, Mr. Speaker, is that the fact that once again the 

Saskatchewan Party government just don’t seem to get it right, 

Mr. Speaker. They seem to really mess things up when they 

have the opportunity. 

 

And this is exactly what the process that I have undertaken as 

an MLA is to tell folks that no matter what the Saskatchewan 

Party do, or try and run their own parade and try and pat their 

own backs, Mr. Speaker, the simple fact of the matter: everyone 

in Saskatchewan, every single person knew that Saskatchewan 

was going to boom, the economy was going to move. And 

we’re going to see a great opportunity for our province, Mr. 



2464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

Speaker, primarily because of all the resources we have. 

Whether it’s uranium, whether it’s forestry, whether it’s potash, 

whether it’s oil and gas, we were very well positioned, Mr. 

Speaker. We were very well positioned as a province, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that we continue to see that growth 

happen and to sustain that growth for many, many years. 

 

And one of the pillars, Mr. Speaker, was the Global 

Transportation Hub. The city was quite excited. I believe it 

became very public in ’06 that this was an opportunity, this 

2,000 acre site, to coordinate all the transportation need and to 

have as many businesses located within that transportation hub. 

It was a very simple process, Mr. Speaker. And once the NDP 

lost the election in ’07, the reins were handed over to the 

Saskatchewan Party government, in particular the Minister of 

the Economy. And what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is problems 

after problems after problems created by that minister and by 

that government, Mr. Speaker, because they simply don’t know 

what they’re doing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the 2,000-acre site that we’ll make reference 

to as the GTH site, the Global Transportation Hub site, what I 

think is going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is that the people are 

excited about it. The opportunity is here. The companies are 

certainly, and many more companies are keenly interested in 

being part of the solutions towards making the Global 

Transportation Hub happen, to make it very effective, and to 

make sure that there was really good benefits for years and 

years to come. 

 

And all the companies got engaged, and all the players got 

engaged, and the RM and the city were engaged. And then, Mr. 

Speaker, enter the Minister of the Economy. And what 

happened, Mr. Speaker? We are now seeing that a lot of 

companies are simply bypassing the Global Transportation 

Hub. And we need to ask those companies, why are they doing 

that? The concept was simple. The opportunity was great. And 

we encouraged your participation when we were in government. 

What happened since then, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan 

Party simply took over the project, and once again, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re seeing that there are many, many mistakes and 

many, many errors being created. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if somebody were to ask me which 

companies bypassed the Global Transportation Hub concept . . . 

Because at one time there was many, many companies that were 

interested in being part of this huge project. And certainly, you 

know, since we’ve seen that excitement, we’ve seen the 

opportunity as an NDP government. And we encouraged the 

companies to become of a smart growth strategy that the 

province was certainly undertaking at that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of the companies that have since vacated, that have 

since moved from the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker, 

are companies like Southland Equipment, companies like 

Redhead Equipment. And, Mr. Speaker, we were very close, 

that close to losing Kal Tire to Manitoba. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what they’ve done is they’ve finally decided to locate here, but 

they would not locate in the Global Transportation Hub area, 

the 2,000 acres. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to be able to ask the 

questions why. Why are these companies not part of this project 

that they were so excited about at the time, Mr. Speaker? And 

these are some of the questions we have around Bill 81. 

 

The simple reality, Mr. Speaker, was Loblaws and some of the 

companies that we made reference to in this bill and I’m 

making reference today, Loblaws was prepared and has 

continued to be prepared to be the solid player that they are — 

$250 million as an anchor for that development, Mr. Speaker, 

and all the jobs attached to Loblaws in terms of being the 

anchor for this GTH project. 

 

And we want to recognize them and certainly encourage them 

and to point out that we are quite interested and keenly 

interested in continuing to keep Loblaws and many companies 

like that in Saskatchewan because it’s important that we 

continue building on the economy for the long-term economy of 

our province and thus the health of our people. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, we encourage Loblaws. We know 

that they provided a lot of leadership. We continue engaging 

Loblaws, and we saw that they certainly put their money where 

their mouth was in terms of making commitments. And now we 

see a lot of progress being made as a result of Loblaws stores 

and some of the other stores that are certainly trying to locate 

within the GTH. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, within the GTH area, where was the 

problem, Mr. Speaker? Where was the confusion? Well as I 

mentioned at the outset, things were happening very, very good 

in terms of trying to get the area coordinated because — 2,000 

acres of land, having a number of companies engaged, having a 

number of players like the city themselves, like the RMs that 

skirt the city — this was the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I look at some of the headlines, Mr. Speaker, that it is 

just one mistake after another. And what happens now is the 

minister certainly wasn’t aware of all the challenges and the 

nuances of trying to get this thing organized. 

 

So what happened was he noticed there was one CEO let go, 

and they tried to find somebody else. And all of a sudden they 

weren’t getting along with some of the partners that were out 

there. So the minister says, okay, I’m going to legislate control 

and authority over this area and to do what I want as the 

minister to try and get this project moving and to try and make 

sure it happens in the correct tone. But, Mr. Speaker, since his 

engagement, there have been many, many challenges and many, 

many problems. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And we know that the city itself, they want to encourage 

investment. There isn’t a city in this world that wouldn’t 

encourage investment. And the Regina city council along with 

the mayor, they’re going to do all they can to encourage 

investment, to provide jobs because the city itself is a great city. 

There’s great opportunities. And you just see the amount of 

support and certainly the amount of encouragement that the 

local leadership have shown towards this project is phenomenal, 

and certainly the people in the local community would 

encourage investment as well. There isn’t anybody that would 

not encourage investment. 

 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

So that being said, Mr. Speaker, you see how the current 

government and the minister have muddled their way through 

this. They have somehow created major, major mistakes. And 

we don’t know, Mr. Speaker, for the life of us, how they can 

mess things up so quickly, so badly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the interim we would ask that the players 

that were decided or the players that decided not to participate 

in this project, we want to ask the players what happened there. 

What were the problems? We’re going to ask Kal Tire. We’re 

going to ask Southland Equipment. We’re going to ask Redhead 

exactly what were the reasons why you wouldn’t be partners in 

the Global Transportation Hub, the 2,000 acres of coordinating 

a lot of the transportation needs for the whole area. You’re 

linked to major highways. Why wouldn’t you become part of 

this process? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other question we’ve got to ask is, in the 

minister’s panicky response to all the problems within the GTH 

concept, we’re going to ask, you know, we should ask . . . 

There’s certainly the question of the proper return on the 

investment for that area because obviously the city has invested. 

The RMs have invested. There’s a lot of people that have 

invested a lot of time, a lot of time and a lot more money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So given the fact that they’re prepared to invest all this time and 

effort and money . . . And they’re prepared to sit and meet. 

They’re prepared to do what they can, Mr. Speaker. All they got 

basically as a response from government in terms of leadership 

is they’re simply saying, look we’re taking over the project. 

We’re going to do as we see fit. We’re not going to take into 

account any of the challenges that have been expressed by the 

companies that have decided to vacate the GTH or the city that 

may want more for some of the opportunity that is attached to 

the land. And how about the opportunities that the RMs might 

miss out on? 

 

We need to ask those questions, Mr. Speaker. And we don’t 

have, we don’t have the information in front of us that would 

really show to the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 

this local city, this fine local city, the mistakes that were made. 

We can prove that mistakes that were made by this current 

government and this current minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it is quite clear, it is quite clear that there was a lack 

of regional planning. And the reason why there was a lack of 

regional planning is many of the players decided to vacate the 

process, or in this case of the bill, actually thrown out of the 

process. And, Mr. Speaker, any time you exclude people that 

could have some significant information for you, then you’re 

creating a major mistake for the project. And that’s exactly 

what we see has happened here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So quite frankly with the bill itself, we look at Bill No. 81, it is 

rife with problems. There’s a lot of challenges attached to the 

project. Despite the Sask Party’s bungling of this project, we’re 

still seeing a lot of optimism and opportunity being seized by 

the companies that were originally in place to make sure that 

the Global Transportation Hub happened. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, we have to make sure 

that people are aware of how this particular government and 

this minister are messing up a lot of positive projects. There’s 

no question in my mind, from our perspective as the New 

Democrat opposition, that our whole notion and our whole 

concept of having smart growth . . . And I tell the people of 

Saskatchewan, smart growth to me simply means a number of 

important pillars. Number one is that you engage as many 

partners as you can. That’s what’s really key, Mr. Speaker, is 

that you engage as many partners as you can and as many 

regions as you can. And this project, the Global Transportation 

Hub, is similar to the Prince Albert bridge concept, is that you 

have to have the necessary infrastructure to encourage and 

foster and develop economic development. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that this government doesn’t 

have the vision not just for the Prince Albert bridge, but they’re 

bungling the Global Transportation Hub concept that the NDP 

began and that the NDP started, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 

question that we are not going to take our hats off in any way, 

shape, or form to the Saskatchewan Party. We’re not going to 

sit back and say these guys know what they’re doing when it 

comes to the economy, Mr. Speaker, because evidence has 

shown time and time again that they’re bungling through this 

great opportunity that Saskatchewan has, the great economy 

that they inherited. They are not doing the proper consultation. 

They are not doing the proper steps. They are not doing the 

proper procedure. 

 

And another example, if it’s not the Prince Albert bridge, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s evident in this bill, Bill 81, that they’re once again 

bungling the Global Transportation Hub opportunity because 

they simply don’t know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s the bottom line, no matter how you look at it. There’s 

evidence galore that goes from one project to one project to 

another project of how this minister has made a mess of the 

opportunities that the NDP envisioned for this province just a 

short number of years ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out again, I would point out 

again, under the smart growth strategy we talk about making 

sure that you have the proper investments and that you have the 

proper players on board. And I think having regional players 

and having a regional concept and having our major centres, 

rural parts of Saskatchewan, and all throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, that we have a regional and we have a territorial 

strategy to make sure that the economy is strengthened in all 

those areas. 

 

The second pillar of any smart growth strategy, Mr. Speaker, is 

to make sure that we have the proper human capacity, the 

people that would be trained for these jobs, the people that 

would be working some of these jobs. And what does this 

government do, Mr. Speaker? It goes to war with organized 

labour. And this is another issue that I think is detrimental to the 

future of Saskatchewan’s economic health, is you simply cannot 

and should not go to war with the people that are going to work 

for these industries and the people that are going to make a 

significant difference in their communities and certainly in our 

cities as well. 

 

The third point, Mr. Speaker, is it’s quite clear that you have to 

have an environmental conscience. You’ve got to make sure 

that we’re not throwing the environment under the bus when it 

comes to this development, that we all, in any development, that 



2466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

we all have to be conscious that we simply, as one of the 

phrases being said on a continual basis, we have not inherited 

this environment from our ancestors. We are simply taking care 

of it for our children. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re stewards of the 

environment. 

 

So under the smart growth strategy it’s very simple. We have to 

have regional strategies. We have to encourage the private 

sector. We’ve got to be very, very visionary and very focused 

on trying to make the best of the opportunity we have today. 

We always want to make sure we take care of the working men 

and women of our province instead of going to war with them. 

And of course one of the strongest builders is to ensure that the 

environmental protection of our province to make sure that we 

don’t see the environmental degradation occur under our watch. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on all three fronts, we’re seeing that the 

Saskatchewan Party are failing miserably, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

failing miserably. 

 

Now going back to the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. 

Speaker, the concept as I mentioned at the outset was very 

simple: that a group of companies that were coming together — 

the biggest player being Loblaws, a $250-million anchor — to 

create a regional transportation yard or a region, and that they 

would, based on the fact that they are next to a large centre, 

next to some booming RMs and the fact that they’re connected 

by highways, Mr. Speaker, that this opportunity that the NDP 

envisioned in ’06, that it would be absolutely phenomenal for the 

city to work in concert with these companies to encourage job 

creation, to encourage investment, and to encourage profit for 

these companies, Mr. Speaker. That’s something that we will 

make sure we tell people that’s a concept that every party in this 

Assembly share. 

 

And the most important thing, Mr. Speaker, is we want to make 

sure that we don’t give any partner any kind of disrespect, that we 

respect all the players that are there. And any time that you don’t 

engage partners, Mr. Speaker, that’s really I think a major, major 

problem. And what I see as a result of this particular bill is that the 

province and under the particular minister is simply saying, look, 

we know what’s best for the regional transportation hub. We will 

decide what’s going to happen. 

 

Yes, they have been bungling through this whole process, but 

somehow, Mr. Speaker, they still figure they can figure it out. And 

many people and many players are saying, and I think they’re 

saying to them, that you have bungled and bungled and bungled 

once again. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the companies, this is a 

most telling, important point is that you don’t have to listen to a 

New Democrat MLA on this point, but the evidence will show and 

it shows here in the headlines that three or four companies decided 

to opt out of the Global Transportation Hub. And I’ll mention to 

the minister as well, just for the minister’s information, that 

they decided to opt out of the Global Transportation Hub. And 

the companies that decided to opt out, Mr. Speaker, are 

Redhead Equipment and Kal Tire and a few other companies. 

 

Now they were originally part of the process. They I think 

wanted to be part of the process. And the question that we 

would like to ask as an opposition today is, why did these major 

players, the companies that would make a significant difference 

and investment into our province, why do they walk away from 

this and decide to relocate elsewhere? And we’re sure glad, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re sure glad that they decided to stay in 

Saskatchewan because the threat of them moving to Manitoba, 

especially in Kal Tire’s case, was very, very real, Mr. Speaker, 

was very, very real. 

 

Now the question I have is, why did it get to that point? Why 

did it get to the point where one company was saying, okay, 

we’re not going to locate there, and if you continue giving us 

problems, we’re simply going to relocate, and we’ll be doing 

business in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. And once again this 

minister bungled through that. And thank goodness that Kal 

Tire decided at the end of the day that they would locate here 

but not in the GTH of which they were originally, were 

certainly viewing as a good place to invest, Mr. Speaker. So I 

looked at Bill 81 and a big question that we have today is, how 

could they have bungled this thing so badly? 

 

And now with this bill, they’ve simply taken over all control of 

that area. There is no premise from the city’s perspective, I 

don’t believe, that excluding them, excluding them from the 

process would be helpful. I know the city. I don’t know this for 

an absolute certain in terms of value, in terms of dollars, but 

they’ve invested into the project. And are they getting value for 

that investment? The RMs, have they invested in the project? 

Are they getting value for that investment? Some of the 

companies that invested into this whole concept, are they 

getting value, Mr. Speaker? The workers that will be working at 

some of these sites, do they feel that the long-term health of the 

GTH should be left to the whims of the government? Well 

absolutely not, not the way that they’ve treated working people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think overall there’s a lot of questions we have, a lot of 

questions we have on Bill 81. We don’t think in any way, 

shape, or form, Mr. Speaker, that this particular minister has 

excelled in handling this particular file. We think that the 

Global Transportation Hub, the original vision that the NDP 

had when they embarked on this Global Transportation Hub 

concept was a grand vision. It is a great vision. And, Mr. 

Speaker, once again we’re seeing, we’re seeing how this 

particular government has been messing up the economy that 

they’re handed, Mr. Speaker. They’re taking every opportunity 

they can to go to war with the working people who’ve taken 

every opportunity to throw the environmental regulation and the 

protection of our environment under the bus. It’s not important 

to them. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we even see them bungling an 

opportunity such as the Global Transportation Hub to 

encourage companies to come to Regina, to come to 

Saskatchewan, to invest in our city, to invest in our people, and 

to invest in our province, Mr. Speaker. So on all three fronts I 

give this minister and this government an F minus, F minus, and 

F minus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it’s important that people in Saskatchewan know, people 

in Saskatchewan know that from our perspective we will never 

ever turn and ask advice on how to build an economy from a 

party that simply inherited the economy and are now messing it 

up, Mr. Speaker. We simply asked them to do one thing. Now 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2467 

that you’re government, please don’t mess it up. And what do 

they do, Mr. Speaker? They messed it up. So all I’ve got to say, 

Mr. Speaker, on that front is we are going to be paying very 

close attention to how this bill is supposed to help that minister 

fix the problems that he created. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m just seeing more authority going to this 

particular minister and this government and I don’t see any 

particular solution in the future. We should have, as a province, 

seized on the opportunity that the Global Transportation Hub 

provided us many, many years ago, Mr. Speaker. And somehow 

along the way the Saskatchewan Party mess it up. They mess it 

up, and they’ve messed it up. They messed up things all over 

the province, Mr. Speaker, all over towards . . . for the future of 

our province in the hopes that we can build a future, a 

long-lasting, sustainable future, a great, solid economy, Mr. 

Speaker. They have messed it up, Mr. Speaker. Why? Simply 

because they were in the wilderness in terms of being 

government for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. So we can’t expect 

them, we can’t expect them to figure it out. But they’ve been 

there now for six years, and the six years that they’ve been there 

they look like a tired, old government already, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So all I’d point out to the people of Saskatchewan, that the 

Global Transportation Hub of which that minister has created 

problems for, Mr. Speaker, that’s evidence to me today to tell 

the people of Saskatchewan one thing, is that the NDP 

appreciate the private sector. We appreciate investment in our 

province. We know how to handle investment properly. And if 

those guys across the way can’t get it done, get out of the way, 

we’ll show you how it’s done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll show you how you’re able to protect your environment, 

to protect your workers, to attract private sector investment, Mr. 

Speaker. We can do all that. And we can do it much better than 

the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, primarily because of the 

history of the NDP. And certainly the players out there are 

aware of how well the NDP have done when they had the 

economy built alongside the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We had a great economy going. We had a great 

economy building. We had a great thing going. And once again 

the Saskatchewan Party comes along saying, we can do it 

better. And, Mr. Speaker, they have failed miserably on that 

front. They have failed miserably. 

 

In spite of the Sask Party’s poor track record of handling the 

economy, thank goodness we have the private sector investing 

at the rate they are. Because if they didn’t, Saskatchewan would 

be in a heck of a lot more problems, Mr. Speaker, many more 

financial problems. And the people across the way can laugh at 

that, Mr. Speaker, but the fact of the matter is the people of the 

province understand, and they pay very close attention. And 

they have seen how the Sask Party has bungled on many fronts, 

not only to protect the environment fairly or protect the 

workers. Now they are somehow finding their way to 

discourage investment into this province. And the good 

example of that is how this minister has bungled the Global 

Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that note, I think it’s important that the people of 

Saskatchewan know this. It’s that we believe in order to have a 

long-term sustainable economy for Saskatchewan, there’s a 

number of principles have to stand out. We have to be a place 

and a beacon where investment can happen and that many 

private companies and many big companies out there can come 

to Saskatchewan and help build that economy and sustain that 

economy. 

 

The second thing is we have to make sure that we protect the 

environment, to make sure the environment is not squandered 

and that we don’t pollute our lakes and that we don’t destroy 

our forests and that we protect the land in which we inherited 

from our children. That’s really important as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the final piece, the final piece is that you’ve got to make 

sure you protect the working men and women. You’ve got to 

make sure you protect them to a point where they’re protected 

wholeheartedly. 

 

And those three basic principles, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, 

that is smart growth from our perspective. It is very smart 

growth. And all I’m seeing, Mr. Speaker, from the 

Saskatchewan Party is big fat Fs on all fronts. They have failed 

this province. They have failed not only this province, they 

have failed future generations. 

 

And Bill 81 is a good example of how they bungled things up 

so bad that they’ve taken over the projects, taken over the land. 

And mark my words, Mr. Speaker, the bungling will not stop as 

a result of this Bill 81. It will simply continue. And I say to this 

government, maybe you should start figuring out how you can 

develop the economy instead of just talking about it and 

bragging about it. So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill 81. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 81, The Global Transportation 

Hub Authority Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 82 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 82 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to enter 

into this debate on Bill 82, An Act to amend the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Act, a very significant piece of legislation for 

sure. As we know, seniors right across Canada and particularly 

here in Saskatchewan wrestle with income security as they face 

their retirement years. And we know across Canada this has 

been a major, major topic. In many ways it’s the next social 

issue of our generation, particularly as you see baby boomers 

leaving the workforce and entering into the retirement years, 

and what are we going to do to make sure that they have 



2468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

provided for themselves enough income so that they can live in 

a fashion that they’ve become used to — maybe not extreme or 

too out there, but one that is reasonable, that we think is decent 

for senior citizens to live. 

 

And this is not a smaller, insignificant piece of legislation. We 

know this is something that the Finance ministers have been 

wrestling with for many years. In fact 2008, 2009 . . . in fact I 

was just looking at a Globe and Mail article here from 2009. I 

had it in my old file, and the title is “The end of retirement: 

Who will pay to end the looming pension crisis?” An expanded 

CPP [Canada Pension Plan] could rescue the nation of 

inadequate savers from themselves, but at a cost. And that’s 

what’s emerging as the next major battle over Canadian social 

policy. 

 

And so we see this today before us. And it’s one that all of us 

will pay a lot of attention, as all of us, and we hope, will 

eventually be at that stage where we can retire with a sense of 

dignity and with a sense of security that all things are looked 

after. And so this is an important piece of legislation before us, 

as I said, and we’ll have many, many questions in committee 

about it. 

 

But I do want to say and I do want to set the stage for this 

because I think that it’s one that deserves a fair bit of 

discussion. Because this session we’re talking a lot about pretty 

major pieces of legislation that affect working men and women. 

And I’m thinking of Bill 85 particularly, Bill 83, the temporary 

foreign worker piece of legislation that’s coming before us, and 

of course the review of workers’ compensation and the pension 

bill as well. 

 

And I think that this bill, Bill 82, is one that’s right up there in 

importance as with all of these. Because this does shape the 

government’s approach. This does tell us an awful lot about the 

government’s approach to how we think retirement should be 

funded. And of course this is a battle that has been raging for 

many years, and one that Canada can take a lot of pride in terms 

of the Canadian Pension Plan. And I think that now we look 

back into the ’30s and the ’40s, I’m not sure when this plan 

actually started, but we have a long history of looking after our 

seniors to make sure they have a sense of dignity. And of course 

that was of course reignited in the ’70s when along came the 

Guaranteed Income Supplement and the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan actually with Allan Blakeney put in the extra for the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan. 

 

And so you had a sense that seniors would be looked after, but 

clearly we’re looking now at more as things . . . government 

financing is under challenge more and more. How do we make 

sure seniors have the savings and the ability to look after 

themselves? And we know that many simply don’t have the 

ability to save and this is a challenge. We know that there is a 

school of thought out there, and in fact it was the Harper 

government who actually talked about financial literacy, and if 

people only knew to save, they would save. But we know for 

many, far too many, that’s clearly not an option. At the end of 

the day, at the end of the month, when they’re looking to pay 

their bills, savings is a very, very difficult, very difficult bill to 

pay because there’s just too many things — whether it be 

shelter, whether it be food or whether it be medical supplies — 

savings seems to be too remote. And yet it’s an important one. 

It’s a very important one. 

 

And it’s also one that we think that we should take a lot of time 

to talk about. You know, in my riding I have many senior 

buildings. Saskatoon Housing Authority operates them 

downtown. And every year I have more questions that come up, 

and one that came up just this time . . . And of course the 

government now is taking into account some of these plans and 

we’re asking more details about this so we can be sure that 

everything is okay. 

 

But one senior came up and said, you know, I had savings, 

about $10,000. He thought he was doing the right thing. He was 

trying to save money. He started too late and he didn’t have 

enough. Clearly he didn’t save enough to make enough 

difference. And in fact the unfortunate thing, because he had 

that savings and it was affording him about 100 or $200 a 

month, that because of that he lost his Guaranteed Income 

Supplement. So he was no further ahead, no further ahead by 

having that savings and yet he was trying to do the right thing. 

He saw the ads on TV. He believed in what we all should be 

doing and that is preparing and doing our share of savings for 

our retirement years. But it wasn’t going to work for him 

because he didn’t break that threshold. Now that threshold is, I 

think, above 50,000 or 100,000 where you were actually going 

to get a fair enough return on your savings in your retirement 

years that you’re not going to lose out on the guaranteed income 

supplement. 

 

Now of course in Saskatchewan if you lose out on your 

guaranteed income supplement, you also lose out on your 

Saskatchewan Income Plan. And that’s a big deal. That’s a big 

deal. And it’s one that we need to make sure, and this’ll be one 

of the questions we have about this plan, is because of its 

increased contributions and the potential for so much more 

money to be saved, is there going to be a shelter for people who 

come in with savings of 40,000, 30,000? Or will they in effect 

lose what they have because when it comes time to retire that 

they just don’t have enough and they’re actually losing out on 

federal and provincial programs because they have, in that zone, 

the amount of money that the government will just essentially 

claw back? 

 

And that’s a real heartache because you see seniors who, you 

know, it’s unfortunate, they probably should have bought a car. 

They should have done something else with $10,000 but now 

they’ve got it and they’re going to lose out on a government 

program. And that wasn’t the intention of it. And I don’t think 

anybody would say, well we’re going to take your 10,000 back. 

But the rules are the rules and this happens right across Canada, 

and it’s a big deal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important bill before us. I think 

it’s interesting. I hadn’t really thought about it that actually we 

have a lot of bills that are affecting working men and women, 

whether it’s their pension, Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 

Workers’ Compensation, whether it’s a temporary foreign 

worker, or the Bill 85, the omnibus bill about labour standards. 

All of this is hugely, hugely important. 

 

I just want to take a minute to reflect on what the minister said, 

because I always like to think about and take a moment to 

review what they have to say. And of course he has been to 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2469 

many of these. And we often read. We read in the Leader-Post 

or The StarPhoenix what the Minister of Finance is saying as 

he’s preparing to go to these provincial-federal-territorial 

meetings, and he’s had some, he’s been to several that have 

wrestled with the issues of pensions. And this is a big deal. As I 

said on one side is, the one side is really lobbying for more 

CPP, a bigger contribution to CPP, so therefore you would get a 

much bigger return when you retire. And as well, your 

employer would be also contributing or on the other side, you 

have the voluntary savers camp. 

 

And it looks like we’re into the voluntary savers camp. I’m not 

sure. This would be a question that we need to ask the minister: 

how does he view what’s happening with pensions? Because 

it’s one of those challenges we have. You know, it’s like so 

much in this world. It’s something we should have started 20 

years ago. The next best day is today. And so many things are 

like that, and this is clearly one of them. I wish I’d started 20 

years ago saving money, but you know today is a better day, but 

you’ve got to start sometime. 

 

Anyways I do want to take a minute and review what the 

Minister of Finance had to say. And this again was, you know, 

that first week of December. We were quite busy here in the 

House. December 4th is when this bill was introduced for the 

second time, and the Minister of Finance says, and I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan provides a unique 

retirement savings vehicle for individuals with little or no 

access to occupational pension plans or other retirement 

savings arrangements. It’s the only plan of its kind in 

Canada, operating at arm’s-length from government and 

offering members professional investment management at 

institutional costs. 

 

Now you know what’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker? I don’t 

know if you know this, but Regina ranks as the second highest 

union density in Canada. The only one higher than Regina 

would be Ottawa, and of course the connection would be the 

public civil service. Here we have a lot, and they have a lot in 

Ontario. A significant number of people in Saskatchewan 

actually have pension plans, and I think it is about 40 per cent, 

and I will . . . Yes, here it is. In Saskatchewan just 40 per cent 

of workers were covered by a workplace pension plan in 2010. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now what’s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is that’s fairly 

close to how many people are covered by unions in this 

province. I think we’re about 27 per cent, actually. It might be 

higher. But what often goes along with unions is good pensions, 

and that’s critical. And we see that across Canada. And yet we 

see the removal or the attack on unions and therefore the 

removal of people who actually have pension plans because that 

is one of organized labour’s most important roles is to ensure 

not only a fair wage but a fair pension. 

 

And so it’s interesting that we talk about those who have no 

access to occupational pension plans or other retirement savings 

arrangements. Often they’re in the unorganized workplace, and 

this is a big deal. This is a big deal. Those are probably in the 

lower income jobs. Those are in the service industry where 

there’s hotels, restaurants, that type of thing, and the retail 

sector — all of those areas where you actually don’t get paid an 

awful lot. And as again I said, you know, there is one school of 

thought out there that if people only knew how to save they 

would save but the problem was that they can’t save because 

they’re just not getting paid enough. They’re barely making 

ends meet and the idea of a pension plan is quite remote for 

them. They would love to have one and it’s a sense of pride 

actually to have one. 

 

You know, my own son now he’s just 27 and he works in an 

arts organization. They’ve begun a bit of an RRSP [registered 

retirement savings plan] thing and he’s very happy about it. It’s 

a sense of pride that he’s actually contributing and saving and 

that’s a good thing. There’s some way of some forced savings 

and that’s very, very important. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this is an important area that we think 

about in terms of those who have pension plans and those who 

don’t have pension plans. And is this a significant enough tool 

to actually meet the challenge of those seniors who will be 

retiring but probably won’t have the incomes to actually retire 

in the style they would like, or worse, if they felt that they 

would have more money or they would have a better security in 

place than they would have right now? 

 

So this is a really important issue, you know. And I think that, 

you know, and it’s interesting because he goes on to say: 

 

The [Saskatchewan] plan [can be] . . . an integral part of 

the retirement savings plans of many Saskatchewan 

people. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan offers members 

important benefits such as affordability. You can be a 

member of the plan regardless of your earnings. This is 

especially attractive for people with irregular or seasonal 

earnings such as students, part-time workers, or people 

who are self-employed. 

 

And those are really, really important. But we just don’t want to 

be misleading those people into believing that they’re getting 

more than what they’re actually going to get. And this is always 

a dilemma, that if you’re not giving enough, if you’re not 

contributing enough, that is the basis of what you will get back. 

And nobody wants to be misled, especially when you’re a 

senior, and as I was saying earlier, when you have to tell them 

the unfortunate news they just haven’t saved enough. They just 

haven’t saved enough, and they really thought they had. They 

thought they were going to have a little bit of a nest egg where 

they would be getting a couple hundred dollars a month and that 

would be a nice thing. But you find out actually because of that, 

they are losing out on other programs. 

 

So he goes on and talks about how the amendments to the plan 

are necessary in order to keep the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

current with modern times and to make the plan as sound as 

possible for all members. And they talk about survivor benefits, 

allowing members to transfer funds from registered pension 

plans, that type of thing, and increasing the contribution limit 

from 600 — this was done in 2010 — to 2,500, and allowing 

transfers up to 10,000, and then modernizing some language. 

 

So again this is one more step along that way of this discussion 

around what is suitable for seniors. And I am deeply concerned 

that we’re not going far enough, that of course this may be 



2470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

appropriate for some people, but really to say that this is the 

answer is clearly, is clearly not the case. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that as I said earlier . . . And I do 

want to take a few minutes and talk about this in terms of the 

Canadian pension plan which I would have liked to have seen 

more leadership from this government on because I know that 

this has been talked a lot at the federal level and with the federal 

minister, Minister Flaherty, who has been really leading the 

charge on this, that there’s been real changes that affect seniors 

and therefore affect Saskatchewan seniors and therefore has a 

real impact on what we’re debating today. 

 

And of course one of them is the fact that, as I said, that about 

60 per cent of Canadians have no workplace pension. And this 

is really, really a problem. Six out of ten, or three out of five 

Canadians have no workplace pension. And what they’ve been 

told is that many of them should go out and get a pension or an 

RRSP and that will help them; that will solve the problem. But 

clearly many, many of them don’t do that. In fact over half of 

them don’t. We’re down to about . . . I understand about 25 per 

cent of people actually benefit from that. And so you have that, 

that happening out there. 

 

So what are we really going to do about the problem of seniors 

and their income so that they have security? We know that this 

is going to be a real, real issue and, as I said earlier, particularly 

for baby boomers as they move into the retirement years. 

 

So there has been a discussion and really, as I said, I wish that 

this government would have joined in with many of the others 

who were talking about beefing up the CPP. I think this was a 

way to make sure that people did actually contribute, and also 

get the employers on side. And it was a secure way, and if you 

did it you actually would see some real benefits. And I know 

that this has been an ongoing discussion. As I said, I was 

quoting from a newspaper earlier from 2009. But I know that 

the Canadian Labour Congress, the CLC, has put this forward. 

And I think this is a really important idea that this government 

should have taken a look at, you know, and what they talked 

about. And they’ve done a lot of . . . They’ve sent out a lot of 

materials. And I think both sides of the House have seen this, 

and really I think it’s important that we take some time and 

think about it. 

 

First off, Canadians would have more pension security. And 

this is really, really important, that we’re not going to be 

worried about higher inflation, things that happen in the stock 

market, or the loss of employment. As well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this would be a pan-Canadian solution to a 

pan-Canadian problem. This is not just something that’s 

happening only in Saskatchewan. This is happening right across 

the country. As baby boomers age, we need to get a handle on 

this. It prepares us for the future. And really, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we see this and we see this in spades, that the current 

fend-for-yourself pension plan or pension system is not 

working. It’s simply not working, and we need to have a much 

better, more robust system in place so that all Canadians are 

protected. We know the system that we have now is leaving too 

much at risk, and that’s a real problem. And we know, 

unfortunately, that most employers haven’t delivered by a 

whole host of different reasons. But I think it is the fact that 

while they wish they could have done more, they haven’t, and 

they haven’t been able to for a variety of reasons. 

 

And again these RRSPs or these kind of plans simply don’t 

work. Now it may be an interesting one, an interesting idea at 

the time, but it simply . . . We need more; we need more. And I 

think that, as I said, it’s interesting. We’re dealing with this 

today, but as we look to the future and the increase in cost of 

living and that type of thing, that we really need to take a look 

at how can we make this better for seniors. And that will take 

some planning and that will take some creative thinking, but it 

will also take a commitment to do some things that I think are 

the right thing, and I think we have to take a look at the 

Canadian pension plan and that’s really, really important. 

 

And I think, you know, Mr. Speaker, the groups that the 

Minister of Finance introduced or talked about are the very 

groups actually that would benefit from an enhanced CPP 

program as opposed to a Saskatchewan Pension Plan program, 

simply because it’s much more easily administered, it’s across 

Canada, and you clearly don’t have a choice. And there’s 

contributions from both sides. 

 

Low-income seniors would see that, and I think that’s an 

important area. Young workers, because again, you know, it is 

interesting that the government talks about how, if you’ve lost 

track of people, there’s a way of transferring their funds into the 

General Revenue Fund if you don’t know where they are. And 

maybe, you know, the fact of the matter a young person may 

start working here and work till they’re 30 and then move to 

another province for, you know, the rest of their lives, and they 

go to retire 35 years later when they’re 65. Saskatchewan is 

way back in their history, way back in their history. And do 

they have to then go back and find out what happened to their 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan? Or with all of us, the Canadian 

pension plan travels with us, and it won’t matter where we are 

in Canada. So that would be a much more reasonable thing to 

do, to contribute with that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that we take a look 

at this, and I think that it is interesting to be talking about this. I 

want to talk about, a little bit about what’s happening in 

Saskatchewan, you know. As I said earlier, in Saskatchewan 

just 40 per cent of workers were covered by a workplace 

pension plan in 2010. And actually we’ve seen — this is 

interesting — a marked drop in workplace pension plan 

coverage with employer plans now covering only 38 per cent of 

the workforce, down from 46 per cent in 1977. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see a real challenge here in what’s going to 

happen with seniors in terms of income security. And then what 

happened, it’s interesting, in terms of RRSP contributions, only 

about a quarter of tax filers contributed to an RRSP in 2009, 

and the median RRSP contribution amounts to just 6 per cent, 6 

per cent of available contribution room. So that means for every 

$100 that a taxpayer could have put into an RRSP, they put $6. 

That’s what they could afford; instead of $100, they put $6 in. 

Still something but not, clearly, what they were able to do. And 

in 2009, 631,000 Saskatchewan tax filers had $16.2 billion in 

unused RRSP contribution room. So you can see that in 

Saskatchewan we’re leaving an awful lot of money on the table 

because we’re not making use of the RRSPs, over $16 billion in 

unused RRSP contributions. 

 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2471 

As well in Saskatchewan, individuals with incomes of 80,000 or 

more make up 11 per cent of the tax filers, but these people who 

make more than 80,000 account for 26 per cent of all 

Saskatchewan tax filers contributing to RRSPs, and 52 per cent 

of total contributions to RRSPs. And that’s, I mean that’s great, 

that’s good that they are able to do it, but really what it 

underlines is those who don’t make 80,000 are not participating 

in this voluntary savings plan. They just don’t have the money 

to do it. If you are making 40 or $50,000, you may contribute 

$5 out of $100, but you’re leaving an awful lot of money, or 

ability, to get those tax breaks but you just can’t make those 

ends meet. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And so this is a big, this is a big challenge in front of us. And so 

while we have this bill, and on face value, we look at it and we 

go, what could be wrong with that? What could be wrong with 

that? Perhaps not much, but really it isn’t getting to the heart of 

the issue. And the heart of the issue is what are you going to do 

about those low-income earners who will not have enough 

money to put aside for their retirement years. And they truly do 

want to. 

 

I mean I actually think $6 out of $100 shows at least they’re 

trying and they’re aware of it. They’re just not putting nearly 

enough money in there. They’re not putting in the other $94. 

They’re putting in some so they can say, well I’m trying, but 

clearly we need to do a better job of this. 

 

And this I don’t think is the vehicle, and while it’s an 

interesting idea, I think we should be investing more. And this 

Minister of Finance should’ve been looking at and really taking 

a leadership and saying, is there a better way? And I think CPP 

and those contributions that follow you right across Canada, 

follow you right across your career, would’ve been the way to 

go. 

 

So with this, we will have lots of questions about this. I know I 

will be very interested in hearing what the minister has to say 

about his times at the ministerial tables. And why will he be . . . 

Does he think the other way is just as well. I mean, maybe there 

is more than one way to do this and if that’s what he’s saying, 

I’d be very happy to hear that. And if he’s saying he’s still 

championing the CPP increase contributions, then that would be 

very good news. But we haven’t heard that. But I know how the 

media goes. Sometimes they quote you accurately and 

sometimes they don’t. It’s just, maybe there just wasn’t enough 

time in the news story to get the full story in. 

 

But I just have to say that I think this is an important issue. This 

is an important issue that faces seniors when they reach those 

golden years and they’re trying to figure out between their 

housing costs, their medical costs, their food costs. And they 

want to retire with some sort of dignity. And they want to travel 

a bit. They want to have a cup of coffee. They want to go down 

and visit with their friends. But as I said, it’s very sad when you 

talk with them later and find out it’s hard to make ends meet. 

And then for seniors who are facing too many challenges, this is 

just one more that we shouldn’t be hoisting upon them. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many other people want 

to join into the debate on a variety of topics today, but I am 

going to . . . I think if we’re ready to go, I’m going to move that 

we table Bill No. 82, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 83 — The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in debate on 

Bill 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration 

Services Act. 

 

I’d just like to, I guess, start out with some opening comments. 

And I guess we look at the number of immigrants that are 

coming in, foreign workers, to the province of Saskatchewan, 

and we’re hearing all kinds of different reports about 

employment opportunities in Saskatchewan. And we want to 

make sure that there’s employment here for all Saskatchewan 

people, but also if there is skilled jobs that need to be filled, 

definitely you want to make sure you’re recruiting foreign 

workers to come to the province to fill those needs. 

 

But having said that, I want to make some opening comments 

that clearly . . . Concerns from many, I guess, leaders — 

Aboriginal community members, community elders, just 

workers out there in general asking questions, Saskatchewan 

people. We want to ensure that Saskatchewan people . . . And I 

want to talk about our Aboriginal population. We have many 

First Nations and Métis that are unemployed in our province. 

There’s opportunities for them. And we’ve seen some of the 

comments made by Professor Eric Howe. There’s been other 

individuals have made comments about the Aboriginal 

unemployment, and I mean many of my colleagues have made 

it very clear that we see the graduation rates. We see 

opportunities missed by a large, young Aboriginal population in 

this province. And the government of the province has to do a 

better job and we have to do a better job of reaching out to the 

Aboriginal population that’s very young. 

 

When I think about that, we talk about such a large population 

under the age of 20, 25. If you look at the Aboriginal population 

the number is unreal that’s young. I think about my own family. 

I myself have 17 grandchildren under the age of 20. And if I 

look at that, it’s a young Aboriginal population coming forward, 

wanting opportunities. We have to make sure that the education 

system is there for them. We have to make sure there is 

opportunities for post-secondary. We have to make sure that 

we’ve done all that we can do to cover the needs of our young, 

growing population — First Nations and Métis. And if you look 

at the First Nations rate of unemployment, I think it’s just about 



2472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

22 per cent, just about 22 per cent. That’s unacceptable. 

 

If we look at the Métis population, it’s just about 11 per cent. 

These numbers are unacceptable when you look at the rest of 

the province and we talk about numbers that are 3 and 4 per 

cent with everyone else in the province. That is pretty sad to see 

these numbers, Mr. Speaker. Clearly we have a problem. And a 

government can sit there and speak about yes, we’re willing to 

work. We’re going to have a task force. We’re going to look at 

the Aboriginal graduation rates. We’re going to look at the 

education, the funding. 

 

There are so many challenges that are facing First Nations and 

Métis communities when it comes to education, making sure 

they are cultural. There are differences — traditional ways 

people learned, the way the elders taught, the way a community 

is raised, the way parents and grandparents and communities 

raised the children. We need to go back. We have a lot of work 

to do because it is a growing population. It’s huge, and there’s 

so many of them just wanting to have a fair chance. 

 

And I know sometimes we hear some of the criticism out there, 

some people, with some of the workers. That’s fine. Not every 

worker is perfect. There is improvement we know that needs to 

happen. But when we look at foreign workers coming in, and 

the concern is if it’s for . . . I guess, you have these skilled 

workers that can fill some of the positions, that’s fine. 

Nobody’s against that. If you can’t find those workers within 

our province, if we’re not going to give our young people a 

chance, if we can’t have the training, we have to be clear that 

when you bring in foreign workers, we have to make sure that 

they’re treated right. Just like anyone else in this province has a 

right to be treated when they’re working. 

 

We look at the labour legislation that this government’s 

reviewing, Bill 85. There are many concerns about the way 

they’ve introduced this bill, the way they’re bringing it forward, 

the way they’re ramming it down Saskatchewan people. And 

we have families, hard-working families in this province that 

have truly made this province successful that it is today. And 

we have protection, and we see the bill being introduced, Mr. 

Speaker, Bill 83, to protect foreign workers. 

 

There’s other provinces that are introducing bills and, I 

imagine, have legislation. We need to look at that. We need to 

make sure we’re consulting the workers, finding out how are 

they being treated by employers. How are they being treated by 

recruiters? And there’s consultants, and I mean the fees, and we 

see some of the comments being made here about some of the 

fees that foreign workers are asked to pay when recruiting, I 

guess, companies, consultant companies that bring in foreign 

workers and match them up with employers. 

 

But I think it goes further than just checking on the foreign 

workers and making it clear that the recruiting companies, the 

consultant firms . . . I think we have to make sure that there is 

protection, legislation that protects these workers. When an 

employer brings them into their place of business, we have to 

make sure accommodations. There are many challenges that 

we’re hearing and some of the stuff that we’re looking at and 

some of the concerns. And foreign workers are truly, they’re in 

a position where they’re probably very scared to raise any 

issues with their employer or to raise any issues with 

government for that they’ll be sent out or there are 

repercussions coming back on them. They’re fearful of what the 

employer may do, if it’s about the employer the way they’re 

doing, about the recruiting agency, whether it’s a government 

agency, and how they’re being treated as a foreign worker. And 

they’re scared . . . happy to come here. 

 

We have to make sure that these protections — and we consult 

with them — to make sure that we deal with the issues that 

they’re being faced. Now having said that, that’s one area that 

we can talk about and we can work with, but this government 

has to be willing to go out and actually consult. And the track 

record of this government has been very poor when it comes to 

consulting anyone in our province, never mind Saskatchewan 

residents, but now we’re talking about foreign workers, to 

consult foreign workers. 

 

I don’t put much trust in the Sask Party government to consult 

anyone, their total neglect, their stubbornness, their 

bullheadedness to move ahead on legislation on anything that 

comes to their mind and what they want to push without 

consulting. You know, we sometimes say it should be fair that 

people that are being infected by legislation that’s being 

introduced by this government, that they should have their say. 

Well truly we’ve seen, in a lot of those situations, legislation 

that has been introduced by this government in the last six 

years, have introduced and brought forward, there has been 

little consultation when it comes to First Nations, Métis, 

protected lands. There has been a lot of different files where this 

government has pushed ahead with labour legislation without 

consulting. We’ve seen the courts turn down legislation that this 

government has to reverse and has to amend, has to fix, has to 

correct. Will they admit they’re wrong? No, they don’t like to 

admit they’re wrong. 

 

It just goes to show how a government gets in. And you know, 

yes, we’ve seen that there’s a number of them — 49 — versus a 

small number in opposition. But I have to say at least there is an 

opposition and somebody who can stand up and show exactly 

what this government doesn’t want people to see out there. 

Saskatchewan residents need to know exactly what their 

government is doing. 

 

You’re elected for the people by the people. That’s so 

interesting to say that. They ask you and they trust, and they put 

trust in the MLAs and in government. And the Sask Party 

government has been handed that honour, that privilege. And 

we see some of the challenges and we see some of the stuff 

coming out in question period today, Mr. Speaker, that just goes 

to show you some of the relations to different bill legislations 

that come in about consultation. 

 

And when you look at Bill 83, very clearly, very clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, we want to make sure that those individuals, foreign 

workers, are going to have an opportunity and feel safe to share 

their concerns. I don’t believe right now they feel that way. The 

legislation that’s being introduced may give them some 

protection. How do we know? It’s being introduced. We’ll have 

to see what kind of protection is there and, in the end, what the 

regulations are. What are the rulings and how will it be used? 

 

Now some of the comments in here, you know, first of all it will 

be about the employer, and government refers to that. They’re 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

going to be working with the employer. It’s about that side of it. 

That’s interesting. This totally should be about the foreign 

worker. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear: at the 

end of the day, people want to come to Saskatchewan, Canada. 

There’s a lot to offer. 

 

And I think individuals want to make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, 

that they want to come to Saskatchewan, but they want to be 

treated fair. They want to be treated with respect. And they 

want to know that there’s laws that protect them, that they don’t 

have to feel that fear of being sent back. Or whether it’s the 

recruiter, whether it’s the employer, whether it’s the 

government agency that’s supposed to be protecting them, we 

have to do a better job. But we can see this information will 

come forward, and I know my colleagues will want to discuss 

this. 

 

But really, when I look at the concerns . . . And I want to make 

it very clear. I said earlier in my comments, the foreign 

workers, we need them. Skilled workers, we need that. We 

know that. There’s a lot of recruiting. Employers want to have 

workers. We want to support business. And I know the 

Aboriginal population wants to be good partners. They want to 

support the industries that are around their communities, 

whether it’s First Nations, Métis communities, the Aboriginal 

population. 

 

But when we see a government’s lack of commitment to 

education, the lack of post-secondary training, and we see a 

government who’s cut programs that at one time under the 

previous NDP government did really well . . . And we heard 

that from industry. We heard that from the Aboriginal leaders, 

from training institutes saying that the partnership of the 

Aboriginal business development program did an awesome job. 

It created partnerships, meaningful partnerships, and created 

employment. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government cut 

that program, a program that truly did some great things with 

partnership, with industry, with government agencies, with the 

training facilities. There’s true partnership because there was 

some consultation. There was talk. They went around the table, 

and they developed a program that was working for the people, 

the Aboriginal people of this province. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And this government owes them a better way. They owe them a 

better way of consulting, a better opportunity to our young 

people, to my grandchildren, to all Aboriginal people. And 

when I talk about the Aboriginal population, because the 

numbers of unemployment are so high, but we don’t want to 

forget about the 4 or 5 per cent of unemployed people. And 

there’s young people looking for jobs — we know that — that 

are non-Aboriginal. 

 

We have to make sure that all Saskatchewan residents have 

opportunities to post-secondary, to the best education and 

training opportunities that we can provide. And this government 

has to do a better job that’s talking about filling, rather than 

recruiting, always recruiting. They want to go and recruit. Make 

sure that we’re taking care of Saskatchewan people first. They 

used to use that, you know, first. Well let’s take care of 

Saskatchewan young people first, Saskatchewan people, and 

then if we have to go out and find skilled workers because we 

can’t find them here, we’ve done all we can to educate, train, 

and make sure that those partnerships are working with our 

Aboriginal communities and all Saskatchewan residents, then 

yes, we encourage the recruiting and we support that. There’s 

nothing wrong with that, bringing people, foreign workers from 

all over into Saskatchewan’s work. 

 

But let’s make sure when they do come here we have protection 

to make sure that they feel protected, that they have rights just 

like the rest of Saskatchewan. But let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, 

we have an obligation to Saskatchewan residents to make sure 

that they have the opportunities and that it’s done fair when it 

comes to funding for education of First Nations on-reserve as 

well as any other Saskatchewan resident; it’s a fair process and 

a fair opportunity for education and a fair opportunity for 

training and a fair opportunity for post-secondary. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to adjourn debate. I know 

my colleagues have more comments on some of the bills we 

will be debating. And at that time, I adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 84 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 84 — The 

Common Business Identifiers Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise today and join in debate on Bill No. 84, The Common 

Business Identifiers Act. The second reading speech anyway 

took place December 4th, 2012, late last year. 

 

Again referencing the second reading speech on the part of the 

Justice minister who introduced this piece of legislation to the 

Chamber, it’s about “better integration and delivery of business 

services through more streamlined and efficient channels . . . 

[thereby enhancing the] environment in our province.” 

 

Continuing on with the quote, Mr. Speaker: “This bill facilitates 

the continued development of a future one-stop business service 

by establishing a . . . [service] database, or what is referred to as 

the hub for sharing business information.” 

 

Carrying on with the quote: 

 

The hub allows information to be shared between Canada 

Revenue Agency and designated government programs to 

facilitate the use of the common business identifier known 

as the business number. The first step . . . to implement the 

hub were taken with the passage of amendments last 



2474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

spring to the Saskatchewan business statutes to allow the 

exchange of information between the Canada Revenue 

Agency and the corporate registry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the face of it, again this seems to be a fairly 

straightforward piece of legislation. And I guess the one thing 

that I would underline, just in terms of . . . by way of critique of 

this legislation, is the fact that, getting back to what I’ve quoted, 

“. . . the continued development of a future one-stop business 

service by establishing a secure database, or what is referred to 

as the hub for sharing business information.” So that 

future-state quality, Mr. Speaker, is something that we’ll be 

following with great interest. 

 

Certainly having a single point of access or a hub approach or a 

unified point of access to different services and the streamlining 

of the way that businesses or individuals connect with or 

engage with government and the myriad of entities that that can 

entail, Mr. Speaker, that simplifying or that streamlining of 

connection is something that on the face of it would make good 

sense. 

 

And I guess we will be interested to see how this carries 

through in terms of whether or not the proclaimed intent can get 

to that streamlining and the way that’s at the same time 

protecting sensitive information, and that the different privacy 

concerns are squared off and that the database that’s attached to 

this, how that is operated and established. You know, lots of 

different questions arise with a piece of legislation like this or 

with an initiative like this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again, on the face of it the intent seems to be a laudable 

one. But I guess where we’re interested to see how it all winds 

up or continues to progress, Mr. Speaker, is it seems to me there 

was an initiative put out for consideration by the government 

opposite in terms of a single access point for citizens looking to 

connect with government services. And you know, out of the 

city of Regina there was a very successful initiative with the 

777-7000. You know, you phone the switchboard and they will 

connect you throughout government. So not just the theory of 

that single access point, Mr. Speaker, but as a citizen of the city 

of Regina who’s had opportunity to use that service, for me 

that, I think, is very user-friendly, which is helpful when you’re 

considering the source here, Mr. Speaker. But when the 

government office had mooted a similar possibility for a single 

access point to government services on their part, I thought, you 

know, that would seem to be a pretty common sense initiative, a 

pretty straightforward way to better connect citizens to the 

different services that government provided. 

 

I’m sure you’d agree, Mr. Speaker: government is a 

many-splendoured thing. There’s a lot of different entities that 

fall under the umbrella of the Government of Saskatchewan and 

successfully navigating those different entities to make sure that 

you’re connecting with the service that you need or the 

department or the ministry that you’re after, or the agency that 

you’re seeking as a citizen, can sometimes be a bit of a daunting 

task. So that single point of access seemed to be a pretty 

common sense proposal and one that we were very interested to 

see how that progressed. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s where 

my caution rises in terms of the way that that initiative was 

announced or discussed by members opposite. And where is it 

today? 

And I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that the hype far outstripped 

the reality of what is on offer. And that single point of access 

for citizens, as simple as a 211 or a 611 or something that gets 

you into the system, I think we’d do well to hear as a House 

where that is at. So again, the principle is good; the intention is 

good. It’s the follow-through where we see some problems 

arising, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as regards the specific piece of legislation in front of us, 

with using a common business identifier, as in using that hub 

approach to ensure that you’ve got that uniform or that unified 

common access point, and that you’ve not got businesses forced 

to endure the merry-go-round or the tarantella of, you know, 

from going from ministry to ministry or department to 

department, again we think that’s a laudable goal. But it’s with 

the follow-through and with the execution of what is proposed 

here in this draft piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll be 

watching closely to see how that stated intent measures up to 

the actual delivery. 

 

Now I know that other members are interested to join in debate 

on other pieces of legislation. So I at this time will commence 

ceding the floor on Bill No. 84, The Common Business 

Identifiers Act, and as such, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 84, The Common Business Identifiers Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 85 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

wade into the debate on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. Obviously since this Bill came to the House in 

December, the opposition has much to say about this, as do 

many members of the general public. This Bill isn’t just about 

unionized workplaces. This is about all workers in 

Saskatchewan and will have a tremendous impact on all 

workers here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think one thing that I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the 

consultation. So less than a year ago, Mr. Speaker, last I believe 

it was May, the government announced that they were making 

major changes. A hundred years of labour legislation they were 

going to consult on in 90 days, beginning in May and wrapping 

up at the end of July. So 90 days of what they called 

consultations which would . . . But they would only be taking 

written submissions. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about this government’s record on 

consultation in the first place. They tend to do things after the 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

fact. They will produce something, provide it, and then they get 

pushback or kickback and then decide that they need to walk it 

backwards. And then they’ll start listening, Mr. Speaker. But 

the fact is, in order to create good public policy, you need to be 

talking to people before you are proposing things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there were 90 days over the course of the summer. So not 

only was it only 90 days to review 100 years of labour 

legislation, but those days happened over the summer days here 

in Saskatchewan, which as we know, the summer, it’s not that 

people stop working in the summer, but the reality is many 

people like to take advantage of the short summer that we have, 

and June and July I suspect are probably not the most 

convenient or easy ways for people to participate in putting 

together briefs. 

 

But I want to talk about something, some consultation that was 

very good on a very similar issue. Back in 2005 the federal 

government decided that they were going to review the federal 

labour standards Act. So the federal labour standards Act only 

governs about 10 per cent of employees here in Canada. The 

employees it covers are interprovincial, who work in 

interprovincial and international trade, those who work in 

banking, telecommunications, federal Crown corporations, and 

some who are involved with some First Nations activity. 

 

So the government decides that they’re going to review the 

federal labour standards. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? Do 

you know what they did? In February of 2005 the federal 

government, the then federal government struck a commission, 

a fairly high-level commission too. Judge Harry Arthurs chaired 

that commission. A Daphne Taras who used to be at the U of C 

[University of Calgary] who is now the dean I believe of 

commerce at the U of S was on that commission, and two 

others. It was a very high-level commission to look at the issue 

of federal labour standards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they strike this high-level committee. This is the federal 

government in 2005. They put out a consultation paper in 

February of 2005. They put out a consultation page in February 

of 2005. They produced a interim report in October of 2005. 

And the final report, the final report did not come out until 

October of 2006, the final report. So that is a considerably 

greater length of time than 90 days, Mr. Speaker, 90 days this 

government took to review our provincial labour laws. 

 

So the same process, they called it the modernizing. The federal 

government back in 2005 also called it the modernization of 

federal labour laws. But they started consulting in February of 

2005 and didn’t produce their final report until October of 2006, 

a considerably greater length of time than the May until the end 

of July period that this government took to take 100 years of 

labour legislation and review it and roll it into one omnibus bill, 

Mr. Speaker, which I think is a huge problem. 

 

Let me tell you a little bit more about that process that produced 

a really great book full of principles and ideas, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

called Fairness at Work: Federal Labour Standards for the 21st 

Century. So this is what came out of that consultation process. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So what did they do? So this provincial government, this Sask 

Party government accepted written proposals, Mr. Speaker. 

What did this federal labour standards review do? There were 

13 locations, Mr. Speaker, 13 locations across Canada. Let me 

tell you where they held their consultations: Whitehorse, 

Ottawa, Toronto, Regina, Winnipeg, Vancouver, Edmonton, 

Calgary, Montreal, Moncton, Charlottetown, Halifax, and St. 

John’s. So the federal government did in-person consultations. 

They allowed for people to come and present briefs. 

 

So what happened here in Saskatchewan? What kind of briefs 

did we hear in Saskatchewan? So some of the participants, they 

weren’t just labour organizations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These 

were all people concerned about labour standards and the 

average, everyday employee here in Saskatchewan. So some of 

the presenters: actually SaskTel presented. The Work and 

Family Unit presented. The Breastfeeding Committee for 

Canada presented. The Balancing Work and Family Alliance 

presented. The Saskatoon caregiver information centre 

participated. An organization called Saskatoon Communities for 

Children and the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce participated 

and provided in-person briefs to this high-level commission, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we want to talk consultation here, accepting written 

submissions and willing to add just form letters to the 

consultation process I don’t think accounts for successful or 

effective and meaningful consultation, Mr. Speaker. So there 

were these 13 locations across Canada where the federal 

government accepted briefs in person, plus they had many, 

many, many written submissions as well. 

 

And I want to emphasise, I want to emphasise the timeline here. 

Our Sask Party government last May announces that we’re 

going to be consulting, 90 days of consultations, only accepting 

written submissions, till the end of July, Mr. Speaker. I think 

that that’s hugely problematic when you’re reviewing 100 years 

of labour legislation that impacts all employers here in this 

province. It’s a huge problem. 

 

One of the things about which I’m very passionate is the issue 

of work-family balance and being able to help ensure that 

people are able to maintain their care responsibilities and their 

work responsibilities and do both as well and effectively as 

possible, Mr. Speaker. And I think one of the things that jumps 

out on me, this is one of the changes. And I actually have some 

questions for the minister, and maybe at some point he could 

answer this question. But if you look at the side-by-side 

comparisons of The Labour Standards Act, the existing 

legislation here right now, just a little tiny change, but it’ll make 

a big difference in lots of people’s lives, and it will be 

problematic. So this is the current legislation that is in effect 

here in Saskatchewan: 

 

Notwithstanding subsection (1), where there are more then 

10 employees in any establishment, the employer shall 

grant to every employee who is usually employed for 20 

hours or more in a week a rest period of two consecutive 

days in every seven days, and one of those days is to be 

Sunday wherever possible. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s existing legislation. What is this 

government doing today with The Saskatchewan Employment 

Act? I would like to read that: 



2476 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

In prescribed workplaces with more than 10 employees, or 

for prescribed categories of employees, an employer shall 

grant to employees in the workplace or to the category of 

employees two consecutive days off every week. 

 

You might notice in that second piece it isn’t something that 

might jump out at you, but the word Sunday is missing, Mr. 

Speaker. So no longer in workplaces with more than 10 

employees will Sunday be the day off that many of us get. The 

reality is when it comes to work-family balance, if it’s around 

children — if it’s around elders, it might be a different case — 

but if it’s around children, the reality is children for 10 months 

of the year are in school, Monday through Friday. And so if you 

don’t have an opportunity to have one of the days off where 

your children are also off school, you’re making it even more 

difficult, Mr. Speaker, to find any balance in your life. And the 

interesting thing . . .  

 

And this is my question for the minister. So that’s for 

workplaces that have over more than 10 employees. What I’m 

curious about is, and he can let me know this, but what I 

understand is that if you are under 10 employees, Bill 85 only 

requires an employer to grant one day off every week to an 

employee who usually works or is at the disposal of the 

employer for 20 hours or more in a week. So am I correct in 

saying that employees will no longer be entitled to two days off 

in a week? 

 

So I’m not sure. I think we have many questions about this Act. 

We’re not sure where the rubber hits the road, what this is going 

to look like. But I’d like to know from the minister, am I correct 

in reading that? To grant one day off every week to an 

employee who usually works or is at the disposal of the 

employer for 20 hours or more in a week, is that correct? That 

you will only be entitled to one day off in a week, Mr. Speaker? 

That’s hugely problematic. 

 

Some of the employees that I’ve had the privilege of working 

. . . happen to be more vulnerable employees working in places 

that aren’t unionized. They’re not professional employees, but 

they’re front-line employees who have a huge impact on 

business. They are the people who work in restaurants. They’re 

the front line in confectionary stores. They’re the receptionists 

or the people who we meet when we go into a business who 

work very hard and set the stage for the business. If that . . . 

They’re the first person you meet when you walk in the door. 

So we need to be able to ensure that our . . . What my 

experience is, is many of these employees have not been, don’t 

have the protection of labour standards and don’t have, for 

example, paid time off, whether it’s paid sick time or paid days 

to care for family members. 

 

Work-family balance is a very real issue for a huge percentage 

of people. We have about 70 per cent of people, of mothers 

with children under the age of five, who are in the paid 

workforce right now. About 70 per cent of those with children 

under five are in the paid workforce, so that’s a huge percentage 

of our population that we need to make sure working conditions 

are good. And I would argue that one day a week, having one 

day a week off is not conducive to work-family balance. 

 

The reality is there are many employees who are working 

multiple jobs when it comes to scheduling shifts. When I say 

multiple jobs, I’m talking two or three jobs where they’re trying 

just to make ends meet. And so they are working jobs where 

they are precariously juggling while . . . when does this shift 

finish? They might not have regularly scheduled hours as it is. 

So the reality is, it is incredibly tough for a lot of people out 

there, here in Saskatchewan, and ensuring the people only have 

one day off is not satisfactory, Mr. Speaker. That is a huge 

problem. 

 

Another issue is around averaging of hours when it comes to 

flexibility. And I’m a huge proponent of flexibility in the 

workplace. Again from a work-family balance perspective, 

there’s all kinds of literature that shows that when employees 

are able to maintain their work-family balance, that you have 

lower absenteeism costs. You have higher loyalty. You have 

lower recruitment and retention costs because people aren’t 

leaving because they’re not just trying to hold it together every 

day. So supporting employees in work-family balance, 

individual employers do it, but our labour standards also set the 

minimum bar for that. And taking away a day is not a good 

thing to do. 

 

But I’d like to talk a little bit about averaging of hours and, 

well, flexibility. I could talk a great deal about flexibility. I’m a 

little bit all over the map here. 

 

I feel very passionately about supporting people in their 

working and caring responsibilities. And we have huge 

concerns about this bill and what this bill will do to the average 

everyday person, let alone some of the more vulnerable 

individuals who are working their butts off to try to be good, 

productive citizens but just are not given a break. And there are 

things in this Act that will in fact take them a step backwards, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one thing that we have here in Saskatchewan right now is 

something called averaging of hours, where if you want 

someone to work more than eight hours a day in a certain 

period of time you have to get permission from labour standards 

to be able to work more than those hours. And as I said, I’m a 

big believer in flexible work and thinking about the different 

ways. For some people working a compressed work week is a 

good thing, but it’s only a good thing if it works for you. So to 

be mandated to have to work a 10-hour day, four days a week, 

is not about flexibility, Mr. Speaker. So right now, as I said, 

with averaging of hours, that’s something that you negotiate 

with your employer and you get permission from the labour 

standards to be able to do that. 

 

But this Act, and maybe the minister can correct me if I’m 

wrong, but in looking at this Act, what it is telling us is that an 

employer will not have to get permission anymore and you 

could be mandated to work 10-hour days, four days a week. 

Which again, I want to emphasize, flexibility is what is key to 

supporting work-family balance, working with an employer and 

employee to come up with a relationship that works and ensures 

that it works well for both parties. 

 

So when you take away the averaging of hours and are 

mandating that you have to work a 10-hour work day, it’s 

hugely problematic. I’ve worked with people who have been 

forced to work split shifts, so they work for a few hours in the 

morning and have to come back later on in the day. These are 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

people who often have transportation issues. They may have 

their work in one location, their child care in another, no vehicle 

to get anywhere, so something like this makes it incredibly 

difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for people to live the life that I 

think we all want people to live. We want people to have the 

opportunity to have fulfilling work and to be able to be good 

caregivers for their children or their elders. 

 

And there are things in this new Saskatchewan employment Act 

that are going to make it very difficult for people to lead 

balanced lives where they’re thinking about, where they are 

really able to have some balance in their lives and care for their 

children or their elders well. So getting rid of and cutting away 

overtime pay is a problem as well, and forcing people to bank 

their hours. Is that what the bill is going to do, Mr. Speaker? 

Looking at it, that is what it appears to be doing. So putting all 

the flexibility in the employer’s court and taking any flexibility 

or option away from the employee, especially some of the more 

vulnerable employees who do some of the averaging of hours, 

is hugely problematic. 

 

So just to recap here a little bit, I want to talk about 

consultation. That’s a big piece that I had focused on. We had 

the government, the federal government in 2005 embark upon a 

real and meaningful consultation process that took from 

February of 2005 until October of 2006 to do the same thing 

that this government did in 90 days, Mr. Speaker. And this 

government did not even meet with anybody face to face. How 

do you have a real consultation process if you can’t even sit 

down and ask questions of the person who is providing you 

with a document, Mr. Speaker? How do you have any give and 

take and dig deep and learn what the person or the organization 

is proposing? 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, this consultation process has led to a 

document that is weak and will have some serious problems for 

Saskatchewan citizens. I know I have colleagues who will be 

speaking in greater detail about this, but with that, I would like 

to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being near the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Page 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2447 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2447 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2447 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2447 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2447 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2447 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Telemiracle 37 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2447 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2448 

 Online Campsite Reservation System 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2448 

 Carpeting in the Premier’s Office  

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2448 

 Constituent’s Heroic Act 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2448 

 University of Regina Cougars Win Canada West Championship 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2449 

 We Day 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2449 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 IPAC-CO2 and Climate Ventures Inc. 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2449 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2449 

 Surgical Initiatives and Funding for Medical Services 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2451 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2451 

 Insurance Rates for Motorcycles 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2452 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2452 

 Standardized Testing and Student Achievement 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2452 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2453 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2454 

MOTIONS 

 Membership of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2454 

 Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2454 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 76 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2455 

 Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2457 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2459 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  Broten ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2460 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2462 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2463 

 Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2467 



 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2471 

 Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2473 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2474 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


