




















































Hansard: March 04, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 26B  MONDAY, MARCH 4, 2013, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2479 

 March 4, 2013 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 7 o’clock, this 

House resumes second reading debates. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 45 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today, to rise and speak on Bill No. 45, An Act 

to Amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act or 

known as the miscellaneous statutes amendment Act, 2012. 

 

It is an important piece of legislation. We know the Crowns are 

an important part of our economy here in our province and 

they’ve served us well. And definitely SaskTel has done that 

over the many decades of Saskatchewan’s history in terms of 

technology and taking us from those rural exchange, or small 

town exchanges of phones and all of that, to now dealing with 

Internet and cellphones and all of that. 

 

And of course we are where we are, and many people would 

credit the Crowns for giving us stability in our economy, in our 

phones, knowing (a) that we’ve got the telecommunications 

solved; we’ve got the insurance solved; we’ve got the energy 

part of it solved. And so when we talk about the Crowns, it’s 

very important that we take time to reflect on these bills 

because a lot of things that were in place prior were put in place 

to protect the integrity of the Crowns. 

 

And it’s important that we keep that in mind and we ask 

questions. Are these changes necessary? Are they something 

that we must do? I mean often we think — and I know 

politicians often think — that if only it was a little easier, we 

could do things so much more quickly and solve a lot of 

problems. But boy, then we get into problems because it’s a 

little too easy. 

 

And so it’s important that we take a look at the intention of Bill 

No. 45. What does it really mean? What does it really ask for 

and is it important? What are the unintended consequences? 

What might they be? 

 

And if they make common sense, let’s do it. But let’s also make 

sure, let’s take a moment to reflect on this. Because in a 

province like Saskatchewan, where our economy is so 

resource-based and based throughout its modern history in 

terms of agriculture, Crowns are critical to maintain who we 

are. And I mean that as a whole province, not just the urban, the 

two urban large cities, but right across the province, right from 

the North right down to the South and throughout the province. 

So it’s important that we take a look at this. 

 

So it’s not a long Act. In fact it’s only one page, but I do want 

to take a minute to take a look at what the minister had said 

about this and why this was important. I’ll just reflect a minute 

on what he had said. And he had talked about the first part was 

dealing with “. . . simple housekeeping matter[s] of monetary 

limits of order in councils and the length of the term of 

borrowing by SaskTel.” 

 

So over the past five years I understand the Canadian bond 

market has expanded and now they issue bonds for 30 years or 

more. And this hasn’t been provided to the province or SaskTel 

for a long time. It talks about the recent credit upgrades, and of 

course we have a long history now, a long history of credit 

upgrades for the last, I would think the last 10 years if not the 

last 15 years of credit upgrades. So this is important. 

 

It talks about how it could potentially impact SaskTel’s ability 

to participate directly in the province’s borrowing program. So 

what he’s really talking about is asking that SaskTel and, well 

SaskTel in this case, be able to participate in a program where 

the term is 30 years or longer. And that seems to make some 

sense so we’ll take a look at that. And that’s really, really 

important. So I think that that’s one part. 

 

But the second part, and this is one that I know, and I know my 

colleague from Regina spoke earlier on this. He talks about: 

 

The housekeeping matter is to align SaskTel’s dollar limit 

for the order in council with CIC’s [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] model that was 

recommended by the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations. Currently SaskTel requires an order in 

council for all lands purchased in excess of $100,000. This 

could delay the . . . [delay] of land for cell towers. 

 

Now, it’s interesting. It says, could delay the land that they 

want to purchase for cell towers. So I’m not sure if it’s 

specifically and only for cell towers or that’s just an example 

that he’s using. 

 

Now he’s talking about how it’s a very competitive market, the 

cellular market, and how important it is to be able to move 

quickly. There’s a couple of flags in there. First of all, I know in 

Saskatoon we’ve had some controversy about where cell towers 

are placed, and so I’m not sure how that all fits into that whole 

process. Do we want to make sure that when cell towers go up 

in neighbourhoods that they’re welcomed and that people feel 

okay about them, that the land isn’t quickly bought? A cell 

tower goes up and it’s a done deal. Like I think we have to 

make sure that we take some time to think about that. 

 

And if I read this right, when he’s talking about the amendment 

for: 

 

The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act is amended in 

the manner set forth in this section. 



2480 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

And it’s section 2(2): 

 

Subsection 11(3) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“The corporation shall obtain the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council if the purchase 

price or sale price of real property included in one 

transaction entered into by the corporation exceeds 

the amount fixed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council.” 

 

So it sounds like it could be both the purchase or the sale price 

and that’s what the focus is around, the $100,000. And it goes 

down into section 11(4) which follows and talks about the 

purchase price or the sale price. 

 

So we’re not just talking about the ability to buy land for cell 

towers. Maybe we are. Maybe that’s the complete intention. But 

it is amending the SaskTel communications holding corporation 

Act and the SaskTel communications Act. And I have some 

questions about that because it’s just not as clear as it might be. 

And so we need to know what that really means. 

 

And so I have a lot of questions and I think that we now see . . . 

And actually it was very interesting, reading the remarks from 

my colleague from Regina Rosemont who is talking about . . . 

And he’s the Chair of the Public Accounts and I think he has a 

fair bit of credibility in this. And I think we all worry, we all 

worry when this government on this side leans a little too heavy 

towards the Crowns for supporting them in their balanced 

budgets. And we’ve just seen that recently just a few weeks 

ago, and we’ve seen it in the past where millions, tens of 

millions, hundreds of millions have come from the Crowns over 

to the government. 

 

And so when we see that kind of a habit by a government when 

they are pressed in terms of making their budgets work, we 

have some real concerns. And so when we see this kind of a bill 

before us, it makes us ask a few questions. What is this really 

all about? Is it really about just buying some land for cell 

towers or is this enabling them to do much more? And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that we have to ask them some questions about 

this, and we will ask some questions about this. Have they lost 

deals where they . . . [inaudible] . . . cell tower deals? I’d be 

very curious because I know of two cell towers, particularly in 

Saskatoon, where questions were raised about their location. 

And we would not want to see this happen so quickly that 

neighbours are pitted against one another because of a cell 

tower going up. 

 

We need to take that time to get things and do them in the 

proper manner. So things aren’t quite as straight forward as they 

might be. We talk about the 30-year. That may be a new pattern 

and that seems to be a logical thing. Of course we need to know 

more about that, but I am concerned about this government and 

its relationship to the Crowns and especially SaskPower and 

SaskTel and Sask Energy and using them to, as I said, to make 

their budgets work. And the public is watching as well. And so 

when this kind of thing happens . . . And of course the 

minister’s framed it as just buying land, but here it’s actually 

buying and selling. It’s a two-way street. So the legislation 

raises questions about what really is the intent. And so we have 

questions. 

 

And I think it’s rightly so that we take some time, particularly 

as we’re getting closer to budget. And there’s been all sorts of 

signals sent out that the budget’s going to be a tough one. And 

this government has been known to, when tough decisions are 

made, they often go to the Crowns, and they often rely heavily 

on them, overly relying on them to an extent that many feel that 

they’re really at risk. And then they’re put into a tough spot 

where they are kind of forced to make . . . They may be making 

choices that later on would be viewed as not the best. 

 

So we have a lot of questions about this. And we know that we 

can look back in the paper when we talk about SaskTel Internet, 

and we can know that last summer or about a year ago, we 

heard about rural Saskatchewan and SaskTel Internet, about 

8,000 high-speed Internet users in rural Saskatchewan, there 

was some questions about the capacity of SaskTel to continue 

on with that. And so we really have questions in terms of 

making sure that this government is allowing SaskTel to do its 

work and not using it as a cash cow necessarily to get money so 

that when times are tough, they’re having to deliver cash and 

not doing the kind of things that people right across this 

province are expecting. 

 

And I think in Saskatchewan, you look at SaskTel as a provider 

of telecommunications right from the North right down to the 

South. Rural is right involved as much as the urban. And we 

look at cellphone coverage, and we think that’s all very critical. 

But we see dangerous signals from this government in terms of 

how they can be hobbling this corporation. And so when we see 

this kind of enabling legislation to allow bigger financial 

transactions to happen without the public scrutiny, then we have 

some problems. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that this is one that we’ll have a lot 

of questions in committee, because we know for so many 

people in Saskatchewan, SaskTel has a long history. We’ve all 

grown up counting on SaskTel. And we can tell just by the 

loyalty factor of how many people use SaskTel for their 

cellphones or how many people use SaskTel for their Internet 

addresses, you can tell there is a huge loyalty factor. So we 

can’t be doing things that weaken our Crown corporations. 

 

And so when we kind of do this, we want to know, is this being 

well thought out? Is there good management behind it? Is it 

sound? I’m not so worried so much about the 30 years. I don’t 

know a lot about that. We’ll have questions about that. But I am 

worried more about the $100,000 and the ability to sell and buy 

land so quickly that the public scrutiny is not there. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know we have a long evening 

ahead of us and there’s a lot of bills that we want to cover. And 

so at this point I would want to move adjournment on Bill No. 

45, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Act and The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 

Corporation Act, also known as the miscellaneous statutes Act, 

2012. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 46 — The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased and honoured on behalf of the official opposition to 

stand today to give my initial comments about this particular 

bill that talks about the municipal employees’ pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I looked at the bill and read some of the comments 

of the minister, and certainly from our perspective the bill 

deserves and merits a lot of attention. It’s important that people 

out there know that the pension plans that the minister made 

reference to in this particular bill deals with all the folks that 

work for our villages and towns, and I am assuming the cities as 

well, to look at the long-term sustainability of the pension plan 

and to make sure that you protect workers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as part of our smart growth strategy that the 

NDP has certainly adopted for the last number of years, I think 

that it’s important that we look at that issue of how we make 

sure the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, know that the 

pension plans that we have in our province are fair, they are 

very sustainable and, Mr. Speaker, they are there to protect the 

working men and women of our province. 

 

There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, as I travelled . . . I tried to 

travel here yesterday on a Sunday night and I probably got as 

far as Kenaston and the roads were quite bad, Mr. Speaker. 

They were so bad to the point where I believe the police finally 

shut down this main road. And I can tell you when I travelled 

through conditions of that sort, it’s always nice to see some of 

the police officers and the emergency crews and the Highways 

people out there working very hard and working in conditions 

that are quite frankly very, very dangerous for all the people 

involved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I had no choice but to turn back at Kenaston 

because obviously the weather and the roads were getting 

worse. And at that point, Mr. Speaker, when you see people 

helping out each other, people that may have hit the ditch and 

you see emergency vehicles out there, it really makes you 

appreciate, knowing the value of the emergency workers out on 

our highways and our street and helping other folks, but also the 

value of the people that maintain the services, the public 

services in our province. And certainly the people that are there 

in case you need them, whether it’d be a nurse or a doctor or an 

EMT [emergency medical technician] — these are the people 

out there, Mr. Speaker, that are working every day in very 

tough conditions, very demanding environments, and they 

continue to show their support and commitment towards 

Saskatchewan people. 

And that’s why I look any time the Sask Party mentions pension 

plans. And to make sure that they’re fair and sustainable, we 

within the NDP [New Democratic Party] take very, very . . . We 

pay very, very close attention to all the details of anything that 

the Sask Party brings forward when it talks about, when it talks 

about the pension plan and the ability for the pension plan to 

pay its own way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s important is a lot of people don’t know, 

when you look at some of the workers that are out there, the 

pension plan, under this particular case, a lot of the municipal 

employees contribute a certain amount and of course the 

government matches those amounts. Those amounts are 

invested. They’re reinvested in our communities. They’re 

invested into a lot of different sources of opportunity for our 

province, and over the years it grows. 

 

And one of the things that’s really, really important, Mr. 

Speaker, if you look at the notion . . . And we’re not saying 

nothing’s wrong with it, but the corporations have a pension 

plan called profit. And we support that notion because you 

shouldn’t be in business if you’re not willing to make a profit. 

But we look at the contribution and the ability for the 

employees. I think in the long term their profit is actually their 

pension plan for the end of their working lives, so where they’re 

able to, to be able to live a decent, sustainable life in their old 

age. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that’s really, really 

paramount to our belief. If you want to build a good 

Saskatchewan, it’s got to be fair for all. 

 

And certainly from our perspective, Bill 46, when you look at 

the pension plan, we see some minor adjustments, Mr. Speaker. 

It talks about the board of directors. It also talks about the 

surviving spouse. And some of the amendments, Mr. Speaker, 

are some of the things that we think certainly if there’s an 

opportunity to make the pension plans more sustainable and 

operate better, then there’s nothing that the NDP will do to 

disrupt that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the reason why in opposition we take a 

very, very close look at all of these bills, and we pay a lot of 

close attention — we pay extra attention — to the Sask Party. 

Any time they talk about pension plans or working people or 

any of those particular bills, Mr. Speaker, right away within the 

NDP circles there’s a lot of worries, a lot of confusion. And it’s 

our job as the official opposition to pay particular attention to 

any meddling that the Sask Party has in any bills that affect 

working people because, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen evidence 

time and time again that the Sask Party is going to war with our 

working people. And it’s important that that gauntlet has been 

placed down by the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And the working people are not going to back down, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re going to continue holding this government to 

account. And we in the opposition are going to support the 

working people to ensure that they don’t make any changes 

unbeknownst to the working people when it comes to the 

pension plans. And that’s why Bill No. 46 is really, really 

important to all of us and something that we’ll pay very close 

attention to. On that point, Mr. Speaker, we would encourage 

people out there that have information . . . 

 

And we know that the pension plan sustainability issue is all 



2482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

throughout the land. I think the federal government, with any 

contribution, if I’m not mistaken, Mr. Speaker — and if I’m not 

right, certainly I would stand to be corrected — if you look at 

the federal government, they also have a 6.2 per cent. I think the 

employees of Saskatchewan, I think it’s 7 per cent. There’s a 

variation of pension contributions throughout the jurisdictions. 

And thankfully I believe Saskatchewan is on a path to 

sustainability. I think they also talk about a plan of fairness. 

 

But let us not forget, the premise of a pension plan, whether it’s 

this particular pension plan that the minister is making reference 

to or any other pension plan, that the workers themselves are 

contributing their own dollars — as opposed to being paid 

higher salaries — for the opportunity to be able to retire in 

relative comfort. And that’s the whole premise of putting these 

pension plans in place. 

 

So I would point out that the issues that are being brought 

forward on this particular bill, Bill 46, we’ll pay very close 

attention to. We think that there’s some issues, that there’s a bit 

of fixing up on some of the minor details. So we will watch that 

and make sure that’s the full intent of this particular bill. But 

rest assured, and a message to all the working people, any time 

that the Saskatchewan Party begin to talk about pensions or 

start meddling in any pensions of any sort that affects the 

working men and women throughout this province, Mr. 

Speaker, rest assured that the NDP will be paying very close 

attention. And we would encourage those members as well to 

pay very close attention to make sure, to make sure that the 

right wing over there doesn’t start messing with something that 

has taken years and years to build. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

what you call the pension plans of Saskatchewan and the 

pension plans of our country. So I think it’s important. It’s 

important that we pay very, very close attention to what is being 

done. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue doing that. 

 

I would also encourage all those folks that are in the know to 

come forward and share a lot of information on any pensions 

that are out there because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we all 

contribute to pensions as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly]; the workers contribute to pensions as workers. And 

the amount of pensions that they contribute, whether you’re a 

teacher, a doctor, a nurse, an MLA, we certainly make our 

contributions, matched by the province and it really . . . And 

then the money’s invested so it makes a lot of sense to build this 

economy together through a pension plan. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s an issue of fairness. It’s 

certainly an issue of sustainability. We appreciate that. But let 

us not forget, in the place of higher income for workers, many 

of them have opted for pension plans. It’s their only savings for 

the future and, Mr. Speaker, it is a good opportunity to protect 

our workers because, as I mentioned at the outset, if 

corporations are allowed to make profits, then workers should 

be allowed to build pensions. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a good 

balance. It’s a solid opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to point out that Bill 46 is a bill that we’re firmly 

interested in to make sure that the amendment that the minister 

has spoken about is all they do and that they don’t try and 

hoodwink the people of Saskatchewan by throwing some unfair 

argument into the mix. And that’s what the important role of the 

opposition is, is to make sure we hold this government to 

account. So we have a lot more to say on this particular bill, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to go through it carefully. We’re going to 

seek some advice. We’re going to do some consultation. And, 

Mr. Speaker, rest assured that all the employees over time, you 

know, and certainly all the employees in the future, know that 

when it comes to sustainability, when it comes to fairness, that 

that offer is extended to them. It’s extended to all the parties 

involved and just makes common sense. 

 

As I said at the outset, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great opportunity for 

us to invest in our workers; it’s a great opportunity for the 

workers to invest back in Saskatchewan; and it’s a great 

opportunity to work hand in hand with the corporations that 

make profits and the workers that make pensions. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a great balance and it should always be sustainable and 

should always be fair, and from our perspective that’s one of 

the premises that we undertake as we sit here in the opposition 

to watch what the Saskatchewan Party bring forward. And Bill 

46 is no different. We will endeavour to make sure we look 

through this bill as thoroughly as we can and encourage all of 

the partners that are out there to do the same, to share the 

information with us, and continue to shine a light on anything 

that the Sask Party does when it comes to pensions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on the second 

reading, Bill No. 46. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 47 — The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 

47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 

2012. Just looking at the Act and just going over it, it’s taking a 

bunch of different, I guess, concerns that we have with water 

and water safety, providing water for the people of our 

province, whether it’s drinking water, whether it’s business that 

have to rely on water to make sure they are competitive, to 

make sure they have a water supply to continue to do the good 

work that they’ve been doing. 

 

Now over years, you know, we had SaskWater. We had the 

Watershed Authority. You have different areas, and what 

they’re trying to do in ministry, I think, health, there’s been a 

lot of different components when it comes to water. And I think 

we hope at the end of the day this bill will bring together, you 

know, an agency that would look after water right through, 

working in partnership with industry, with municipalities to 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2483 

ensure that we have safe water, that we have a continuous 

supply of water. And it’ll work with the environment as well, 

Ministry of Environment. 

 

And I know there’s many challenges and people are getting 

more concerned today with types of, I guess, alarm bells, 

concerns that people are really concerned about the quality of 

good drinking water that people will have that for the next 

generation, and some of the damage that people are feeling is 

being done to our lakes, our rivers, and to the water supply 

that’s vital not only to, I guess, southern people, the North, but 

all of Canada. 

 

And I guess, the Idle No More movement, and I can say that 

I’m proud of the Idle No More movement, the awareness that 

they’re trying to bring out not only within First Nations and the 

Métis and the Aboriginal population but with all Canadians, to 

ring the alarm bells about the federal government’s dealing with 

water — the lakes, you know, protection. And there’s not going 

to be protection on a lot of rivers, lakes, streams, where even in 

Saskatchewan we have lakes, rivers that are protected and were 

protected, and the federal government is weakening those 

protections to protect the water. 

 

So here you have a provincial government trying to find ways 

to ensure that we have, we hope, meaningful . . . And going in 

an area, Mr. Speaker, that will protect water for the next 

generations for my grandchildren and great-grandchildren and 

for all members in this House and for all people in our province, 

but not only in the province, it could be in Canada. And we see 

some of the concerns that are being raised amongst the Idle No 

More movement, clearly about the supply and protection of 

water supply. And now you have a bill like this coming 

forward, and if the bill is going to have some teeth and you’re 

going to bring different agencies together whether it’s health, 

the environment, SaskWater — and they come together to make 

sure that those agencies, the resources, I guess municipalities, 

all the different groups, and they do have resources — I guess 

the idea is to focus those resources together to make sure we are 

doing what we need to do to protect the water. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So we know there’s a lot of discussion that needs to go on, and 

that has to happen. And at the end of the day we’ll hope that 

both sides, provincial and federal governments will hear the 

alarms and see what’s going on. And I guess when you look at 

the environment overall and you look at the world and you look 

at some of the challenges that I think other countries are facing 

with not having the protection of water supply for their 

residents, for industry, there could be some serious challenges 

coming ahead. 

 

And we see this as a start, and I say it’s a start. I hope it isn’t 

going to water down — and I say that — the protection’s that 

currently there, that this will enhance. And we hope the 

government’s hearing that. And if that’s what the government is 

doing and they’re going to bring the agencies together to 

strengthen regulations, to make sure that water supply is 

protected for drinking, that the water supply is there for industry 

in a balance — sustainable, protected to make sure that balance 

happens — then this is a good step in that direction. 

 

But if all it is is smoke and mirrors, and in the end there are no 

protections to protect the water for the next generation so that 

we have water for drinking, water as we cook, water to go 

fishing, that all our lakes aren’t contaminated, that they are 

protected. Whether it’s agriculture industry working together 

with this, health, they’re committed to this is what we’re seeing 

in this, and that’s what it’s supposed to bring the resources 

together, Mr. Speaker, we hope that will happen. We hope they 

will consult with a lot of people, but sometimes unfortunately 

this government, the Sask Party government does not do that. It 

doesn’t like to consult. It likes to have its own agenda. It pushes 

what it wants. It bullies people. It intimidates people. So people 

are a little concerned, and I don’t blame them to be a little 

concerned. And they’re cautious. 

 

When you see a government that handles the files and some of 

the bills that they’ve handled in the past — and there’s many of 

them we can refer to, Mr. Speaker, the way they’ve handled 

them — they haven’t done them and been open with people. 

They haven’t asked for proper input. They haven’t consulted. 

They haven’t asked for input. After the fact when the public 

finally gets upset and sends a message, it’s no different than 

we’ve seen today with the rates with SGI and the motorcycle. It 

isn’t so much SGI, the government has created some of those 

problems the way they’ve mismanaged the finances. So they’re 

looking for every dollar they can possibly find, and if that 

means you’re going to go and charge it on registering your 

motorcycles and some of those areas. 

 

And the government can sit here and they can spin it the way 

they want, and they can try to say . . . but it comes down to 

there’s been a lot of money in the government coffers that have 

not been spent properly, the way they should be, the way the 

public trusts a government, saying, here’s our tax dollars, the 

public money, the assets that belong to the public. We want you 

and we trust clearly that you’ll do right. This government’s got 

some answering to do, and they will be answering to it. The 

public won’t let things go away. 

 

And I mean we have many, you know, I guess situations where 

can we refer to, and we will. And those questions will come 

forward as this session goes on, to find out exactly what some 

of the, I guess, concerns are. And you know, question period 

today was another area, Mr. Speaker, where we kind of shed 

some light on some of the areas where there’s questions about 

public dollars, wasteful spending of taxpayers’ dollars, 

hard-earned dollars that people work hard and they expect the 

government to take care of those dollars. They don’t put that in 

the government’s hands easy. 

 

Some people are struggling today. They’re not having a good 

time. It’s not easy to try to put food on the table, to make sure 

their rent is paid. And it’s not just people that are living in 

poverty. It’s not. It’s middle class. It’s working families. They 

are struggling to make ends meet and when they see a 

government start to waste that money — money that’s been put 

there, earned by hard work and sweat on their part and the 

government collects that in their coffers and charges them more 

for utilities. And the cost on the middle class, people living in 

poverty, and people who are struggling, it’s pretty sad. 

 

So when they say trust . . . And that’s why we refer to this Bill 

and I’m saying that. The government will have lots of 



2484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

resources, different ministries whether it’s Health, Agriculture, 

Environment, to come together with those resources. They want 

to make sure that those resources, Mr. Speaker, are well taken 

care of — that it’s not misspent, that there isn’t a situation 

calling into question that’s coming out. And there’s going to be 

shed some light on some of those areas where government 

definitely has got the attention of the public. 

 

And let’s be clear. You go into the coffee shops; you start to 

hear people talking. They are asking questions about it. They 

can sit there and ignore it and they can try to, you know, brush 

it off. It isn’t going to work. I think this is something that’s 

going to stick with them. And I think as the investigation goes, 

and if it’s hopefully the Provincial Auditor looks into it, and 

investigates, you know, the two-point-millions of dollars. And 

you know, it’s amazing. Here we have a situation where we’ve 

got millions of dollars people are wondering about. And we’re 

seeing dollars being asked, Mr. Speaker, from the residents that 

live in this province, whether it’s utilities. They are asking for 

increase to cover off the utilities because they are taking the 

money out of the Crowns, because they are causing some of the 

problems that the Crowns are facing. And we wonder why. It 

goes to privatization. Is that where this is going? So people are 

really watching it. 

 

And you know, it’s amazing — this government, the Sask Party 

government focus on millions of dollars for three more MLAs 

which the public didn’t want. They didn’t consult them. They 

didn’t ask. They didn’t go to their doorstop. But it’s amazing to 

watch how now they can go to the public to get the increases 

that they need to cover off some of the costs and some of the 

damage they are doing to our province. And you know, you talk 

about the growth of our province, and we encourage that. We 

need that. I know our party supports business. The business 

people have to work together. 

 

There are challenges. There always are. You know what? You 

know, they can sit there and say what they want and do their 

heckling about it. At the end of the day, if business does well, 

our citizens do well. But there has to be co-operation. There has 

to be meaningful co-operation between employees, the business 

sector, and government. That has to work. This government 

doesn’t focus on the working men and women of this province. 

They do not. They have a certain agenda and they work on that 

agenda. And that’s their opportunity to reach out if they want 

to. I would encourage them to reach out not only to the business 

sector, to the working men and women but also the Aboriginal 

population that is suffering terribly under their watch, under 

their management, and under their mismanagement. And 

opportunities, they have such opportunities to reach out, but 

they don’t seem to want to reach out to the Aboriginal 

population when it comes to training, education, when it comes 

to the business. 

 

So here’s another bill that they bring forward, you know. And 

they want to talk about bringing different ministries’ and 

agencies’ resources together. And that’s fine to do that, but 

unfortunately we have other areas where I wish they would look 

a little closer to, and the Aboriginal population is one where 

they should be. It is a young population growing. There are 

many challenges and needs on and off our First Nations 

communities, our Métis communities, our Métis citizens. 

 

There are challenges within our province with all citizens trying 

to make ends meet. The costs are going up. But sometimes you 

have to ask, in a province that’s doing as well, we want to make 

sure our government protects our water. This bill, Bill 47, is 

going to try to attempt to do some of that, we hope. We hope. 

We hope that this bill . . . And we have a role as opposition to 

hold the government to account, and we will do that. 

 

And at the end of the day, I’m proud of the work that my 

colleagues do over here, asking the tough questions, bringing 

the concerns of citizens who call and say, we can’t get the 

MLAs from the Sask Party to call us. We have trouble getting 

our message across to the ministry. And when the public comes 

in here, and we’ve seen the film industry, we’ve seen different 

groups come here with concerns about the way this government 

bullies and pushes ahead on its agenda and what it wants to do 

without consulting. It sells off stuff without consulting. The 

public is watching. 

 

And I know they like to laugh and talk about how many of them 

over there, and they’re so humble — which they’re not. They 

chuckle and they, you know, want to throw it around. That’s 

fine. They can play that game. At the end of the day, the public 

will make a decision. And I wonder next election, that if they 

continue the way they’re going, how many of those 

backbenchers will be there? Will they get a message from the 

public, or do they take it for granted? 

 

But here’s a good way. And you look at Bill 47. It starts to 

protect some water. It’s a start. And I wanted to make sure, Mr. 

Speaker, we focus on Bill 47, what it’s trying to do, we hope. 

We hope. But you know, sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we have to 

refer to other situations that have arised in this House, other 

situations and concerns that citizens of this great province raise 

or try to raise to a government that they say does not listen. You 

have citizens in this province that say the government doesn’t 

listen. The government moves on its agenda. And they talk 

about, oh you can have a government who say they hear you, 

but they actually don’t act on what they hear because they have 

their own agenda. It’s what they want. It isn’t what the people 

want. 

 

But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people will hold the finances of 

our province. The people hold, whether its Bill 47 with 

resources and it’s the public’s dollars that run this ministry, it’s 

the public dollars that that government is responsible to make 

sure they spend right, that contracts are developed, not a 

handshake. Now let’s make it clear on that. People want to 

protect their money and they want protection, and it isn’t done 

by a handshake or, oh yes, well we’ll do a verbal contract. That 

doesn’t cut it for the people. They want to make sure things are 

done, so they want to see actual contracts. And that’s important. 

That’s the accountability. 

 

But obviously we’re seeing some light being shed, and I think 

there’s going to be a few skeletons that will come out of the 

closets over there. And maybe it’s time that maybe the public 

— six years; they’ve had six years — maybe the public is going 

to start looking at them. They’re so confident. And sometimes, 

good, I’m glad you’re confident. But sometimes it goes too far. 

And I think the people are going to hold the Sask Party to 

account for their dollars, because they’re struggling out there to 

make ends meet. 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2485 

So they want to make sure, like in Bill 47, the resources that the 

government has, you take care of those resources — every 

dollar. You make sure you’re doing what’s needed. And they 

want to make sure that the resources that we have, and we see at 

the end of the day that people want to say, you did the right 

thing as a government. And sometimes we work together, 

whether it’s the opposition and the government. We can work 

together. We’ve shown that co-operation. Sometimes there’s a 

reason to work together and we pass legislation without hurdles. 

We try to improve because it benefits all of us in the province 

and it takes care of a need. So we’ve done that. And again, I’ll 

say that — it’s important, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes we come 

together and we do try to solve some of the serious issues that 

affect our citizens in our province. And that I say is governing 

the province together. 

 

Now having said that, we’re not always going to agree on some 

of the things. But I know one thing — the public wants to make 

sure that the resources that they give to this government and the 

government coffers, that the government takes care and shows 

respect, accountability. And I think the way we see things 

coming out — and we’ll see more of that in the next probably 

months as things are uncovered — there are some serious 

problems going on. And I think the people are going to demand 

some answers. 

 

And they’re not going to ask for the little shell game and they 

ain’t going to ask for the PR [public relations] spin shop and 

they ain’t going to ask for the media spin that the government 

tries to put on some of the stuff, the photo ops that they want to 

be in. They’re going to ask for some tough questions. They’re 

going to ask us to ask those tough questions, and they’re going 

to want some answers. 

 

So I say, Bill 47, it’s a start to work on protecting water. You’re 

taking different ministries together and it’s a start. And I know 

a lot of my colleagues will have a lot more questions. We’re 

going to consult with individuals out there, seeing what is the 

best way to handle this legislation. 

 

So when I say that, Mr. Speaker, clearly we want to make sure 

that the people of our province, the ministries come together to 

make sure that we’re doing the right things and we are 

protecting the water so that there is good drinking water, safe 

drinking water, not only for municipalities but for First Nations 

communities, our municipal communities in northern 

Saskatchewan, wherever — everyone has a right to that. 

 

So this may be a good start, but we’ll see where the regulations 

go. We’ll find out, like everything else, in the details what 

comes out with this Bill 47. But again, Mr. Speaker, clearly, 

clearly it’s going to be interesting to see where things go in the 

next little while. 

 

And at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know a few of my other 

colleagues want a few things they want to talk about and there’s 

more bills that we have to debate, so at this time I will adjourn 

debate on Bill 47, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 48 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and make some comments about Bill No. 48, An Act to 

amend The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is quite a short piece of legislation 

because it effectively relates to the province attempting to bring 

our provincial legislation in compliance with federal legislation, 

the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999, commonly 

known as CEPA. And what is required under that legislation for 

provincial legislation to be declared equivalent is that it has 

some provision for a citizen’s investigation power so that 

citizens have the right to make complaints and actually have an 

investigation take place. 

 

Right now our legislation doesn’t have that specific provision, 

and when one looks at the sections that are part of this rather 

short bill, it effectively puts in those provisions. And so what 

we have is a situation then where the new sections, 62.1 to 62.3, 

have been added into The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act. 

 

And what it says is as simple as this, is that any resident who’s 

18 years of age, who has an opinion that there’s some 

contravention of the legislation, can make a complaint and they 

can apply to the minister, and that investigation then needs to 

take place following the rules that are here. And basically that’s 

what’s here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important though to understand the 

context in which this particular legislation is being brought 

forward. We know that over many decades the concerns that 

have been registered by governments of all political persuasions 

in Canada from the provincial level has been that the federal 

legislation doesn’t always take into account some of the 

regional nature of the country, and it doesn’t take into account 

some of the very specific kinds of issues that arise in a local 

jurisdiction. And so what we will sometimes have is a situation 

where a company or a project or some activity complies with 

provincial legislation but not with federal legislation. And 

there’s always been this discussion between the federal 

government and provincial governments around how to 

coordinate that kind of legislation. 

 

Some steps have been taken over the last number of decades 

which have allowed for common perspective on how to regulate 

particular industries. And what this particular legislation does is 

remove another impediment to the province being the regulator 



2486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

for one aspect of environmental issues, and that relates to 

obviously the management and reduction of greenhouse gases. 

 

Now this could be something that’s not necessarily that 

significant. But it’s also part of a bigger issue around what’s 

happened in Canada in the last six, seven, or eight years and 

one of the things that’s happened in Canada as it relates to 

environmental regulation. And the perspective is that there’s 

been effectively less and less emphasis at a national level on 

setting up standards and more and more of this being pushed 

down to the provinces and the territories. 

 

Now given all of the discussion over the decades, it hasn’t 

necessarily been something that everybody has been totally 

concerned about. But when you look at the kind of discussions 

that take place within the corporate legal world, within the 

people who are trying to comply with the rules, if I can put it 

that way . . . And often it’s the vice-president and corporate 

legal secretary of a particular company who has to give advice 

on what are the rules that we have to comply with to proceed 

with our business, whether it’s an oil refinery or a power plant 

or maybe even some of the fisheries operations. All of these 

different activities are rule-driven, and the rules are there for 

protection of the public, protection of the environment, and 

protection for the long-term future of our country. It also relates 

to a number of the forestry issues and things like that. 

 

Now what we’ve seen in the last number of years has been a 

great reduction or neglect of these kinds of perspectives at the 

centre of Canada, at the national level. And it’s played out in 

quite a number of different ways. But as it relates to greenhouse 

gases and the whole climate change issue, there clearly has been 

a perspective from the national level and I think to a point from 

the provincial level where evidence from scientific investigation 

is discounted. 

 

We see on a national level that the ability of federal scientists to 

actually communicate with the public around the research that 

they’re doing has been removed. We see that there’s been a 

collapse of the funding for many of the projects. I think the 

biggest and most egregious example is a whole series of lakes 

that have been studied for many, many decades that were part of 

the Canadian contribution to world science as it relates to 

limnology, the study of the water and environment. That has 

been cut back and I think is close to being eliminated during 

this year. 

 

Well that perspective at a national level has played down into 

many other areas. And frankly, one of the major problems that 

we’re having right now, our Premier’s going to Washington 

tomorrow to speak Wednesday and Thursday around the whole 

issue of the XL pipeline and environmental issues that are there. 

All people who live here in Western Canada are supportive of 

making sure that our products have ways to get to the market, 

and XL pipeline is another activity that is part of that particular 

task. It’s building on obviously a long history we have in 

Western Canada of building safe and effective pipelines. 

 

But one of the things that’s happened in the United States and 

around the world is that that pipeline and that perspective has 

raised the ire of many of the environmental groups in the United 

States and Canada. And it’s become a symbol around the fact 

that Canada’s perspective or Canada’s position in the world as 

it relates to environmental protection, climate protection, 

climate change science, environmental science has been so 

damaged by federal government decisions and, I think, some of 

the things that have been happening provincially, that people 

are taking on some of the important industrial kinds of activities 

that we have. And so what we have is a sense that in Canada the 

environment, the climate change issues are not as important to 

our governments, both federally and provincially here in 

Saskatchewan. And that affects business. That affects the 

economy And we’re seeing those kinds of effects as we move 

forward. 

 

This particular legislation is one that ties in with the federal 

legislation that is seen to be not as stringent a standard, not as 

world-class as Canada had always hoped to be in that position, 

and as a result we have our Premier having to go down there 

and defend what we’re doing in this province in a situation 

where people who oppose our perspective around our oil 

industry and around some of those kinds of things can say, well 

yes, you’re part of the Canadian system where you dismiss 

scientific evidence that everybody else in the world accepts, 

where you diminish the role of environmental regulation, where 

you diminish the role of government on behalf of all the people 

and of the businesses, on behalf of the environment. You 

diminish that role as protector. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we in this province have ended up 

pushing aside some of these responsibilities that we’ve had . . . 

We’ve taken on some projects, but it’s very clear when people 

look at some of the plans that we had 10 years ago that have 

been pushed to the side. We know that people are criticizing 

what we have done in Saskatchewan, but I think even more 

importantly what we have done in Canada on a national basis. 

 

Now I know that the Minister of Environment, when he was 

speaking on his second reading speech on November 5th, got 

way over the top on explaining that our federal Environment 

minister was doing an excellent job. I think he evens calls him a 

. . . “Peter Kent is indeed an excellent, excellent minister.” 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues that we have 

internationally as Canadians and as Saskatchewan people point 

to the fact that the federal government and the federal Minister 

of Environment are not doing the kind of role that we have 

expected as Canadians. 

 

And I make a plea to our provincial government that they don’t 

try to follow or emulate some of that, especially as it relates to 

the funding of research, the funding of science. But 

unfortunately some of our great assets that we have here in 

Saskatchewan are under tremendous pressure around the 

funding that’s available for them to continue to do the work 

that’s absolutely necessary. And I make this plea here in this 

legislature because it affects our economy. It affects our ability 

to market products from our part of the world, our 

Saskatchewan, when we have others looking at us and saying, 

there’s something suspect about your environmental regulation. 

There’s something suspect about your participation in some of 

the things that are happening nationally. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we want to do in legislation that we 

have in Saskatchewan is to provide assurance to the people of 

the province that Saskatchewan will remain this green, 

important place that we have always treasured. We want to 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

make sure that whatever industrial activity takes place in our 

province is done according to the best rules, the latest rules, and 

those rules that are going to protect our land and our water and 

our air. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that happens based on the actual activities 

and perhaps some of the kind of work that comes from this 

particular legislation which is effectively putting in a complaint 

process around the standards, but it also happens with a basic 

attitude towards the value of research science. And, Mr. 

Speaker, unfortunately our present government seems to 

identify too closely with the federal government and their 

ability to dismiss the research and the evidence that we all need 

as Canadians to make sure that protections are in place. 

 

Now the smart companies, the smart-growth people of the 

world at the inter- or transnational or cross-border companies 

that operate worldwide know that those places where the rules 

are the tightest, the rules are the clearest, the rules are based on 

evidence, those are the places that you want to do business 

because then your customers can be assured that you have a 

product that’s come with the best standards attached and the 

best work that can be done. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the goal 

of our party and has always been the goal to try to be in that 

particular role. 

 

Now I know from personal experience as the former Minister of 

Environment that when we sold the upgrader in Regina, the 

goal was to set aside that $300 million to deal with a number of 

these issues. Eventually, $30 million out of the 300 million was 

used for that. The other money went other places and it’s 

disappeared. But, Mr. Speaker, the goal there was to use money 

from an asset that did have an impact on the environment to 

actually go and address a number of these issues. 

 

And unfortunately the last five years or six years of this 

government has seen a steady diminishment in the size of the 

Environment department and in their oversight and in some of 

the activities that they do. There is an attempt to respond by 

saying, well we’re doing it in different ways or doing it in 

smarter ways, but unfortunately I think that a lot of what’s 

happened in our province is that we have gone down the same 

path as the federal government where we’ve diminished the 

value of research, we’ve diminished the value of evidence in 

how we plan and in what we do. 

 

We all know that Saskatchewan is in the prairie basin where 

adaptation to climate change will become one of the main 

political activities for the governments of the province over the 

next 100 years. And the reason for that is going to the 

mountains and looking to see the source of our water. We know 

that the great water towers of the earth in the mountains which, 

you know, the Columbia glacier, the Athabasca glacier, all of 

those in the Rockies, they’re diminishing in size to a point 

where people are concerned. And so what we need to look at 

when we’re doing that is, how does that affect some of the 

decisions we made around greenhouse gases? Why are we 

managing and reducing greenhouse gases? Because we are 

concerned about the contribution to world climate change. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to be in a situation where a lot of 

these issues are clearly part of the long-term concern that we 

have. 

 

Now when decisions are made in budgets that diminish these 

longer term goals for short- term political gains, we all lose. 

And I’m not sure exactly what’s coming in the budget as we 

move forward as it relates to the management and reduction of 

greenhouse gases, but I suspect, given the Premier’s present 

perspective on these types of issues, that this is an area where 

we’re going to see less resources and less importance attached. 

This is wrong. It’s bad for our present generation, but it’s really 

bad for the next generations to come because this is going to be 

one of the biggest issues that we have in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now when the Columbia River Treaty was put into place, I 

guess it’ll be 60 years ago, coming in another couple of years, 

there was a big discussion in this legislature — and I’ve raised 

this here before — around whether Saskatchewan should be 

included in the Columbia River Treaty. Now we’re sitting here 

and people are saying, well what’s the Columbia River have to 

do with Saskatchewan? It’s in British Columbia and it’s in 

Idaho and it’s in, well one of the tributaries is in Idaho, but it’s 

in Washington and Oregon. And the issue is that one of the 

concerns raised by the Saskatchewan government in the ’50s 

was where we would get more fresh water supply for the 

southern part of the prairies when the glaciers are gone. And 

clearly when you look at pictures that are taken in the ’50s 

compared to now, we can see the diminishment of the amount 

of water that’s there. 

 

I know 10 days ago there was a seminar where some of our 

Saskatchewan experts were speaking, including the new expert 

on water from the University of Saskatchewan, at Canmore, 

Alberta. And one of the issues that they were looking at was, 

once again, the amount of water that’s available. Those kinds of 

issues play right back into this particular legislation because 

they relate to how we respond and deal with the effects of 

greenhouse gases on a worldwide basis. And our particular task 

is to make sure that we are contributing to the full extent 

possible. 

 

Now there are a whole number of areas where we have done 

some very good science and we’ve developed some very good 

projects that relate to the management and reduction of 

greenhouse gases. My plea to the government is that they don’t 

just pass legislation and do those kinds of things, but they 

actually fund and provide resources for the science for the 

evidence to be developed here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now when a country such as Canada loses its reputation as 

being one of the people at the forefront of the environmental 

perspective in the world, it takes a long time to get that 

reputation back. The same is true of a province. And we have 

many, many challenges in this area that we have to continue to 

deal with, but the reputation that we have is crucial. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when our Premier goes to the United States to talk to 

US [United States] politicians, the pressure on those US 

politicians is to find out more about what the Saskatchewan 

perspective is on environmental regulation, what the Canadian 

perspective is about environmental regulation. 

 

And I would rather have the Premier be able to go down with 

some solid evidence from our scientists, from the people that 

are actually doing the work that we need, rather than just have 



2488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

some sort of sales flyers and PR because we know that in the 

long term that will not win out. And, Mr. Speaker, when you 

end up with these very serious problems and your only response 

is another phrase, another glossy kind of response, then we’ll 

end up with difficulty as we go forward. 

 

Now we know from the history of British Columbia that they 

ended up in a very, very difficult situation as it related to their 

forestry industry because of the worldwide perspective that 

their forest products were not respecting the sacred and special 

places of British Columbia as it related to the harvesting of the 

trees. And one of the responses after much turmoil in that 

province was through the work of the late Stan Hagen, who was 

a minister in the BC [British Columbia] government, to 

eventually working with many people and many of the 

individuals who were concerned about the protection of the 

coast was to set up the Great Spirit Bear wilderness, which 

encompasses a big part of the coast between Prince Rupert 

down almost to Sechelt, almost to Vancouver. And what that 

did was start the change of the worldwide perspective that there 

was something not good, there was something environmentally 

wrong with products from the province of British Columbia. 

That was a perception. It wasn’t necessarily a fact but it was a 

perception that took a long time to deal with. 

 

In Saskatchewan, and more importantly I think for the province 

of Alberta, they have a worldwide perception of their oil 

product being something negative, something that others don’t 

want. And the question is, how do we make sure that our 

legislation and what we do in this province keeps us from 

getting into that kind of a negative perception around the 

world? Unfortunately some of the steps at the federal 

government level and at the provincial government level have 

put us in a situation where we’re having to try to catch up. What 

we know is that a number of the activities that Alberta thought 

were helpful in promoting their industries as it relates to the oil 

sands of northern Alberta have actually been causing a great 

deal of difficulty. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation may, in the 

whole scheme of things, seem to be quite a small piece but it 

has this simple requirement that an individual 18 years of age 

and older can make a complaint to the minister about a problem 

related to the management and reduction of greenhouse gases. 

And I think that’s a good kind of provision to have in there, but 

we need to recognize that it’s part of a bigger and more 

important world. It’s about the perception of what we as 

Canadians, as what we as Saskatchewan people are doing and 

how we are concerned about our environment. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we cannot underestimate the importance of that 

perception. 

 

And I remind the government, I remind the Premier that there’s 

a major task here and that we need to do those things in 

Saskatchewan which show we can be leaders in this field. Let’s 

not lose some of our really good science. Let’s not lose some of 

our really good research. Let’s not lose some of our institutions 

that are important in this worldwide perspective. And let’s do it 

in a way that we can all be proud of what’s happening and in a 

way that others will point to us and say, these people are doing 

this kind of work in an appropriate long-term way that protects 

the Earth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I would ask to adjourn debate on this 

Bill No. 48. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved that Bill No. 48, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment 

Act, 2012 be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure tonight 

to join into discussion on Bill No. 49, An Act to amend The 

Forestry Professions Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation has to do, as the title 

would suggest, with forestry and with the profession of being a 

forester, Mr. Speaker. And it makes some changes with respect 

to individuals who are practising in this field in order to ensure 

that the professional designation that they do have, Mr. 

Speaker, is protected and has the same type of understanding 

and importance that it has in other jurisdictions across the 

country. 

 

The few pieces to this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, were 

outlined by the minister responsible on November 5th, 2012. 

The minister talked about the importance of this piece of 

legislation and the way that he described it was, “elevating the 

forestry profession to the same level as other provinces do in 

Canada with similar legislation.” So it’s the idea, Mr. Speaker, 

that if someone is calling themselves a forester here in 

Saskatchewan, it means the same thing as in BC or New 

Brunswick, in other places. And there is a passing reference, 

Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s remarks later on as this relates to 

ensuring consistency with respect to trade and labour mobility 

agreements. 

 

And actually I think, Mr. Speaker, I’ve given a number of 

speeches on other types of legislation that have come into being 

here in the Assembly because of the need for consistency with 

other jurisdictions based on agreements. And in each of those 

discussions, Mr. Speaker, what’s often highlighted, and I think 

appropriately, is the need to strive for consistency across the 

country when possible, but also to ensure that Saskatchewan’s 

own needs and considerations are in fact respected and adhered 

to as they need to be. So it’s about striking the correct balance, 

as I would see it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, foresters do a number of important things in our 

province. Forestry has traditionally played an important role in 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2489 

Saskatchewan and ought to play a significant role in the years to 

come. It’s important, Mr. Speaker, that those who call 

themselves foresters have the skills that are required to do the 

job well, that they have the professional accountability that is 

required by their peers, and that they also are there in order to 

meet the needs of the companies that they are working for. But 

more importantly, Mr. Speaker, to protect the interests of the 

forests that are throughout Saskatchewan, or at least throughout 

the northern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s a number of issues where foresters need to know what 

they’re doing according to the standards, according to the 

training that they’ve received, the examinations that they’ve 

had. And the designation is very important. So whether it comes 

to the issue of building a resource road and understanding how 

that is best done through a piece of forest and mapping that out 

in an appropriate way to have the minimal impact on the 

environment, or whether, Mr. Speaker, it has to do with 

enforcing protocols with respect to crossing rivers and creeks 

that may have fish or be fish habitat, not even fish habitat, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s important that foresters know the rules and 

enforce the rules properly as it relates to the companies that 

they are working with, and then as well as with the many 

subcontractors and other professions that may be working on 

the cutblocks, Mr. Speaker, in order to ensure that the rules are 

followed and that the environmental protection is first and 

foremost. 

 

And of course there’s many components to forestry, not the 

least of which has to do with the control of invasive species as it 

refers for plants as well as with animals. So the application of 

herbicides and pesticides as it relates to the weather and the 

conditions and all of these factors and as it relates to the . . . as 

it has an effect on the environment and people, these are 

important issues, Mr. Speaker. So it’s important to ensure that 

the people that are calling themselves foresters are in fact 

operating under the highest standards that are required and that 

the meaning of being a forester in one area would be consistent 

with another part of the country. And so it’s important for the 

profession to be able to regulate itself in order to . . . It’s 

important for it to protect that designation so that when 

someone says that they are a forester, that they are in fact 

respected and doing the best that they possibly can. And it’s 

important to ensure that individuals who might casually be 

using that designation are held accountable for doing so. 

 

A number of components here, Mr. Speaker, that are addressed 

with the legislation here. It is said, Mr. Speaker, that this was 

done in consultation with the industry, and of course that’s our 

desire and hope that that is the case and what normally happens. 

So I know as we continue to do our discussions and hear from 

individuals involved in the industry, Mr. Speaker, I hope that 

that is a true reflection of what has occurred and what will 

occur. 

 

There is talk, Mr. Speaker, with the government’s move to a 

results-based regulatory framework, so that does have major 

implications I think for the forestry industry as well as other 

industries, especially as it relates to environmental protection. 

So results-based is a positive thing because we want to see what 

the results are. And that should guide things, Mr. Speaker, but it 

should never be used as a euphemism for lower control or lower 

enforcement of regulations because we need to ensure that the 

process is as good as it ought to be and that our resource is 

protected as it ought to be, as well as the environment as a 

whole. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is specifically 

addressing the forestry profession. It’s bringing the standards 

within the province consistent with other jurisdictions. It allows 

some protection for the use of the term, which is important, and 

this, Mr. Speaker, elevates the role of the profession or the 

significance of the profession consistent with other professions 

so that those that are reliant on foresters, whether that’s the 

general public who want our resources protected and preserved 

in a positive way or whether that’s industry involved with the 

activity . . . This is an important step. 

 

But as with everything that we examine, when it involves 

consultation with the industry and making decisions, it’s 

important to ensure that the words coming from the minister 

opposite with respect to the second reading speech, it’s 

important to ensure that they’re accurate and consistent with the 

reality on the ground. And we look forward to continuing those 

discussions to determine that, Mr. Speaker. So with that I would 

conclude my remarks on Bill No. 49 and move to adjourn 

debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 49, The Forestry 

Professions Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to enter the debate on Bill No. 

50, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012. I’d like to 

start the discussion a little bit by just discussing the minister’s 

second reading comments and what he has said that the bill is 

going to do. 

 

This particular bill, The Medical Profession Amendment Act 

will, says the minister, will permit the college to respond more 

quickly to the anticipated national changes in categories of 

licensure of the health professionals. And he also says it’s about 

maintaining current addresses and contact info for physicians 

and will help the College of Physicians and Surgeons better 

communicate with doctors, keeping information up to date 

when they join or leave a practice. And the minister has said 

this bill is put forward . . . It will also support proper and secure 

storage, disposal, and transfer of patients’ files. 

 

So the one thing the minister also had mentioned in his second 



2490 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

reading speech . . . It’s important in opposition or from anybody 

in Saskatchewan to know who is putting a bill forward because 

that tells you a little bit about what the bill might be doing. And 

the minister mentioned in his remarks that it is in fact the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons that is asking for these 

changes. He also talked about consultation in this particular 

second reading speech and he says that, I’d like to say: 

 

And I’d like to thank the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Registered 

Nurses’ Association, the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, the Saskatchewan Association of Licensed 

Practical Nurses, the Saskatchewan College of 

Pharmacists, the Registered Psychiatric Nurses 

Association of Saskatchewan, and all of our regional 

health authorities. These organizations provided valuable 

insight, and we appreciate their interest and their 

contributions to this process. 

 

Well I’m very glad to hear that the minister has said that he’s 

consulted with all these organizations. It’s unfortunate that the 

government hasn’t taken this approach with many other pieces 

of legislation and many other changes that it’s foisted upon the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Consultation, I 

think, is the cornerstone of good policy making. You can’t 

make good policies that will . . . What ends up happening if you 

don’t consult and have meaningful dialogue with people who 

are impacted, it creates negative consequences, unintended 

consequences. So it’s very important in embarking upon policy 

changes and legislative changes that you actually talk to people. 

 

We saw actually today there were some questions raised in the 

legislature about proposed rate hikes for SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] for motorcycle riders. This is a 70 per 

cent plus increase. And the government has put this out there 

and there’s been a lot of pushback and the government is 

back-pedalling a little bit. But you know what, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? You could save yourself a lot of trouble when you 

bring legislation or any kind of policy change forward if you 

talked to people who are impacted by policy. 

 

We also today talked a little bit about The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act and consultation. And actually, I had the 

opportunity to speak to the bill earlier on and pointed out that 

this government, when it proposed The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act, 90 days of consultation on 100 years of labour 

legislation, whereas the federal government in 2005 set out a 

paper in February of 2005 and didn’t come up with 

recommendations until almost two years later, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So that to me is what consultation is about, allowing 

people to participate in the progress. So I’m glad to hear that 

there has been an occasion where the government has consulted. 

 

But in my three years in this legislature, there’s also been times 

where we’ve heard that the government . . . The government 

tells us that they’ve consulted, and even lists groups and 

organizations, and we discover later that in fact there hasn’t 

been any contact or any discussion with those groups. So our 

job in the opposition is to reach out to groups and organizations 

and find out if really they have been a part of this process as 

they’ve been so named as being part of the process. 

 

But with respect to Bill No. 50, I think it’s important to talk a 

little bit about what the College of Physicians and Surgeons 

actually does. It’s a statutory self-regulating body that’s 

established by legislation, the medical professionals Act, and 

charged with the responsibility of licensing properly qualified 

medical practitioners. So basically for any doctor to be licensed 

here in Saskatchewan, he or she has to be approved by the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons. 

 

The college is also responsible for developing and ensuring the 

standards of practice in all fields of medicine. So this is very 

much about public safety, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The college is 

also responsible for investigating and disciplining of all doctors 

whose standards of medical care, ethical or professional 

conduct are questioned. So the College of Physicians . . . That’s 

a little bit about the College of Physicians and Surgeons. 

 

One of the changes that the minister had mentioned, he had said 

that these changes will permit the college to respond more 

quickly to the anticipated national changes and categories of 

licensure of health professionals. There’s one particular 

agreement on — I’m assuming that this may be where some of 

the changes will be taking place — there is one regulatory 

agreement by the Federation of Medical Regulatory Authorities 

of Canada, an agreement on national standards for medical 

registration in Canada. And the 13 provinces and territorial 

medical regulatory authorities all belong to this. So 

Saskatchewan, the College of Physicians and Surgeons is a 

member of this body. 

 

It’s interesting. They have principles that they’ve laid out that I 

would just like to touch on briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

principles of this agreement on national standards for medical 

registration in Canada include “That the protection of the public 

is the primary responsibility of the medical regulatory 

authorities.” Principle no. 2 is “To the minimum standards set 

out in this agreement for full and provisional medical licensure 

in Canada.” 

 

Principle no. 3 is “On consistent and sufficiently rigorous 

registration . . .” And this is what this agreement is all about. 

They agreed, these 13 bodies agreed that “On consistent and 

sufficiently rigorous registration and licensure processes for 

physicians across all Canadian jurisdictions.” They agreed “To 

support the mobility of physicians across Canadian 

jurisdictions.” And they agreed “To assess the following criteria 

[what they call] (the 5 E’s) to issue a license to practise 

medicine.” They talk about: 

 

a)  Education (undergraduate education leading to a 

medical degree); 

b)  Evaluation of undergraduate medical education 

(knowledge, skills and professionalism); 

c)  Experience (postgraduate medical education); 

d)  Evaluation of postgraduate medical education 

(knowledge, skills and professionalism); [and] 

e)  Evidence of currency of practice. 

 

So those are the principles laid out in this particular regulatory 

agreement on national standards. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So, the one other thing that the minister had mentioned, which I 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2491 

said at the start of my remarks, is he talked about privacy and 

how “The college will be able to better communicate with 

physicians and keep information up to date when physicians 

join or leave a practice.” And the minister argues that this “. . . 

will support proper and secure storage, disposal, and transfer of 

patient files and improve disaster planning processes.” 

Obviously this is about privacy, and so the minister has said 

that. 

 

And we’ve seen, in my time here in the legislature, several 

cases of breaches of privacy of confidential information, 

sensitive patient files that have been incredibly problematic. 

The one thing . . . And again, this legislation and the College of 

Physicians of Surgeons is there. It’s not just doctors’ 

legislation; this legislation is set out to protect people. This is 

very much about protection of the public. 

 

And when it comes to privacy, perhaps the minister should have 

added to his list of consultations perhaps the independent 

officer, the Privacy Commissioner. The Privacy Commissioner 

points out, in a conversation with the opposition, that this piece 

of legislation . . . Or there is no acknowledgement in any of 

these changes to requiring physicians to have a privacy policy. 

 

He also points out, the Privacy Commissioner also pointed out 

that he sees this legislation as empowering but not requiring 

action in regard to privacy. So this will be through the college 

bylaws. For example, the change of address speaks to a 

physician but it doesn’t speak specifically to their records. And 

it’s the records that are the problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

this is perhaps someone that the minister should have added to 

his list and perhaps should go back to the Privacy 

Commissioner and see if there is anything else that should be 

included in this legislation. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do know that I have 

colleagues who will also be weighing in on this legislation as 

well. And we will continue to have our dialogue with 

organizations and individuals who are impacted by this, and 

we’ll carry on this debate. But with that, I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 50, the 

medical profession Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 51 — The Public 

Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to stand tonight and enter into the debate on Bill 

No. 51, An Act respecting Inquiries concerning Public Matters 

and making consequential amendments to certain Acts. 

 

And I think this is an important bill. Clearly it’s a product of 

some very thoughtful work. Whenever we see the work that 

comes out of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada, it’s nice 

to see work that we try to get a consistent approach right across 

the country. We all have our unique characteristics that should 

be reflected in our laws. But as much as possible I think that, 

and in that we are Canadian and we expect a certain level of 

standards when it comes to how we approach these kinds of 

matters, it’s good to draw on work such as that. 

 

So I find this interesting because I do think that we’ve talked a 

lot on this side about consultation: how to get the best type of 

legislation we possibly can, how do we serve the public interest 

as well as we can. And clearly this kind of legislation speaks to 

it. It is an enabling piece of legislation. I just feel, unfortunate 

that I would like to have seen it in place already and many of 

the things we could be talking about could be the result of these 

things. We always like to drive around in a Cadillac, I guess, as 

much as we can when we could walk to the store. But I think 

that this kind of work is interesting. 

 

And I found the minister’s comments here helpful to understand 

how this came about. And he gave a bit of a history, you know, 

talking about the current public inquiries Act; it’s been in force 

for nearly a century and the kind of work that’s come from that. 

And there’s been some very significant pieces of work that have 

come from people who’ve helped us understand the challenges 

that face Saskatchewan people and their public issues. 

 

It’s interesting that we’re really talking about creating two types 

of inquiry commissions: one, the study commission to research, 

examine, provide advice on public policy; and hearing 

commissions where they may be a bit more serious when it 

comes to matters where there’s a possibility of findings of 

misconduct and so on. 

 

And I would really think the study commission is one that 

would be of interest. I mean, you know, we have been so 

focused and I have, as Labour critic, been so focused on labour 

issues recently that I would have thought that would’ve been a 

perfect example of where we could’ve used a study 

commission. 

 

You know, my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale talked 

about Judge Arthurs’s report, Fairness at Work, and how I’ve 

always thought that was a very good piece of public research 

that informed issues that are important to people across Canada. 

We should have been taking that kind of approach on the many 

issues here in our province. And so I hope to see, I hope to see 

— and I think on our side if this bill does get to be passed — 

that we will be asking for more of these types of things because 

we need better, better information and it needs to be done in a 

public way, a public way so we can all be engaged. 

 

For example, one of the things I thought that was very 

interesting in this bill before us — and I want to make sure I get 

the section right, bilingual, so I have to make sure I read the 

right page for us all to get the most out of this — and it’s on 

page 5, actually page 6, “Participation at inquiry.” I always feel 

that it’s very important that as many people can participate as 



2492 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

possible because that is a way of developing capacity or a 

greater understanding of the issue at hand. 

 

Now it’s not that this is an educational project, but as well, 

those people who come out to listen to these commissions at 

their hearings will come away thinking, oh I didn’t realize this, 

or now I understand this. And I think this is very, very 

important. So it talks about: 

 

Participation at inquiry 

A commission shall give those persons who reasonably 

believe that they have an interest in the matter that is the 

subject of the inquiry an opportunity to apply to participate 

in the inquiry. 

 

Then the: 

 

(2) A commission shall determine whether a person is 

permitted to participate in an inquiry, and the manner and 

extent of his or her participation, after considering [and 

there are three factors]: 

 

(a) whether the person’s interests may be adversely 

affected by the findings of the commission; 

(b) whether the person’s participation would further the 

conduct of the inquiry; and 

(c) whether the person’s participation would contribute 

to the openness and fairness of the inquiry. 

 

And I really appreciate the word openness because too much 

now we have seen and in this labour process that we’ve been 

engaged in, even though the minister has released documents on 

the Internet, it really hasn’t been a full, open process because 

people have not had the chance to see people come and bear 

witness or participate in a dialogue. And it’s really important to 

do that. And it goes on: 

 

(3) A person who is permitted to participate in inquiry 

may participate on his or her own behalf or be represented 

by counsel of his or her choice. 

 

So I think it’s really important that we think about these things. 

And I think that, you know, the opportunity for us to have 

better, stronger public policy because of this and as well that 

second stream of the hearing where we can get to the bottom of 

situations where there may be potential for misconduct. And we 

want to have that public trust re-established because, as you 

know, in a government atmosphere it’s important that the public 

believes and has a confidence in the government and its agents 

and the people who operate on its behalf or at different levels 

where the government has been asked to step in. 

 

So I think this is an important issue. And one of the things that I 

didn’t see in this but it may be in here — we’ll have to ask 

questions at the committee — is did the minister have a chance 

to touch base with the officers of the legislature, particularly the 

Ombudsman, who has some experience in doing this kind of 

work? And were they able to give their input into how this 

might proceed? Because clearly, you know, he does talk about 

the 100 years of experience in the old Act. 

 

So maybe we really need to, when we do this new one, that we 

draw from some experience. And I’m thinking of particularly 

the Ombudsman. I’m also thinking of the Privacy 

Commissioner because you know, as well as being a big fan of 

public meetings and all of that, I am very cognizant of the fact 

that there’s a privacy issue here as well. And it’s very important 

that, have we taken that into account? And quite often we will 

see issues of that where it’s just not been taken into account and 

really needs to be taken into account. 

 

So I think that there’s a lot here and it’s very interesting. The 

question that I will have again . . . You know, it was funny and I 

keep going back to the example of the labour situation we have 

in front of us with Bill 85, but when we asked about this when 

the minister announced it last May, he said it wasn’t going to 

cost anything and it was just going to be absorbed in the budget. 

Then we find out in December that in fact it actually cost to that 

date, the end of November — and I don’t know what it’s cost 

since then but I imagine the bill keeps going up; I don’t imagine 

it’s going down — but it was $700,000 that it had taken, the 

cost. So at that point I would say, value for money. Would he 

have been further ahead to have a study done, actually hire 

some experts in the field to do the work that really needed to be 

done? 

 

So my question will be, in the budget that we see in a couple of 

weeks, will ministries have the ability to say, okay we’ve just 

been told that we would like to have a study on this or subject B 

or subject A or subject C. Will they have the resources to be 

able to do that? We see where a ministry had to come back for 

supplementary estimates and ask for $700,000 because they 

seriously underestimated the cost of the work ahead. And that 

was a significant, significant hit on a budget that’s not that big. 

The Ministry of Labour does not have a large budget and for 

him to be overspent by $700,000 when clearly somebody could 

tell that this was going to cost some money. 

 

But again, I think he would have been better served by using 

one of the instruments that we’re talking about here in this type 

of thing, where it would have been much . . . People would have 

had more confidence in the outcome, they would have been 

upfront, they would have said it’s going to cost $500,000. It 

would have been very odd for the minister to say, we’re not 

going to give you any money. But he would have said probably, 

you know we are anticipating it’s going to cost us 700,000. 

Probably, by the end of the day, I would not be surprised if Bill 

85 and that whole process of getting there will be knocking on 

the door of $1 million in the course of the whole year. 

 

And that’s probably why they’re in a rush to get it done, so the 

bills stop coming in, you know, because it is costing more 

money and they don’t want it to drag on. Maybe that’s the 

reason. I don’t know, but it could be because we know that it 

was first estimated to cost nothing. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I digress. I should get back to this bill 

at hand. Forgive me, but I do want to talk about this because I 

think this is very important. How do we have the confidence of 

the public in the work that we do? Because these are important 

issues at hand and clearly we have a challenge. We have several 

challenges in this province that are worthy of study, and one of 

them is jobs; the workplace, all of that. And I think that this is 

important work that we need to have done. 

 

And it does go on actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It does talk 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

about public hearings and talks about that the commission shall 

ensure (a) that hearings are open to the public and the public is 

given access to the information submitted in a hearing, which is 

very, very important. And two, that if it’s a problem: 

 

(2) A commission may, by order, exclude the public from 

all or part of its proceedings, or restrict or prohibit the 

public reporting of all or part of its proceedings and the 

publishing of any evidence at the inquiry, if the 

commission decides that the public interest in an open 

hearing or in reporting or publication is outweighed by 

another consideration . . . 

 

And so it goes on. And actually, it does talk about for: 

 

any reason for which information could or must be 

withheld by a public body pursuant to The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act or The Health 

Information Protection Act. 

 

[20:45] 

 

So there you go. That seems to be something good and that 

connects with that. That’s very important, public security. And 

in the opinion of the commission, it’s necessary for the effective 

and efficient fulfillment of the commission’s terms of reference 

and the right of any person to a fair trial. Clearly that’s a 

principle of our democracy and that needs to be in the 

legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that in many ways we are looking at 

something that has a lot of potential. And of course as I said, the 

potential though is it’s always neat to have something pretty 

special in the tool kit but if you’re never going to use it, that’s a 

problem. And if you’re not going to provide the resources 

within the budgetary cycle to say, listen if you’ve got an issue 

you really want to examine, here’s a couple of tools . . . You 

can either do, as the minister described, a study commission to 

research, examine, provide advice on public policy, or hearing 

commissions to delve into those matters where there may be 

issues or the possibility of finding of misconduct. 

 

So we think this is something that will be of interest, to see how 

it’s used in Saskatchewan. You know, we do have committees 

that do work and they’re out there. You know, one that comes 

to mind that I know this government took a lot of pride, in fact 

it was a campaign promise, was the committee on child 

exploitation through the sex trade some 10 years ago in 1999. 

And of course, it was a campaign promise that they would 

reconvene that. Now maybe this would be the group to do that. 

I don’t know. But it was very interesting was that it was an 

all-party committee to do that. And I hope that at some point 

they will do that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would think that . . . I know that 

we’ve got a busy night ahead of us and there’s lots of work for 

us. There’s no shortage of that for sure when we come back in 

the spring. But to that end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 

move adjournment of Bill No. 51, An Act respecting Inquiries 

concerning Public Matters and making consequential 

amendments to certain Acts. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 51. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 52 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 52 — The Public 

Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

My comments won’t be very long indeed because this is a 

consequential Act and there was not much. And even as I 

review the minister’s comments, pretty much the same. But it is 

important to know that when we do this, that it’s important that 

we look at all the tentacles of legislation and that it’s out there 

and we must make sure that everything is in place. And it is 

interesting that when you look through it, it is actually quite a 

list. It’s a considerable list of Acts that must be amended and of 

course it only makes sense that we do that, and of course that 

they would follow hand in glove with the previous bill, Bill No. 

51. 

 

And so as I review this, this is relatively straightforward and I 

think that it will be very important that we have more questions 

on 51, 52. They come together, as I said, hand in glove, and I 

don’t have much more to add than that, other than saying I 

would like to move adjournment of Bill No. 52, The Public 

Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 52. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 53 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to rise to speak to Bill 53, An Act to repeal miscellaneous 

obsolete Statutes and to amend The Saskatchewan Development 

Fund Act. So this is, I suppose, putting two bills or more into 

one to keep down the numbers on the bills of the legislature. It’s 

another way, I suppose, of doing a bit of PR. You get too many 

numbers here and it looks like this government’s only 



2494 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

concerned about passing bills. So perhaps when we get number 

86 or 87 or whatever the number was we hit today — I guess 86 

— this bill could have added another 12 numbers, so we might 

have hit 100 and then we would show that the present 

government really loves to legislate and create all kinds of 

regulations and rules and difficulties. 

 

So they’ve created a bill called the miscellaneous obsolete 

statutes Act to do a whole bunch of different things. And I 

know that the Minister of Justice wasn’t going around plucking 

these bills out from various places and throwing them in here. 

He was responding to the messages that he got from ministers 

in other places. So when you get a bill like this, I know last year 

we had six or seven very specific clauses that were repealed, 

and I know one of them related to the quality of meat. And I 

know when the whole XL Foods issue arose I thought, well if 

we hadn’t repealed that obsolete bill, we might have had in 

Saskatchewan a method to provide for some of the quality that 

we needed when it seemed like some of the federal rules were 

lacking. 

 

So let’s take a look and see what we have in this particular 

legislation. The first Act that’s to be repealed is The Crown 

Foundations Act. And this is an Act that was specifically set up 

at the request of the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina and it related to taxation policy, 

effectively federal taxation policy, which gave a higher tax 

deduction to donations made to the Crown — to the 

government — than it did to donations made on a charitable 

basis. 

 

A couple of years later that rule was changed so that there is no 

difference. And I think the net effect was that the high hopes for 

this legislation have been diminished, and the use of this 

particular method of raising funds through Crown foundations 

at the universities has effectively ground to a halt. And as a 

result, the request has come to perhaps get rid of this legislation 

because it no longer serves a purpose. 

 

Now I think that there are possibly some other discussions that 

could relate to whether universities should have foundations or 

have specific funds, and I think we actually do have quite a few 

mechanisms that allow for universities to raise funds. And so 

this is not necessarily going to cause any great deal of difficulty 

in Saskatchewan. But it does raise the question of financing of 

university education, post-secondary education, and it does 

raise the question of the Sask Party government running on an 

election, setting out in a budget that they’re going to transfer 

money to the university for a specific project. 

 

And this was all very public and very clear in the fall of 2011, 

but by the spring of 2012 when the budget came, a big surprise 

to the university was the fact that $100 million was not going to 

be given to the university to cover the Health Sciences Building 

cost that had been incurred at that point. But all that was going 

to happen was some facilitation of borrowing the 100 million, 

and clearly it related to a failed attempt by the government to 

show that they had a balanced, in quotes, a suspect balanced 

budget. It also had the effect on the University of Saskatchewan 

of jamming them by adding another $100 million to their debt 

load, making it difficult for them to deal with a number of other 

projects that they had in their operation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when we have legislation like this which 

says a concept of helping to fund universities is obsolete, it also 

makes us want to take a look at, well actually, you know, what 

do we actually do to fund our universities and our colleges and 

other post-secondary institutions? 

 

Unfortunately I have been getting and feeling and picking up 

many signals over the last month or two, and now I guess it’s 

started with ads paid for by the Saskatchewan Party that got on 

the radio today which are softening up the public to the fact that 

there’s not enough money to provide for a number of the 

promises that have come from the Saskatchewan Party. A bit of 

an unusual tactic to do that, although it appears that the 

Saskatchewan Party have lots of money to spend on that kind of 

hype and PR. I think the public would rather that they use 

almost $100,000 as donation to university or as some other 

positive thing rather than getting out there with some hype and 

PR. 

 

So what we have here is this Crown foundations Act, which 

was a way of funding universities, repealed; it’s being repealed. 

But it’s a reminder to us that there’s something not right how 

our universities and colleges are being funded right now. 

There’s something not right in the kinds of pressures that our 

school boards are feeling that affect the education of the 

children in the classrooms. There’s something not right in the 

financial pressures that have been placed on the health regions 

that mean that important items of service for the people are 

suspect. 

 

We heard an example today in question period about a program 

brought forward by Kinsmen Telemiracle as one of the 

contributors as it relates to the electrocardio centre at the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region that this may be in jeopardy because 

of some of the financial decisions of the government. It’s that 

kind of disconnect between what looks like a good economy 

and a lot of the finances that are going sideways in ways that 

the public doesn’t accept and it doesn’t understand that make it 

difficult for all of us to be leaders in our community. 

 

So when the government comes forward and says this method 

of funding universities is obsolete, it raises the question of what 

kind of long-term support are we going to be providing to our 

educational institutions. We all know that the long-term health 

of the province depends on us making sure that the most 

important asset of the province, the young people of the 

province, have the best educations possible. 

 

And so when this legislation is brought forward, even in this 

kind of obscure way, it points to the fact that we have some 

major difficulties in this province. The ads of the Sask Party at 

the cost of I think $92,000 are an attempt to blunt the people’s 

perception of possible inability to manage our funds in the 

province. And we’re all waiting with apprehension the budget 

on March 20th. 

 

[21:00] 

 

So there’s 11 different sections in this bill that relate to different 

pieces of legislation. I don’t have any great deal of difficulty 

with the repeal of this Crown foundations Act, but I do have a 

great deal of difficulty with the way that the financing of 

post-secondary education is being handled by the present 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2495 

government, and this particular legislation points to the fact that 

we have a problem here. Our universities are scrambling. The 

people at University of Regina and University of Saskatchewan 

are trying to figure out why there are so many difficulties at a 

time when this province is doing well economically. And the 

Premier and the members opposite have a lot of questions that 

need to be answered as it relates to why we’re in the financial 

situation that we are in right now. 

 

So I’m going to move on to the next piece of legislation that’s 

referenced in this miscellaneous statutes repeal Act, and that 

relates to The Cut Knife Reference Act. This is an Act that was 

brought in many years ago to deal with the fact that legislation 

introduced in this legislature had not spelled the name of the 

town of Cut Knife appropriately, and so it was spelled 

incorrectly in quite a number of places. And so to deal with that 

particular issue, this Cut Knife reference Act was introduced. 

 

We have the assurance of the Minister of Government Relations 

via the Minister of Justice that there are no further problems 

related to the spelling of the name Cut Knife in any legislation 

in Saskatchewan, and so therefore we don’t need this any more. 

I suppose we can rely on that assurance, and I suppose if it’s not 

accurate, well we could always reintroduce The Cut Knife 

Reference Act to fix it. But this is one where we’re relying on 

the Minister of Justice who has received assurances from the 

Minister of Government Relations that all is well in this world. 

 

So the next piece of legislation that’s being dealt with is called 

The Municipal Debentures Repayment Act, and this Act is being 

repealed. And it’s always interesting to look at the history in 

Saskatchewan of how we finance important projects. It’s quite 

clear that this particular legislation has been around about a 

century, and it relates to how municipalities could issue 

debentures or issue debt arrangements to get sufficient funds to 

build projects that would allow for payment over many years, 

up to 40 years. It’s interesting to note that this legislation gives 

that extra 10 — or well I guess it’s even more than that — extra 

15 years over what the federal legislation has done around 

repayment of debts and the discussion that we’ve had over the 

last few months as it relates to Minister Flaherty’s perspective. 

But effectively this whole method of borrowing money has not 

been used, it says here, for the last 15 years. 

 

Now one of the things that’s not said here, and we may have to 

ask some questions in committee about this, relates to the fact 

whether . . . Given that some of the debts are 40 years, there’s 

an obligation to repay over 40 years. If it hasn’t been used for 

the last 15 years, it’s possible there are still some bills or some 

debentures out there that are governed by this legislation. So 

we’ll need assurance from the minister in charge of this, which 

I guess is the Minister of Government Relations through the 

Minister of Justice, that there are no outstanding debentures 

which would be affected by the repeal of this legislation. And 

that may be a task that the minister or some of his staff may 

want to check this out because it’s the last thing we want is to 

have repealed the legislation which sets out the rules for the 

original borrowing. And clearly we say that this kind of 

legislation is in place to protect the municipality but also to 

protect the people who lend the money to the municipality to do 

the work that they want to do. 

 

So that’s an interesting piece of Saskatchewan’s history that is 

being transferred to the dust bin, and we’ll have a chance to ask 

some questions about that in committee and perhaps shed some 

light on the positive contribution that this legislation has made 

over the last 100 years and whether there are still any holdover 

instruments that need to be protected. 

 

The next piece of legislation that’s to be repealed is called The 

Municipal Development and Loan (Saskatchewan) Act. And 

this particular legislation was created to complement federal 

legislation which was repealed about 30 years ago, it says here. 

And so I don’t think there’s any great problem there with 

repealing this legislation, and I thank the civil servants for 

bringing this one forward so that we can get rid of it. 

 

The next one is called The Municipality Improvements 

Assistance (Saskatchewan) Act, and this Act is to be repealed. 

And this is legislation that came into force in the late ’30s to 

complement or allow for the provincial implementation of 

federal legislation that allowed for building of projects by the 

municipalities or by the power corporations that they owned. 

And it is interesting in Saskatchewan that most of the municipal 

power corporations have been incorporated into the 

Saskatchewan Power, the provincial corporation, except for the 

distribution side in Saskatoon which has continued to be owned 

by the city of Saskatoon, and they obviously get their power 

primarily through Saskatchewan’s power. 

 

But this particular legislation also is part of responding to 

federal legislation. And that legislation federally was repealed 

in 1983, so there’s no need to keep this legislation either. 

 

The next Act to be repealed is something called The Municipal 

Industrial Development Corporations Act, and according to the 

information that we have, this Act was passed in 1960 to allow 

for the, effectively, promotion of industry within municipalities. 

The name is maybe a little dated, but it’s very similar to The 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Act that had a very short life in this 

government. It was the big idea of the 2007 election campaign 

that didn’t work. Or it didn’t work the way that the Sask Party 

government wanted, and so it’s already hit the dust bin very, 

very, very quickly. It did not have the staying power of some of 

these older pieces of legislation. I think it had something to do 

with the consultation that wasn’t there and with the fact that the 

revenues or the monies that were originally promised to be part 

of the whole scheme were not continued. But in a lot of ways 

these last municipal financing ones have similarities with 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, this big, glowing, bright light of the 

Sask Party’s 2007 election campaign. 

 

This legislation, The Municipal Industrial Development 

Corporations Act basically has ended, but there were some 

active corporations still in effect up until September of 2011. 

And this one may be another situation where we’ll have to ask 

more specific questions of the Minister of Justice, and he will 

obviously get the information from the Minister of Government 

Relations so that we can be sure that we’re not repealing 

legislation that still has some particular role in the province. 

And it’s never a good idea to get rid of something that has 

provided a good role in the province. 

 

Now the next piece of legislation that is listed in the Act is The 

NewGrade Energy Inc. Act, and this is basically the Act that 

incorporated the Saskatchewan part of the Co-op upgrader in 



2496 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

Regina. And practically this reflects the fact that that particular 

interest of the province was sold to Federated Co-op, and 

there’s no longer the necessity of having this legislation in 

place. 

 

But it does once again beg the question of what happened with 

the proceeds from the sale of the NewGrade Energy operation. 

We as a government, in 2007 when the sale was made, had 

designated the proceeds of around $300 million to be used for 

environmental protection climate change issues. We know that 

the Sask Party government took 90 per cent of that money and 

used it for other purposes and have not followed through with 

that particular plan that was there, and the public will, in the 

long term, look at some of these things as characteristics of this 

Sask Party government and their attitude towards dealing with 

environment and environmental issues. 

 

Another Act that’s being repealed by this legislation is called 

The Sales on Consignment Act. And this is legislation that 

obviously is no longer really in use because people don’t sell 

things that way anymore. And I think that it speaks to the 

situation where the way that we finance both purchases and 

sales has changed dramatically as we have tried to harmonize 

them with other provinces and also with our neighbours to the 

south in the States and the state laws. And so we have things 

that very much mimic the uniform commercial code in the 

United States which sets out standards around instruments that 

are used for buying and selling products. And clearly this 

particular legislation has been replaced by other ways of 

financing sales. And that’s part of how the world changes and I 

guess we’ll have to accept that. So that particular part I don’t 

have any great deal of question about it. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Now the next item that’s mentioned in this legislation is called 

the Saskatchewan Development Fund. And effectively what 

happens here is that The Saskatchewan Development Fund Act 

can’t be repealed until it’s amended to deal with some of what 

happens when it’s wound up and dissolved. And so what this 

legislation does is sets out the rules for windup and dissolution 

of the Saskatchewan Development Fund and the various funds 

that they have and what happens when the corporation is no 

longer there. And once those rules are in place, then it sets out 

that this development fund Act is going to be repealed. 

 

As part of this legislation it then says that even though The 

Saskatchewan Development Fund Act is going to be repealed, 

there’s still a requirement for the corporation to prepare 

financial statements for January 1st, 2013, up until whenever 

the corporation is actually dissolved by the legislation, and that 

these reports will be fully done in a way that will meet the 

needs of the Provincial Auditor. So in a way, this particular 

repeal section may be a little bit premature. It might have been 

just as well to wait until next year to add that one. But 

obviously the whole crew were quite keen on repealing obsolete 

statutes so they threw this one in as well. 

 

The next one mentioned in the legislation relates to The 

Subdivisions Act, and The Subdivisions Act will be repealed. 

Clearly The Subdivisions Act is an old piece of legislation that 

created rules for subdividing property in rural municipalities, 

that effectively allowed for development in rural areas in a way 

that could be reported to the land titles office and the, I think 

he’s called the chief of planning or the director of planning. But 

in the land titles office they would be able to use the 

subdivisions created by this legislation and make sure that it 

was properly recorded at the land titles office. It obviously was 

a solution to a problem that was there in 1914 with our new 

land titles system and the recording of information. I don’t think 

it’s any longer necessary. 

 

It does raise the question though of the Sask Party 

government’s plans this year to privatize the Information 

Services Corporation, which has the responsibility of managing 

land titles, but also more importantly much of our private 

information. And it raises the question about why they would 

pick this particular legislation to privatize here in Saskatchewan 

when for many, many years it has been a part of what we do as 

a province, as a public service for every person, whether they’re 

humans or whether they’re corporations. And so this particular 

issue of ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], we’ll get a chance to debate that in a few other 

spots in this legislative calendar. But here’s a reminder in this 

legislation of a change that’s being made to legislation that was 

designed around the needs of people. And it’s, I guess, maybe 

sad to see a little bit of the history go that . . . 

 

It also raises the question of subdivisions in rural areas. And 

anybody who has land across the province in areas that are 

some distance from our larger municipalities knows that there 

are developments that take place that don’t appear to have the 

same kind of planning and foresight as is available in some of 

the larger municipalities. And it begs the question, when you 

see the comments here about this legislation, about whether we 

need to have legislation that covers planning for the whole 

province. 

 

We know that in the province of Alberta they have that type of 

legislation already. But here in Saskatchewan we’re still 

operating with a real hodgepodge of rules that you can feel 

sometimes when you go into certain parts of the province. And 

so this may be a reason for, or maybe this is a signal that there 

is some broader municipal legislation in the works. I guess we 

have to ask the minister in committee whether that’s the case. 

 

Now the final piece of legislation that’s being repealed here is 

The Vegetable, Fruit and Honey Sales Act. And I know that this 

legislation is legislation that’s been around for quite a while, 

and it basically allows for the certification of these products for 

sale in Saskatchewan. And effectively what we’re doing once 

again, it’s similar to what we did last year. We’re eliminating 

the provincial regulations that might be in place for food 

products and relying on the federal rules that are in place that 

effectively then allow for our producers to sell products both in 

the province and out of the province. 

 

I think that there are concerns that we lose some of our local 

sense of responsibilities around production of food. We have 

had some fairly major concerns about the safety of our food in 

the last year, and I think there may be some questions that we 

will have around this particular legislation to make sure that the 

national rules, the national standards are in place that will 

effectively do the job that assures the public that their food is 

safe. 

 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2497 

We know at the national level they have been doing substantial 

cuts in every department. And it may be that the replacement 

regulation that is referenced by the minister — and I guess once 

again here the Minister of Justice is putting forward information 

that he’s received from the Minister of Agriculture — but we’re 

receiving assurances that this legislation actually will have 

some kind of federal coverage that will do the same thing. I 

think there may be questions that we should ask in this area to 

make sure that is true, because once again we’re concerned 

about the safety of food for human consumption. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill is short, but as I said earlier, 

clearly the Minister of Justice has listened to all of his 

colleagues and lumped a whole number of different changes 

into one bill so that, kind of like the budget, they can keep there 

being some balance. I think they’ve kind of said, we don’t want 

to have more than 100. We don’t want to have 100 bills in the 

legislature this fall. So they threw a whole bunch of them into 

this basket and have included them all together. 

 

So I think that a number of my colleagues may have comments 

about various aspects of this bill as well, and so at this point I 

will adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 54 — The Seizure 

of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

the debate on Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

I suppose here . . . And of course nobody in the province, I 

know people don’t want, I guess, crime and the property used to 

commit a crime and for those individuals to get to use that 

crime to continue the activity. And I guess the government has 

come up with and, you know, the department, Ministry of 

Justice has come up with a way to seize property from a crime. 

And whether that’s . . . I think there’s going to be a lot of 

discussion on this. A lot of people feel like, yes, you need to 

have this; this is a good provision to have to make sure that 

we’re seizing property that individuals have used that have, you 

know, used the opportunity or whether it’s a house . . . I guess 

the selling of drugs, whether it’s the vehicle, phones. They refer 

to different ones that the government has already gone forward 

and tested and one was where there was money seized, phones. 

But I think it was a forward, a test case that they used. And they 

refer to that in this bill. 

So there’s different things going on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

how Justice, law enforce use that tool. And that’s truly 

important. But also on that, we have to make sure at the end of 

the day that we don’t have citizens that are accused. We have to 

make sure clearly the proof is there, that police officers that are 

investigating this type of procedure, making it very clear that 

whatever illegal activity is being brought on to whether it’s a 

homeowner or the activity of crime, whether I own the home 

and somebody’s in my house and I’m not aware they’re doing 

this crime — they might be selling drugs, or whatever the 

activity might be — we have to make clear that the individual 

somehow that owns the property is aware of this crime was 

going on, that they’re aware of this type of activity was going 

on on their property, in their property, to make sure that citizens 

are protected in the province, that we’re not having someone 

who didn’t know anything and then all of a sudden they’re 

losing their assets, their property because somebody else was 

doing some illegal activity on their property. 

 

So I want to make it very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that yes, 

we agree and I think most people in our province would agree 

that this provision, giving the Justice department and the 

government to seize assets of a crime, of illegal activity going 

on, people are not . . . And they probably support that, as the 

most part. But I think clarification needs to be very clear. 

People want to make sure that the Justice department, our police 

departments, whether they are an investigating unit, whether it’s 

a drug gang, whatever you want to want to talk about — 

activities, illegal activities that are going on — are clearly based 

on facts, that it’s gone before I guess the court, a judge, to hear. 

So we want to make it very clear that those provisions and 

residents, citizens of this province have to be protected. 

 

So we want to make it clear and by talking about this, by 

working through this Act, it will give us the opportunity, it will 

give the Ministry of Justice the opportunity to make clear the 

regulations, make clear the rules that can be used to seize 

property. That is, someone is, you know, I guess, doing the 

illegal activity that we’re trying to stop in this province so this 

gives the government the opportunity to seize the property, the 

vehicles, like I said, whether it’s cash, whether it’s some big 

items. Maybe it’s vehicles, boats, motor homes. There are all 

these different . . . whether it’s a house. There could be different 

things, whether it’s a business, to seize those assets and to put 

them back in the government coffers, I think, and clearly where 

they’re coming. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to be clear that we 

want to make sure that our citizens are protected. And this 

provision in here . . . And I now know that there’s a number of 

different areas in this piece of legislation that clearly outlines 

the way the Justice department and the police force would use 

this piece of legislation. 

 

But again we want to make sure that it’s something that will 

work and not take away from someone who has not done any 

illegal activity or is aware that there’s illegal activity going on 

in their property, in their vehicle, and if they’re not aware of it, 

to have their property seized when they’re truly not aware. So 

that has to be very clear that we would make sure that 

Saskatchewan residents, like I said, are protected, that this bill 



2498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

outlines the rules how the Ministry of Justice can grant to the 

police force or to the investigation, whether it’s a drug unit, 

whether it’s a, I guess, a task force, but to seize these assets to 

Justice, to bring those assets into . . . from illegal crime. I want 

to make it very clear that we want to make sure those 

individuals are protected. And we have to make sure. 

 

And I know the courts will do the job that the courts need to do 

to hopefully protect citizens’ assets and to make sure that they 

don’t lose their assets in a way that truly wasn’t the intent of the 

activity going on, whether it’s illegal or whether it’s selling of 

drugs. And there’s many different things that they refer to in 

here. 

 

But I want to make it clear. I think there has to be provisions. 

We have to make sure the Justice department, whether it’s the 

lawyers out there, will give their opinion on this legislation. We 

have to make sure that we’ve consulted that. And if we’ve done 

that, we want to make sure that we do the work that we need to 

do as legislators to make sure residents are protected. But also 

we want to make sure that individuals do not, I guess, obtain 

wealth or assets from illegal activities. 

 

So let’s make it very clear on there. I think overall we would 

support it, but we want to make sure. There’s a lot of details. 

There’s things that have to be worked out, and I know the 

Minister of Justice, being lawyers, the lawyers will go through 

this and they’ll make sure the Ministry of Justice will go 

through it. So there’s a lot of work that has to still go into 

making it clear how this piece of legislation will be used by the 

Ministry of Justice, by law enforcement, to make it very clear 

that the provisions are there and it’s used in a way that is truly 

the way it was meant and intended to be used, not in a negative 

way in the sense of someone being . . . losing assets or property 

clearly when it wasn’t the activity that was going on. 

 

So we want to make it clear. Nobody would like to see 

somebody lose their property based on, I guess, hearsay. The 

proper, I guess, document, the proper proof would have to be 

clearly outlined in this. So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 54. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 55 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 55 — The 

Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure at 

this hour of the evening to join in on the discussion of Bill No. 

55, The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act. This 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is fairly lengthy. It’s longer 

than some of the pieces of legislation that we encounter here in 

the Assembly and that’s important, Mr. Speaker. So it does take 

some time to go through the many pages in order to ensure that 

it’s comprehensive and meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, was introduced earlier to the 

Assembly, and the minister responsible provided a second 

reading speech on November 6th, 2012. And in this speech, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister responsible outlined the purpose of the 

legislation as well as took some time to highlight the important 

aspects of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when thinking of The Consumer Protection and 

Business Practices Act, I can’t help but think of some of the 

interactions that I’ve had with constituents who have come into 

the office. And as members in the House know, we have a 

variety of constituents and a variety of people that come 

through our doors. And the variety is representative in many 

instances of the broader population, and in the broader 

population there is a lot of diversity. There’s differences in 

education levels. There is differences in socio-economic levels. 

There are individuals that might be more savvy when it comes 

to business practices and what are acceptable consumer 

protection measures. And, Mr. Speaker, there are those who 

may not be as knowledgeable in those instances. 

 

I can think, Mr. Speaker, of some of the people that have come 

through my door, particularly thinking of a few conversations 

that I had with a few seniors who were put in a situation when 

an individual came to their door or phoned them up, when they 

felt like they were pressured into an arrangement that was not in 

fact in their best interest. And we can all think of our own loved 

ones, Mr. Speaker — perhaps parents, perhaps grandparents, 

perhaps a favourite aunt or uncle — who might be older and not 

necessarily, Mr. Speaker, feeling totally comfortable in some of 

the practices that they confront in entering into contracts or with 

respect to some of the business practices that they might 

encounter. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the example that I used here was in the 

situation of older people or seniors, but also it’s not limited to 

those individuals who may find themselves in a position of 

vulnerability or not having the full ability to appreciate the 

consequences of entering into a contract in a particular area. 

And this may occur, Mr. Speaker, for a variety of reasons. 

Perhaps the younger person is busy; perhaps they’re occupied 

with family matters and other things and don’t have the time or 

the ability to do the proper research when confronted with a 

proposal. Or, Mr. Speaker, perhaps there may be issues in some 

circumstances with literacy and understanding of contracts and 

what is fair and what is appropriate. 

 

So those are the different issues. And we can think of these 

situations of perhaps loved ones that we know or people that 

come into our constituency offices who need to have the right 

types of protections put in place to really defend and promote 

their interests. 

 

Now we shouldn’t have a scenario, Mr. Speaker, where the 

rules put in place are overreaching or are disadvantaging a 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

business that might be operating. But, Mr. Speaker, I think first 

and foremost it’s necessary to ensure that the safeguards that we 

have in place, the variety of rules that are there, are in fact 

defending the interests of consumers in order to ensure that 

there is a fair and level playing field that they encounter when 

having to make decisions about their spending and purchasing 

practices. 

 

As the minister highlighted, Mr. Speaker, on November 6, 2012 

in his second reading speech, this endeavour put forward in Bill 

No. 55 was a process of updating and rationalizing the 

consumer protection framework for Saskatchewan. It begins 

with the consolidation and simplification of the existing 

consumer protection Act, making the legislation more 

accessible and easier to understand. 

 

So what we have here in the opening remarks by the minister is 

a statement of the intent that the government is pursuing here, 

Mr. Speaker, is to gather a variety of pieces of legislation 

together into one spot in order to have a comprehensive Act in 

one place. And so for that reason, Mr. Speaker, with the 

minister having stated that is the reason why this piece of 

legislation is being brought into being, Mr. Speaker, it’s for that 

reason that I made my opening remarks about the need to have 

the right balance in order to ensure that consumers are indeed 

protected while businesses are able to operate and function and 

do well here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But as with any piece of legislation, when it involves the 

combining of a number of individual or smaller pieces of 

legislation into one larger piece, there is a lot to digest. And as I 

said in my remarks at the beginning, this is a significant piece 

of legislation with quite a bit of content to it. And when doing 

this process, it’s important not to have some pieces fall through 

the cracks. It’s important, Mr. Speaker, to examine all the 

aspects of the legislation in order to ensure that there are not 

unintended consequences with respect to the changes that are 

occurring. 

 

Now we’ve seen other pieces of legislation where this has taken 

place. And of course with the labour legislation, the 

employment Act that is before the House and discussions are 

occurring. This is an example, Mr. Speaker, where we have 

many individual pieces of legislation which have been 

developed over many years, with the involvement of many 

people, being put together into one piece of legislation. 

 

And I know in my experience as an opposition MLA, having 

gone through the process of receiving this piece of legislation 

and spending some time going through it myself, and then, Mr. 

Speaker, having been approached by members in the 

community, whether they be individuals or whether they be 

members of organized labour, what they’ve told me, Mr. 

Speaker, is that there is so much content in the new piece of 

legislation as it relates to working people here in the province 

that it requires a great deal of expertise that an individual would 

have to have with respect to the earlier pieces of legislation, and 

then seeing how minor changes in some instances could have 

major implications for the new piece of legislation. 

 

So it’s important to have that appreciation of how the 

combining of pieces of legislation into one large piece is a 

significant job. It’s a significant job for those in the Ministry of 

Justice who did the drafting to put the legislation together. I’ll 

give some credit to the minister, Mr. Speaker. It’s a significant 

job to put that together and bring it forward to the Assembly as 

the minister has done. That requires work. But as importantly, 

and perhaps more importantly, it requires the proper scrutiny by 

the opposition and the public as a whole in order to see how the 

amalgamation of those various pieces of legislation into one can 

in fact serve the best interest of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So that’s important. And it does take time. It takes energy and it 

takes a fair amount of expertise to understand what was in the 

previous legislation, what carried through to the current 

legislation or what was adjusted in the current legislation, and 

how those changes may in fact have a significant influence on 

the course of events here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So we know that is the case with respect to the labour 

legislation that is before the House. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

when we look at Bill No. 55, An Act respecting Consumer 

Protection and Business Practices, to repeal certain Acts and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts, the same 

situation is present here. Although the implications may not be 

quite as extensive as the labour legislation, I think there is still a 

great deal of detail here that requires our attention. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, moving on to some aspects of the legislation 

as identified by the minister in his second reading speech on 

November 6th, 2012. There is a new part of the Act that the 

minister identifies called designated activities and licensing: 

“. . . a new part of the Act called designated activities and 

licensing will permit us to consolidate other consumer 

protection legislation into the Act.” Now he says: 

 

Mr. Speaker, consumer protection in Saskatchewan is 

spread across 12 separate statutes, each with different 

standards, enforcement mechanisms, and results. Of these, 

seven are licensing Acts or contain licensing provisions. 

 

So this is some more detail, Mr. Speaker, relating to the point 

that I made about how there are many different components to 

the legislation and how, while individual pieces have some 

common similarities with respect to the content of the 

legislation and its implications for consumer protection, there 

are differences with respect to the types of legislation with 

some of them being responsible for licensing. 

 

[21:45] 

 

So bringing them together, it’s the minister’s argument that it 

brings consistency and in many circumstances I could see that 

as a positive thing. However, Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to 

ensure that nothing is lost, that no protection that is currently 

extended to consumers here in Saskatchewan is being removed 

as a result of the amalgamation or the combining into one. 

 

The minister also states that “The Act will allow for 

individuality of rules governing the businesses depending on 

the particular needs of the industry being licensed.” So there is 

a recognition here, Mr. Speaker, by the minister, that there still 

needs to be the opportunity for legislation that is unique to an 

individual sector, understanding that there may be specific 

needs for that sector. 

 



2500 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

Now one might argue that is the reason why there were 

individual statutes to begin with, to cover individual aspects. So 

again as legislation is combined, it’s important to have that 

comprehensive look but it’s also important not to lose the 

individuality of a particular industry, and I think that is an 

important aspect. 

 

The minister states that some flexibility will apply to consumer 

contracts, he states, of which five types are typically regulated 

pursuant to The Consumer Protection Act. And the five that the 

minister identified in his speech are Internet sales, future 

performance, personal development services, travel club, and 

remotely formed contracts. And he says if our government 

decides to regulate other types of contracts, the new Act will 

provide a simple mechanism to do so. 

 

So this is the understanding, Mr. Speaker, that five areas are 

identified, and I assume those five areas are existing in the 

statutes that are present through the legislation. What the 

minister is stating here is that if the government — and the 

emphasis is on if — if the government decides that there are 

additional areas that need regulation, I would assume, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would be following the template provided 

here by the five that are already present in the legislation. 

 

And as always, the minister says that if additional industries 

were brought into the legislation beyond the five, that there 

would be the proper and necessary consultation that occurs with 

the industries. And that is important and that is my hope that 

that would in fact occur. However, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 

instances where government members will say that but then 

they will have a bit of a case of selective hearing or sometimes 

selective hearing combined with some fairly strong 

stubbornness where they were not willing to recognize what 

they have heard or to change their course of action. 

 

So I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that as any of these consultations 

occur, that there would not be an approach that does not fully 

respect and understand the viewpoints that are being brought 

forward. And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

members would approach such consultations with an open 

mind, not coming to the consultations with a predetermined 

decision, not coming to the consultations with a view of how 

things ought to be. But I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that they 

would come to the consultations with an open ear, a willingness 

to genuinely engage with the industry, see what is needed, take 

that information, and then make decisions that are in fact in the 

best interests of all Saskatchewan people. I think that that is 

hugely important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An important change in this bill, Mr. Speaker, as the minister 

identifies, it’s his opinion that this will provide a significant 

benefit to consumers And it has to do, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to providing clarification to the section of the Act that 

prevents the contracting out of the protections of the Act. The 

minister states that this “. . . has been enhanced to ensure that 

standard form contracts cannot tie consumers into arbitration 

clauses or prohibit them from participating in class actions.” 

 

“This will . . .” and the minister goes on to state, “This will not 

prevent the consumer from selecting arbitration if that’s the 

appropriate dispute resolution mechanism. However, Mr. 

Speaker . . .” as the minister said “. . . it becomes the 

consumer’s choice, not the supplier’s.” 

 

So this, Mr. Speaker, is providing more ability for a consumer 

to make the decisions that he or she would deem to be 

appropriate and fitting for the particular situation. In situations 

where there is arbitration as an option and the consumer wishes 

to pursue that avenue, this would be open to the individual. And 

I think that is important, Mr. Speaker. I can think of a number 

of instances where arbitration is the pursued course of 

resolution for an individual, providing an opportunity for two 

sides to come together and to have an outside opinion look at 

the facts, and provided a ruling based on what they deem to be 

fair and appropriate and the best course of action. 

 

It’s also important, Mr. Speaker, as the minister highlighted in 

this piece of legislation, to not rule out the possibility for class 

actions if an individual feels like that is the right way to go. I 

think it is necessary for some individuals who may feel like 

they need to go down that path in order to receive fairness and 

justice in their view. And that’s why we have a court system, 

Mr. Speaker, that can provide rulings on matters such as this. 

So I see Bill No. 55 recognizing the needs for that, as the 

minister identified in his second reading speech on November 

6th, 2012. 

 

Another component that the Minister identified in his speech as 

it relates to Bill No. 55, Mr. Speaker, the Minister called this a 

small but important feature so I’ll leave it up to readers of 

Hansard and listeners at home to decide whether or not is an 

important feature, but as he states, it’s a feature . . . I’ll read the 

quote, Mr. Speaker:  

 

Another small but important feature is the one that permits 

Saskatchewan courts to have jurisdiction over consumer 

actions, regardless of the part of the Act under which the 

consumer rights arise. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this here identifies the importance of the 

Saskatchewan courts. After all, this is a piece of legislation that 

affects Saskatchewan consumers and businesses operating 

within the province of Saskatchewan, so it’s only appropriate, 

Mr. Speaker, that the courts would recognize or have authority 

over this aspect. I could imagine a situation where it’d be 

frustrating, Mr. Speaker, if an individual had a problem with an 

aspect of the legislation and they decided to go through the 

courts and pursue a legal resolution to their situation, if the 

local courts within the province did not have the ability or the 

authority, Mr. Speaker, to address this matter. I think that would 

be frustrating to the individuals involved in the situation. 

 

And so it is important, Mr. Speaker, that we keep that view in 

mind as legislators. I know it’s frustrating when a constituent 

comes to us as an MLA with a particular concern, and as 

members of the House would know, Mr. Speaker, while we 

understand most often the divisions of responsibilities and the 

powers of the different orders of government — of municipal, 

provincial and federal — this is not the case, Mr. Speaker, 

always with average citizens who are busy living lives and 

raising their families, running businesses and giving to their 

communities. To them sometimes government is just 

government and we’re all painted with the same brush, even if 

we’re serving at a municipal level compared to provincial or 

federal. And in many instances, Mr. Speaker, regardless as to 



March 4, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

whether or not we’re on the government side or the opposition 

side, people just see us as part of government. And that’s the 

response that you often hear from people. 

 

So it can be confusing for individuals sometimes. So it is 

necessary, Mr. Speaker, that when possible if authority, when it 

is appropriate, to be extended to the provincial level when 

there’s a matter that affects people in Saskatchewan, I think it is 

appropriate that our courts can handle matters when that is in 

fact in the best interests of everyone considered or everyone 

involved. 

 

The final component, Mr. Speaker, that the minister identified 

in his second reading speech as it relates to Bill No. 55, which 

is a lengthy piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the 

enforcement components of the legislation. Basically, I’ll read 

the quote from the minister so listeners at home have an idea of 

the take from the government side as to what this legislation 

would be accomplishing, for those who weren’t watching on 

November 6th, 2012 before the new year was brought in. The 

minister said on that date: 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the enforcement administration 

provisions have been removed to a part that applies to the 

whole Act. This will make it easier for the consumer 

protection division of the Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan to do its job. Through this 

legislation, Saskatchewan is doing its part to provide a fair 

and balanced legislation that protects the vulnerable 

consumer while avoiding an undue burden on 

Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, though it might, that 

wording, Mr. Speaker, might seem fair and decent to the 

average person who has not been following the news, Mr. 

Speaker, or following the proceedings of this Assembly. But, 

Mr. Speaker, when the term fair and balanced is used, while 

those words in themselves or the expression is a good phrase 

and one that I myself might use from time to time and others 

would as well, Mr. Speaker, the problem is there have been too 

many instances when members opposite have talked about fair 

and balanced and the course of their actions have actually been 

something very different. 

 

And we can think, Mr. Speaker, of different pieces of 

legislation where the talk has been about being fair and 

balanced but we see that inappropriate consultation has 

occurred. We see at times, Mr. Speaker, consultation occurred 

that only listened to certain people. It was often friends and 

insiders of government. And, Mr. Speaker, we see instances 

when they say they’re being fair and balanced but that hasn’t in 

fact been the course of action. 

 

Let’s take for example, Mr. Speaker, one aspect, the film 

employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. You know, the talk would 

be about fixing the policy, as members opposite would suggest, 

and that this is being fair to all industries. That would be the 

type of language. I’m paraphrasing; I don’t have those exact 

quotes in front of me, Mr. Speaker. But that has most certainly 

been the tone that members opposite have used when dealing 

with the issue of the film industry here in the province. 

 

But what the actions have shown, Mr. Speaker, that on the 

contrary to being fair and balanced as members would suggest, 

they’ve actually in this instance picked on one industry, forced 

and pushed its demise within the province, and in so doing 

encouraged many people out of necessity to move out of the 

province to pursue greener pastures because the opportunities to 

participate in the film industry, Mr. Speaker, have simply dried 

up. And we’re in a situation now, Mr. Speaker, where even 

some of the closer allies of the Sask Party would recognize that 

this was a wrong-headed decision, that this was not in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people and not in the best interests of 

the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

And so when the talk of fair and balanced comes forward, Mr. 

Speaker, I do say I take it with a significant grain of salt 

because of the past actions, the recent past actions, that we’ve 

seen from the Sask Party government. 

 

So looking at this legislation, Mr. Speaker, it is lengthy, and I 

can appreciate some of the efforts that government has made in 

this instance in updating the legislation. That is an appropriate 

thing to do from time to time. Of course legislation does need 

review. It needs to happen through listening to Saskatchewan 

people, through listening to legislators, through listening to the 

professionals within the civil service who review these pieces of 

legislation and have an appreciation for how the legislation 

affects the activities of the provincial government and of 

various ministries. 

 

So review is fine, Mr. Speaker, and change is fine within 

legislation as well. That’s the prerogative of government to do 

that, and that in itself is not a problem, Mr. Speaker. But what 

can be a problem is when the details are not looked at closely 

enough. What is a problem, Mr. Speaker, when government 

chooses to listen just to some people. What is a problem, Mr. 

Speaker, is when through the combining of various pieces of 

legislation, aspects are hidden that aren’t in fact in the best 

interest of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I think in those instances, Mr. Speaker, it is a real concern for 

Saskatchewan people. So in this instance when we see 12 

separate statutes being put together into one — statutes that 

have been in existence in the province for some time and have 

been providing consumer protection — we want to make sure, 

Mr. Speaker, that this is in fact creating a better piece of 

legislation, not one that is combined just for the sake of 

combination but one, Mr. Speaker, that improves protection for 

consumers while also allowing businesses to operate as fully 

and as successfully as we all want them to operate here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[22:00] 

 

So I think that’s an important consideration. And my thoughts, 

Mr. Speaker, go back to those of constituents because that’s 

what we need to keep in mind whenever we’re considering any 

piece of legislation here in the Assembly. We have to think 

about how this affects the people that we represent, the people 

that have sent us here to bring their concerns forward whether 

that individual is rich, whether that individual is poor, whether 

that individual is highly educated or has a very low level of 

education, Mr. Speaker, whether that individual comes from . . . 

recently arrived in the country or whether they’ve been here for 

generations, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we need to do. So I think 



2502 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2013 

of those individuals and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 

changes that we see in this piece of legislation would indeed 

accomplish that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks on this 

piece of legislation and move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Oh, sorry. The member has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 55, The Consumer 

Protection and Business Practices Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the House now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:02.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2479 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2481 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2482 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2485 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2488 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2489 

 Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2491 

 Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2493 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2493 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2497 

 Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2498 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


