




















































Hansard: March 11, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 30A  MONDAY, MARCH 11, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2597 

 March 11, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you to my colleagues. As we get going 

this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend a special 

welcome to a number of individuals who have come to join us 

here in the Assembly. I won’t go through every name, but I 

recognize a number of New Democrats in the crowd who were 

some of many present at the convention on the weekend and 

who wanted to be here today. So I thank you very much for 

being here, and I want to extend a thank you to everyone, Mr. 

Speaker, who played an important role in making our leadership 

process a success, everyone who contributed to that process and 

made the convention as successful as it was. 

 

There is one individual, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a 

special thank you to, and that’s to Mr. Linsay Martens. Linsay 

has served as my campaign manager in both provincial 

elections and managed the leadership campaign and was later 

joined by Trevor McKenzie-Smith, and they both did a fine job. 

Linsay is excellent at what he does. And I’m certainly grateful 

for everything he has done, but more importantly I’m grateful 

for his friendship. And I’m happy that he’s here today. 

 

So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the guests to 

the Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to make an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

my colleagues for that leave. Joining us in your gallery today 

are four important leaders in the field of education in the 

province of Saskatchewan. With us today are Ben Grebinski 

from the Prairie Valley School Division, Julie MacRae from the 

Regina Public School Division, Don Rempel from the North 

East School Division in Melfort, and travelling from my 

hometown in Swift Current is Liam Choo-Foo. He’s the 

director of education for the Chinook School Division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, later this day Minister Marchuk and I will meet 

with these . . . Sorry. The Minister of Education and I — it was 

only a week; you’d think I’d remember, Mr. Speaker — we are 

going to be meeting just in a few moments after question period 

with these individuals, with these leaders in education because, 

Mr. Speaker, they are already leading in terms of 

standard-based assessment in the province, so long as it is 

accompanied with targeted resources in terms of finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Chinook School Division introduced the 

balanced literacy initiative in 2008. Sixty-three per cent of the 

students were meeting their grade level reading standards at the 

time. After four years of the program, that number has jumped 

to 84 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Prairie Valley School Division 

also, with the help of some standards-based assessment, Mr. 

Speaker, has seen a year-over-year improvement in 23 of 26 

areas including reading, including math, Mr. Speaker. 

Eighty-one per cent of Prairie Valley students graduate from 

grade 12 on time compared to 72 per cent province-wide. 

Melfort is also using these tools to improve outcomes for 

students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These examples and the work they’ve done with teachers will 

inform this government’s process with respect to student 

achievement. It will ensure its success. So we look forward to 

the meeting. We thank them for their leadership, and through 

them we thank the teachers and the staff that have made the 

leadership possible. Mr. Speaker, we welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 

like to join the Premier in welcoming these guests to the 

legislature. Now I can’t quite see them because they’re behind 

the clock. But in my new role as the critic for Education, this is 

something that’s very important, that we want our students to 

achieve. And it’s great they’re making that commitment to do 

that with the additional resources to make sure that happens and 

there is balance between testing and teaching. So with them, I 

would ask all members to join me with welcoming the leaders 

in education that the Premier has introduced. 

 

I was going to say, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce 

two more special guests to the legislature from the building 

trades who are here to witness this very, very important day. 

We have Gunnar Passmore and Kent Peterson from Building 

Trades who really think the work that we do here is critically 

important, and I would ask all members to join in welcoming 

these folks to our legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and to all members of the legislature, I’d like you to 

welcome some guests in your gallery. John and Tolanda Baker 

are here from Kindersley today. John has 40 years of experience 

in mechanical trades and holds an interprovincial journeyman’s 

ticket in plumbing and heating. He is the current president of 

Mechanical Contractors Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

World Plumbing Day is an international event on March 11th, 

initiated by the World Plumbing Council, celebrating the 

important role plumbing plays in the health and safety of 

modern society. The name of the day is to raise awareness 

about the critical role which today’s plumbing industry plays in 

relation to public health and the health of our planet and 

environment. You’ll be hearing more about this in a member’s 



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

statement later. 

 

Since 1919 the association has continued to mandate and 

encourage, support, and promote the advancement of the 

mechanical contracting industry here in Saskatchewan. Known 

as the MCAS [Mechanical Contractors Association of 

Saskatchewan], the association represents the plumbing 

contractors in the province, who help to ensure that here in 

Saskatchewan we are taking care of one of our most important 

natural resources — water. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join with me in welcoming those guests in 

your gallery here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce Mr. Allen Engel, who is sitting behind us. He’s the 

former member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And he has been 

obviously following politics for a long part of his life, and we 

welcome here today. Along with him up in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, are his wife, Joyce Engel, and friend Ed Zalinsky. And 

so we welcome them as well. 

 

And while I’m on feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce 

Mr. Cory Oxelgren, who is the president of the Saskatchewan 

New Democratic Party. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, it’s a pleasure for me to 

introduce just a few guests. And often we are speaking of 

standing orders in this Assembly. Today I’m introducing some 

Standingreadys, Mr. Speaker, starting with a good friend and 

constituent Donna Standingready who’s also the president of 

the Aboriginal New Democrats of Saskatchewan. Donna is a 

constituent, a great friend important to Stephanie and I and our 

entire New Democratic family, and she’s joined here today by 

her daughter Erin Crowe. Erin is in her first year of business 

studies at SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. 

I certainly introduce these two individuals to their Assembly. I 

ask all others to join with me in welcoming them as well. 

 

While still on my feet, I’m pleased to certainly welcome the 

educational leaders that are here today. Certainly we’ve had the 

opportunity to meet over many years and thank you for your 

leadership to our province. 

 

And I see just a few other individuals that certainly I’d like to 

say hello to Ms. Renu Kapoor that’s joined us here today, Ms. 

Muna DeCiman that’s here today, Ms. Rani Bilkhu that’s joined 

us, Mr. Tom Cameron, and our friends from the building trades 

in the east gallery. It’s so nice to welcome all these members to 

their Assembly here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce two individuals seated in your gallery: Jesse Todd and 

Brenda Baergen. These are family members of the late Howard 

Willems. They were in Regina earlier this morning as recipients 

of the posthumous award that was given to the late Howard 

Willems with regard to his work with regard to the workplace 

hazards and health hazards of asbestos. The award was given to 

them by the Cancer Society earlier today. And I would like to 

ask all members to join them in welcoming them to their 

Assembly, but also to congratulate them for the work that 

they’ve done in raising awareness and moving the 

understanding of the threats posed by asbestos forward. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to rise and welcome my constituent Brenda Baergen 

and her son Jesse to the Assembly. Brenda’s an active member 

in our community. I’ve known her for a number of years, and 

she’s no stranger to community causes. She sponsors the 

bike-a-thon every year and raises a lot of money for various 

groups in Saskatoon and area. 

 

And certainly the work she’s done with SADAO [Saskatchewan 

Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization] has been a very 

important piece of work and it honours Howard’s memory. So 

I’d like to as well welcome my constituent Brenda to the 

Assembly, and her son Jesse. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly 

some guests that are here to listen to the Queen’s message on 

Commonwealth Day. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery we have 

Mrs. Renu Kapoor, Mrs. Rani Bilkhu representing the 

Commonwealth country of India; Ms. Muna DeCiman 

representing Sierra Leone; Mr. Mike Luti representing Uganda. 

 

We also have members of the Saskatchewan branch of the 

Royal Commonwealth Society: Dr. Michael Jackson, the 

president; Reverend Derek Nicolls; Reverend Ted Giese; 

Reverend Dr. Mark McKim; and Mr. Keith Inces. I would ask 

the members to welcome them to the Assembly today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as I 

get closer to you, you seem to get better looking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I stand today to, I’m very proud to present a petition on the 

cellphone coverage, Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nation, also known as Turnor Lake, 

and the community of Turnor Lake, including all the 

neighbouring communities in each of those areas. 

 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this 

petition are from all throughout Saskatchewan and all 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

throughout the province. And the people that have signed this 

particular petition that I present today are from Dillon, 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to call for the reconsideration of passing Bill 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. And we know the proposed 

Saskatchewan employment Act that was introduced in 

December is a sweeping rewrite of our labour laws. And we 

know if the bill becomes the new consolidation of labour laws 

in this province, that your working people — particularly young 

workers, immigrant workers, and other vulnerable workers — 

will suffer from a hasty watering down of our current labour 

standards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

World Plumbing Day 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise in this Assembly to recognize that today has been 

proclaimed World Plumbing Day in Saskatchewan. The goal of 

World Plumbing Day is to raise awareness about the essential 

part of today’s plumbing industry and how it plays in relation to 

the public health as well as the health of our planet and the 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to take for granted the availability of safe 

drinking water and sufficient sanitation systems until those 

systems cease to function properly. The Mechanical Contractors 

Association of Saskatchewan asked that everyone takes a 

moment to think about where their water comes from and what 

they can do to ensure it’s available for future generations. The 

safety and abundance of drinking water is of course a concern 

for most people around the world, but what is not often 

emphasized is the work the plumbing industry contributes every 

day to alleviate these concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, World Plumbing Day works towards bringing a 

better understanding of the largely misunderstood role that 

plumbers play in keeping everyone safe and healthy each and 

every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing 

World Plumbing Day and the vital job that plumbers do. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Welcome to the New Leader of the Official Opposition 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege today 

of welcoming to the House the new Leader of the Official 

Opposition, the leader of Saskatchewan’s New Democrats, the 

member for Massey Place. 

 

For the last six months, Ryan Meili, Erin Weir, the member for 

Massey Place, and I participated in a leadership process that 

gave us the opportunity to listen to the people of our province 

having shared with us ideas and priorities of everyone in 

Saskatchewan, from the beautiful North to the southern border. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to join the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in getting 

behind and standing with our new leader. We look forward to 

putting forward a modern, relevant, and future-focused vision 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

Our new leader is a familiar face to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly. He was first elected in 2007, re-elected 

in 2011. He has served in the legislature, holding very 

important critic portfolios. I also want to mention we’re so 

grateful to our leader’s wife, Ruth, and his precious daughters, 

Ingrid and Clara, for being willing to share their husband and 

dad with our province. 

 

We have a big job to do, but working together with our leader, 

Saskatchewan people can count on us to get the job done. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating the member from Massey Place on his new role 

as Leader of Saskatchewan’s Official Opposition. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Constituent Participates in Freedom Climb 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The old adage 

on why someone would climb a mountain is because it’s there. 

But what happens when it’s more than that? 

 

I’m honoured today to recognize one of my constituents, Denise 

Heppner, and the amazing adventure ahead of her. Denise will 

be the only Canadian climber participating in Freedom Climb. 

This initiative is part of Operation Globalization, and its 

purpose is to raise awareness and money for women and 

children around the world who suffer exploitation, enslavement, 

and human trafficking. The organization helps provide shelter, 

education, and training. 

 

The climb symbolizes support for those who are unable to 

climb out of their current circumstances on their own. Denise 

will be one of 44 women who will lend that helping hand to 

these women and children. In April they’ll be trekking to the 

base camp of Mount Everest and then summit Mount Kala 

Pattar. In Denise’s own words, and I quote: 

 

I thought, “It starts with us.” I thought it was other people 

that could go out and make a difference. Then I thought I 



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

want to be the one who makes a difference in this world. 

It’s everyday people that will change the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m so very proud of Denise and her fellow 

climbers for making a stand and being a voice for the voiceless. 

I ask my colleagues in joining me to say thank you to Denise 

and the other women who will be joining her, who make our 

world a better place to live. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Canadian Cancer Society Award to Howard Willems 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to invite the members of the Assembly to join 

with me in honouring Howard Willems’s family. Howard 

Willems was awarded today, posthumously, the 2013 Impact 

Award for Leadership and Public Policy from the national 

council of the Canadian Cancer Society. 

 

This is the highest award given in the area of public policy by 

the Canadian Cancer Society, a national organization, and the 

only one that is granted each year. Howard Willems passed 

away at the age of 59 from a rare form of cancer that was 

directly related to his exposure from asbestos while working. 

Asbestos is the leading cause of industrial cancers and death in 

Canada. 

 

Howard has worked tirelessly until the very end of his life to 

bring Howard’s law, Bill 604, forward to protect his fellow 

workers from harm. Howard’s wife, Brenda, and his two 

stepsons, Jesse and Lee, continue the advocacy that he started. 

They share Howard’s belief that everyone has the right to know 

if their workplace, school, health care facility, or daycare is 

safe. Mr. Speaker, Howard’s law is a common sense solution to 

help keep the public informed about where asbestos is located 

in public buildings by creating a mandatory online registry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask my fellow members of the legislature 

to listen to the families of Howard Willems and the people of 

Saskatchewan and vote in favour of Howard’s law on Thursday. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Congratulations to Saskatchewan Curling Team 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in this House today to recognize Saskatchewan’s 

Jill Shumay curling team of Maidstone curling club. During the 

week of February 16th to 24th, all eyes were on the Jill Shumay 

rink as they proudly represented the province of Saskatchewan 

at the Scotties Tournament of Hearts in Kingston, Ontario. This 

accomplishment fulfilled a long-time dream for Jill and her 

entire team. After starting out with an impressive four-straight 

win record, they finished the tournament in fifth place, 

representing the province of Saskatchewan in spectacular 

fashion. The team consists of skip Jill Shumay, third Kara 

Johnston, second Taryn Holtby, and lead Jinaye Ayrey; fifth 

Patty Hersikorn; and coach Gene Friesen. 

 

To qualify as Saskatchewan’s representative, they first had to 

compete on the provincial level at the SaskPower provincial 

tournament. They went in as the underdog, ranking seventh in 

the province. They won their first five games, propelling them 

to be named Saskatchewan’s representative at Kingston. 

 

Mr. Speaker, competing at this level has its challenges. Each 

team member holds down a full-time job and devotes countless 

hours honing their skills. It takes tremendous dedication and 

commitment, setting aside almost all of your spare time devoted 

to your sport. As most of you know, Kara Johnston competed in 

this tournament seven and a half months pregnant. That’s 

dedication. 

 

Team commitment coupled with the support of family, friends, 

employers, and community cannot go unrecognized. It’s always 

been the Saskatchewan way to encourage everyone to do their 

best and be proud of excellence achieved. Mr. Speaker, I would 

ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 

the team for their success, professional conduct, and great 

sportsmanship. All of Saskatchewan is proud. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Sergeant Inducted into Council of Women’s Hall of Fame 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 

this House to acknowledge a former colleague and constituent 

of mine, Sergeant Rhonda Meakin of the Prince Albert Police 

Service. 

 

Sergeant Meakin was recently inducted into the Prince Albert 

Council of Women’s Hall of Fame at a ceremony on March 

2nd, at which myself, the member from Saskatchewan Rivers, 

and the member from Northcote attended as well. The council’s 

president, Marie Mathers, saw the great work being done by 

Sergeant Meakin and said, “Our motto this year is women 

nurturing, so we look at people who are giving to the public — 

preferably it’s a youth or young adult, and Rhonda fit in every 

category.” 

 

While Sergeant Meakin protects and serves the public in her 

capacity as a police officer, she’s also a volunteer coach in 

bowling, golf, and curling. She participates in the Salvation 

Army Christmas kettle campaign, has coordinated police 

ventures. She also mentors with Big Brothers and Big Sisters of 

Prince Albert and is a member of the Compassionate 

Community Response Team. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, Sergeant Meakin has been involved 

with the Carlton school and personally initiated and 

implemented D.A.R.E. [drug abuse resistance education], which 

is a drug awareness program in our community. 

 

To add to this impressive list of accomplishments, Mr. Speaker, 

Sergeant Meakin was awarded the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee 

Medal for her continued commitment and significant 

contributions to the community. And, Mr. Speaker, 20 days 

ago, Rhonda became a new mom. Her daughter Grace has a 

great mother and mentor to follow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2601 

Agricultural Safety Week 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 

today to announce March 10th to the 16th as Agricultural 

Safety Week in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there are risks in 

farming and ranching, and we want to remind our province’s 

producers to take the steps necessary to keep themselves and 

their families safe. 

 

Each year approximately 14 people are killed and many others 

are injured on farms in incidents that could have been 

prevented. Agriculture safety should be a priority for all farmers 

and ranchers to ensure the continued success of not only their 

operation but also the agriculture industry as a whole. The 

theme of this year’s week is Get With the Plan, which focuses 

on encouraging farmers to develop written health and safety 

plans for their operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Agriculture provides $70,000 in 

funding to the Agricultural Health and Safety Network, which 

provides agricultural health and safety programming to over 

half of the farm families in Saskatchewan. As well more than 

200 rural municipalities also contributed funding for this health 

and safety programming. Saskatchewan Agriculture also 

provides 30,000 in funding to the Saskatchewan Association of 

Agricultural Societies and Exhibitions for farm safety 

workshops for youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in asking 

our farmers and ranchers to take care this spring during the 

calving season and as they look forward to putting in this year’s 

crop. We wish you a safe and healthy growing season. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Performance of Government and Opposition 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank 

my colleagues, especially the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, 

for the welcome, and thank all members for the welcome that 

they have extended. It’s an exciting time for our party, and I’m 

excited about this next chapter for our party as well as the 

province. And I would like to thank the Premier also for making 

a phone call Sunday afternoon and for the conversation we had. 

In many instances we will be on opposite sides of the fence in 

the debate, and question period is perhaps probably the best 

example when we will debate the issues and be on opposite 

sides of the fence. 

 

One issue, Mr. Speaker, where we have different opinions is the 

government’s track record when it comes to keeping their 

promises, especially the promise, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier 

made that their government would admit their mistakes, that 

they would take responsibility for their mistakes and fix them. 

Too often this has not been the case. The first example, Mr. 

Speaker, was adding three more MLAs to the Legislative 

Assembly, something that people in the province saw as a 

mistake. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he still follow the belief that 

his government is one that admits its mistakes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And just before I get into the answer, I again want to 

congratulate the hon. member on becoming leader of his party, 

Leader of Her Majesty’s Official Opposition, Loyal Opposition. 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge the deputy leader 

across the way and his campaign, as well as that of Dr. Meili 

and Mr. Weir who also ran campaigns. We are better served 

when women and men of goodwill step forward to serve. And 

as a province, Mr. Speaker, we’re grateful for the process that 

the opposition party has just undertaken. We thank in advance 

the new leader’s family for sharing him, agreeing to share him a 

little bit more, frankly, than they have already with the 

province. Although should they choose to be selfish and decide 

not to share him as much, we’re okay with that too, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member, we have worked hard to be a 

government that’s kept its promises. In fact I think that’s very 

much a part of the brand on this side of the House. I want to say 

that we have acknowledged mistakes when they’ve happened, 

including just since the last election when SaskTel, I think, 

made a bit of a miscalculation around rural coverage. We 

backed that process up. We’re seeking solutions. We’ve done 

the same thing with respect to the motorcycle rate change 

announcement, and there’ll be more on that coming forward, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The short answer to my hon. friend’s question is, yes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Increasingly what’s 

becoming part of the Sask Party brand is that of being stubborn 

and not willing to admit mistakes. Let’s look at the next 

example, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government’s decision to 

eliminate the film employment tax credit. 

 

This is something that people in Saskatchewan supported, 

something that people in Saskatchewan saw as good common 

sense — whether they were small-business people, whether 

they were in the film community, or whether they were just 

citizens that appreciated our story from Saskatchewan being 

told in a good way. This was a mistake to eliminate this 

program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he recognize that it was a 

mistake to eliminate the film employment tax credit? And if it 

was a mistake, will he be fixing this in the upcoming budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of my hon. 

friend’s question is interesting because the premise was 

stubbornness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in his first full day as leader, he had the 

chance to comment on the policies of his party and the election 

platform of his party, the Lingenfelter platform, the $5 billion 

platform of excessive promises, of big spending that would 



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

cause deficits, of special revenue-sharing deals with First 

Nations. He said he supports the Lingenfelter platform. We 

ought not to be surprised about that, Mr. Speaker, because he 

helped write it. He wrote the policy book that was its 

foundation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Are we stubborn about some things, Mr. Speaker? Yes, we are. 

We’re stubborn about balanced budgets. We’re stubborn about 

continuing to invest in health care and education and 

infrastructure. We’re absolutely determined and continue to 

make this province the best place to invest. And it seems to be 

working, Mr. Speaker — 3.8 per cent unemployment was 

announced last Friday right here in the province. That’s the 

number one employment record in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to see on the 

second question that the Premier is carrying on the lines that the 

member from Martensville provided yesterday, suggesting that 

myself as a 34-year-old was part of the old guard. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I may have a little bit of grey hair, but if 34, Mr. 

Speaker, is part of the old guard, I think that’s news to most 

Saskatchewan people and perhaps disappointing to many of the 

baby boomers and seniors within our province. 

 

A mistake, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite made was the 

elimination of the Aboriginal employment development 

program. If we want success, Mr. Speaker, in this province for 

everyone, it means extending opportunity to more and more 

people. Of course the long-term answer is improved education, 

but there are short-term decisions that also have a huge 

influence, especially the elimination of the Aboriginal 

employment development program. And economist Eric Howe 

has very accurately described how this has had a negative effect 

on employment numbers over the past year. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he recognize that it was a 

mistake to cut the Aboriginal employment development 

program? And if he recognizes that it was a mistake, if he is 

about admitting mistakes, will he fix this in the upcoming 

budget? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not just members on this side of the House that are suggesting 

he was part of the Lingenfelter team. Mr. Speaker, it was his 

fellow leadership candidate, Erin Weir, Erin Weir. He accused 

this member, now the new Leader of the Opposition, of 

plagiarism because the 2011 policy document, the Lingenfelter 

document, the Lingenfelter platform and his leadership platform 

were almost identical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course we know that Mr. Weir is wrong. He 

didn’t plagiarize the document. He wrote both documents, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these are his policies. They’re Mr. 

Lingenfelter’s policies. If he’s changed them now, or changed 

them as a result of his campaign, he should say so. 

 

With respect to Aboriginal employment, this particular budget 

coming forward in just a number of weeks has a number of 

initiatives that focus on this particular issue. We do have the 

best employment record in the country. We saw a small 

improvement for Aboriginal people in the last numbers, but we 

need to do better. And, Mr. Speaker, the track record on this 

side of the House is that we will do better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. As I talk to other young 

families in the province, a concern that comes up more and 

more, Mr. Speaker, is around the area of education and the 

concern that we’re not taking the steps right now, Mr. Speaker, 

to ensure that our children and the next generations have the 

brightest possible future. 

 

We hear of crowded classrooms, Mr. Speaker. We hear of the 

lack of supports for students who are studying English as an 

additional language. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard about the 

huge reduction in the number of educational assistants here in 

the province — more than 350. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he believe it was a mistake to 

see a reduction in the number of educational assistants here in 

the province? And if it was a mistake, Mr. Speaker, is he going 

to fix that in the upcoming budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, school boards have made 

some decisions with respect to educational assistants. And by 

the way, Mr. Speaker, the product of some of those decisions is 

that in terms of the overall number of student support in the 

classrooms, we’re at a higher level now than we were before. 

Some of them are professionals in different areas; some of them 

are EAs [educational assistant]; but, Mr. Speaker, there are 

more than there were before. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the level of increase for education operating 

is up significantly from when those members were in office. It’s 

been up every single year, year over year, in significant ways — 

education capital, Mr. Speaker, finally investment in schools, 

not just new schools that we need for our growing economy, but 

the renovation of existing schools. Now 200-plus schools have 

been renovated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will put our record on education against the 

NDP’s every day of the week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, part of admitting mistakes, in 

order to admit mistakes, the government needs to be open and 

transparent and accountable. And that was a promise, Mr. 

Speaker, that Sask Party government members made. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that is the stubborn approach that 

we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, of members opposite, of not 

admitting mistakes. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, the province has learned the details of 

the IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre for 

geologic storage of CO2] affair, the issues that have happened 

here in Regina. The information has not come to light, Mr. 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

Speaker, because members were open, members were 

transparent and willing to share information. Information came 

to light, Mr. Speaker, through the media and through the hard 

work of opposition members. 

 

My question to the Premier concerning the IPAC affair: does he 

believe that his ministers, his cabinet, his team have handled the 

IPAC affair properly, or does he see this as a mistake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would hope the Leader of 

the Opposition is following this issue a little bit more closely 

than his last question might indicate. I think the minister 

responsible, the Minister for Crown Investments Corporation, 

very much acknowledged here in recent days that if there was a 

challenge, if there was a mistake made by government, it was 

not forcing the University of Regina, which is independent and 

autonomous and actually under whose auspices some of the 

challenges and concerns occurred, Mr. Speaker, it was perhaps 

this government’s mistake to not force that autonomous agency 

to produce the information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is candid in terms of this government’s 

accountability process, and it stacks up very favourably versus 

what we’ve seen from members opposite — even, Mr. Speaker, 

over what that member had a chance to do yesterday. The 

Leader of the Opposition had the chance to stand up and say, 

we made a mistake in the last election. Our $5 billion platform 

was a mistake. First Nations revenue sharing or any special deal 

is a mistake, Mr. Speaker. He had the chance to start off on the 

right foot; he didn’t do that. Will he do that now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s that very 

sort of deflection that we saw just there, Mr. Speaker, that has 

people questioning the former claim of that government to be 

open and transparent. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the 

IPAC affair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On Friday the federal government weighed in and said they had 

serious concerns about how public money is being spent. 

They’re concerned about how assets, including a $600,000 

computer, ended up in private hands, let alone the unneeded, 

unboxed computers that are sitting in storage at IPAC. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the minister dismissed wasted money as 

somehow not important to Saskatchewan people. The minister 

can’t be serious. Is the minister standing by that outrageous 

position here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, time and time again I’ve 

answered questions on the details behind IPAC. We know 

when, Mr. Speaker. We know that this started in 2009. We 

know what, Mr. Speaker. We know that there was a 

sole-sourced, overpriced contract for IT [information 

technology] services. We know where. We know that this 

happened when IPAC was under the management at the U of R 

[University of Regina]. We know why. We know there were a 

few individuals that were employees of the U of R that did not 

follow the processes of the university. And we know, we 

actually know who those individuals were although the member 

opposite wasn’t interested in that when he had the opportunity 

to find out. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there has been a number of audits. There’s 

been a forensic audit done of what happened under IPAC when 

it was under management of the U of R. There was evaluation 

of the IT equipment that was done, Mr. Speaker, and going 

forward, their audits have been clean, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister references that 

she keeps talking on this file. That’s correct. The problem 

though is that her words keep changing, Mr. Speaker. She keeps 

saying something different. 

 

Let’s remember last week that there were deals that were 

exposed with CVI [Climate Ventures Inc.] and ClimbIT that 

were revealed and deals that the minister hadn’t told anyone 

about. And it’s a result of a handshake deal with a company that 

the Sask Party actually funded the start-up with taxpayers’ 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. It’s been like pulling teeth to get straight 

answers where taxpayers’ money has gone on this file, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now the federal government’s investigating and one would 

think the province would want to know the whole truth about 

what really happened to taxpayers’ dollars. We know there are 

conflicts. We know there is waste. It seems though that, it 

seems in many ways that this is nothing more than a flow 

through of public money into private hands. And people of 

Saskatchewan deserve to know who benefited from their wasted 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: who has personally gained on the 

backs of the taxpayer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there was a forensic 

audit done of what was happening with IPAC when it was 

under management of the U of R. That was done by Meyers, 

Norris, and Penny, and they could not identify anyone who 

personally gained, although they recognized that there was an 

overprice that was paid for the IT equipment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as soon as the IPAC incorporated and a board was 

formed, actions were taken immediately. I think those steps 

were appropriate. They severed the contract with the CVI. They 

also took the management and the control of the money away 

from the U of R, Mr. Speaker. They asked for a forensic audit 

as well as an evaluation of the IT equipment, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to know who the member opposite is trying to 

identify that personally gained from this, but one thing I can tell 

him is, not one Sask Party member personally gained from any 

of this. 

 



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when that minister’s story 

is not changing, she’s certainly brushing aside very serious 

concerns, and we’ve seen that all the way through when she 

should have been stepping up and providing answers and 

ensuring accountability, Mr. Speaker. Now the federal 

government is investigating, and last week we called once again 

for the Provincial Auditor to investigate, something we’ve been 

calling for for the better part of a year. But the minister sat on 

her hands last week, Mr. Speaker. But the Premier is here, and 

he’s heard how the minister has failed to be open and 

transparent and he should know that this is a mistake. Will the 

Premier finally do the right thing and call on the Provincial 

Auditor to investigate and clean up the IPAC affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 

did do an audit when IPAC was under management of the U of 

R. You can find the report; it’s a public report. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when IPAC incorporated and a board was formed and 

the difficulty with the contract was identified, it was cleaned up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Hyperbaric Chamber and Health Services in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the city of Moose Jaw, residents 

are very concerned about what the Sask Party government plans 

to do with the hospital-based hyperbaric chamber for the 

treatment of burn victims. Over 2,400 people have signed an 

online letter to keep the hyperbaric chamber in the plans for the 

new hospital. 

 

The local residents raised funds to bring the chamber to Moose 

Jaw and are concerned with the minister’s comments that it’s 

not in the plans for the new hospital under development. Instead 

he wants a private clinic. It appears that their new hospital will 

have fewer beds and be smaller than the current one. This 

uncertainty is another blow for the city and to the residents 

concerned about their health services. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party government removing 

the hyperbaric chamber from the services provided in the new 

Moose Jaw hospital? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the member for his question. Mr. Speaker, I am 

fully aware that the member is a former Health minister. In fact 

I think he served . . . the longest serving Health minister in the 

history of this province, Mr. Speaker, which he reminds us from 

time to time. 

 

He will know, Mr. Speaker, that the hyperbaric chamber in 

Moose Jaw is not a provincially provided service. It was a 

donation to the health district that then became the Five Hills 

Health Region, Mr. Speaker, and it’s certainly not . . . Mr. 

Speaker, the hyperbaric chamber doesn’t belong to the province 

of Saskatchewan or the Ministry of Health, and it’s certainly not 

our decision to make in terms of the future. 

 

What the member will also or should know is that that 

hyperbaric chamber is reaching the end of its life cycle, Mr. 

Speaker, and plans will need to be made on a replacement, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’re certainly a couple years away from that 

decision, Mr. Speaker. In the meantime, the hyperbaric chamber 

will continue to serve the people of Moose Jaw in the existing 

hospital. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able 

to come and answer some of these questions, but the Sask Party 

should listen to the people of Moose Jaw. They’ve very proud 

of this hyperbaric chamber. They raised money to put it there, 

and it’s the only one between Edmonton and Toronto. So it’s 

providing services outside the boundaries of our province. This 

equipment allows patients placed inside a pressurized steel 

chamber to breathe 100 per cent oxygen, and this, in treatment, 

is used for carbon monoxide poisoning, soft tissue infections, 

skin grafts, and burns. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister needs to listen to 

what the people in Moose Jaw are saying and figure out how 

this can be part of our provincial health system. Because right 

now it appears that his decisions, both on the size and services 

in the hospital and on this particular aspect, are not meeting the 

needs of that community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly we are listening to the people of Moose Jaw 

because a number of years ago the people of Moose Jaw said 

that this city needs a new hospital and, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

providing for a new $100 million hospital that will be a modern, 

state of the art facility, one of the first designed, Mr. Speaker, in 

this country using lean principles and the first in this country to 

be constructed in a lean manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly though, we are listening to the residents of Moose 

Jaw, and I’m certainly listening to my colleagues on this side of 

the House that represent the city of Moose Jaw. And they have 

indicated that this is, Mr. Speaker, an issue of concern for the 

people of Moose Jaw. 

 

But I’ll say this, Mr. Speaker. Since 1997 the hyperbaric 

chamber has provided service for just over 200 people, Mr. 

Speaker. When you look at the example of hyperbaric chambers 

across Canada and, I would dare say, across North America, 

Mr. Speaker, that sometimes they’re located within a hospital, 

oftentimes they’re not located within a hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

And when you consider that for those 220 individuals, 96 per 

cent of the time it’s been used as an outpatient procedure, Mr. 

Speaker, are there more applicable places to use this, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s what we’re looking . . . 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Lakeview. 

 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the point is that the Saskatchewan 

Party needs to listen to the people of the province. It needs to 

listen to the people in the Five Hills Health District. And it 

means that they have to look at all of the options. This 

particular service, which is provided here in Moose Jaw, is 

providing a service for Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and other 

parts of the Prairies. And so this option needs to be fully 

reconsidered by the minister. Will the minister confirm in the 

House today that he will reconsider the position of the 

department and keep the hyperbaric unit as part of the new 

hospital in Moose Jaw? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly I know that people in Moose Jaw, and in fact I 

think this government, is certainly very excited about this new 

project, Mr. Speaker. This is going to be a modern, state of the 

art facility that’s going to serve the people of Moose Jaw and 

the Five Hills Health Region for many years to come, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In fact when you look, Mr. Speaker, at the services that are 

going to be provided, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be provided 

in a different fashion than has been provided in the past, Mr. 

Speaker, by ensuring that services are pulled to the patient, 

rather than having the patient being pushed around the facility 

for services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the number of beds in the 

facility, when you look at all the acute care beds, the 

observation beds in this hospital, flex beds, as well as surgical 

beds, the facility will go from 121 beds to 115 beds, Mr. 

Speaker. And we believe that with that level of support, as well 

as support within the community, that it will serve the people 

very well for many years to come, keeping in mind that we 

don’t build hospitals the way that we did 50 years ago and 100 

years ago. Mr. Speaker, this is going to be a state of the art 

facility to serve the people for many years to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Housing Availability 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the disturbing reports keep coming about how the Sask 

Party’s ignoring the need to build affordable housing. On 

Friday the CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation] 

released the February construction numbers of new 

multi-family housing. And the numbers are grim, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Year over year Regina has seen a 70 per cent drop in 

multi-family dwellings and it’s worse in Saskatoon where it’s 

been a 91 per cent drop from February last year. And clearly the 

Sask Party’s Throne Speech commitments to build 10,000 new 

units of affordable housing, such as apartments, is off track. 

 

The CMHC says there’s a huge demand and we definitely know 

that to be true, and the vacancy rates are dangerously low in our 

cities. To the minister: why has the Sask Party failed to keep the 

housing construction on pace with demands? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

opposite should be looking at some of the other stats that we’ve 

had an opportunity to look at and to celebrate since we became 

government. We’ve had 4,988 rental units developed since we 

became government. That’s 4,988. That’s $114 million in 

investment on top of the repairs that we’re giving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also had the highest number of housing starts 

since the 1970s; that’s nearly 10,000 housing starts. And as far 

as multi-unit starts, they have quadrupled, Mr. Speaker, 

quadrupled since 2007. Mr. Speaker, we have an increased 

number of people moving in to our province and an even larger 

number of houses being built. In fact last year there was over 

9,000 houses built in this province. Mr. Speaker, that is a huge 

number and we know that we have to be working not only as a 

government but with developers and with municipalities to 

continue that trend. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, having a good year for housing 

starts is a step in the right direction, but the problem, the 

problem is if that trend doesn’t hold. CMHC says Regina saw a 

70 per cent drop from 126 new units last year to 28 this 

February. And in Saskatoon, those multi-family units went from 

173 last year to a mere 16 this February. When family 

dwellings — apartments and other multi-family units — have 

fallen, it’s a clear sign the Sask Party is just not focusing on the 

proper priorities of decent, affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan families. Their short-sighted approach doesn’t 

plan for our long-term needs. 

 

To the minister: why can’t the Sask Party make affordable 

housing a real priority and act on it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what the 

priority is for this government when it comes to housing. $344 

million is what we’re going to be investing in five years. We 

know that that’s going to create over 12,000 units and it’s going 

to help repair over 24,000 units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that within our government we’ve got 

developers. We’ve got municipalities. We’ve got meetings with 

business people that are saying, where can we . . . what we need 

now is more developed land so that we can actually put houses 

up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have 744 more family units in this province. 

We have 4,988 more rental units in the province, and we built 

nearly 10,000 units last year. Mr. Speaker, I know that the 

government cannot do it alone, so does developers, so does 

municipalities. That’s why we’re working in conjunction with 

each other and having the summits and an opportunity to speak 

together. The only people that aren’t excited about the work 

that’s being done are the nine members on the other side of the 

House. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. That includes the Minister for the 

Economy. 



2606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY 

QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 

The Speaker: — Will you please all rise for a message from 

Queen Elizabeth II, head of the Commonwealth: 

 

This year’s Commonwealth theme, ‘Opportunity through 

Enterprise’, is a celebration of our achievements, 

particularly those that may have seemed challenging, 

daunting or even impossible, which have helped to build 

strength, resilience and pride in our young people, in our 

communities and in our nations. 

 

Great achievements in human history have a number of 

common characteristics. From climbing the highest 

mountain, to winning a sporting competition, making a 

scientific breakthrough, building a successful business or 

discovering unique artistic talent — these outcomes all 

begin as a simple goal or idea in one person’s mind. 

 

We are all born with the desire to learn, to explore, to try 

new things. And each of us can think of occasions when 

we have been inspired to do something more efficiently, or 

to assist others in achieving their full potential. Yet it still 

takes courage to launch into the unknown. Ambition and 

curiosity open new avenues of opportunity. 

 

That is what lies at the heart of our Commonwealth 

approach: individuals and communities finding ways to 

strive together to create a better future that is beneficial for 

all. 

 

Our shared values of peace, democracy, development, 

justice and human rights — which are found in our new 

‘Commonwealth Charter’ — mean that we place special 

emphasis on including everyone in this goal, especially 

those who are vulnerable. 

 

I am reminded of the adage, ‘nothing ventured, nothing 

gained’. As we reflect on how the Commonwealth theme 

applies to us individually, let us think about what can be 

gained with a bold heart, dedication, and teamwork. And 

let us bear in mind the great opportunity that is offered by 

the Commonwealth — of joining with others, stronger 

together, for the common good. 

 

Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada 

 

Thank you. You may be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 86 — The Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to move second reading of a bill, Bill No. 86, The Regulatory 

Modernization and Accountability Act. As members of this 

House are aware, the Ministry of the Economy is focused on 

further improving the regulatory environment in Saskatchewan. 

When and where barriers to growth arise, as has been caused by 

duplicate or outdated regulations, we recommend and will help 

to implement the necessary steps to break them down. 

 

The Act is a product of the government and the private sector 

following extensive consultation that will make government 

accountable to report on what is being done to reduce the red 

tape being encountered by business and the citizens of our 

province. The red tape reduction initiative was first highlighted 

in the October 2010 Throne Speech. The 2011 election 

campaign included the promise of reducing red tape on 

businesses and barriers to growth by legislating red tape 

accountability measures, public reporting, and targets for red 

tape reduction. The Ministry of the Economy is working with 

other ministries and agencies to implement the initiative. 

 

This Act instructs ministries and agencies to report on the 

progress of red tape reduction and regulatory modernization 

initiatives across government to increase regulatory 

competitiveness. It will help ensure government’s regulations 

are up to date and create a more positive business climate that 

will attract outside business opportunities in investment and 

support the growth and expansion of existing businesses while 

ensuring proper protection for consumers, employees, and the 

government, and the environment. The bottom line is what we 

must make more efficient for business to do business in 

Saskatchewan and interact government to be prosperous and 

help our economy grow. 

 

Saskatchewan is one of Canada’s economic leaders, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re expecting to be among the top provinces in 

Canada for growth this year. We have the lowest 

unemployment rate in the nation. When Saskatchewan business 

people go to work, they should be able to focus on serving their 

clients and creating jobs. We are enabling this by creating a 

regulatory regime that is efficient, effective, and relevant — in 

short, business friendly. 

 

We feel this legislation is in the best interests of the current and 

future provincial economy and the people of our province. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to move The Regulatory Modernization 

and Accountability Act for second reading. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 

Economy that second reading of Bill No. 86, The Regulatory 

Modernization and Accountability Act . . . Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly . . . I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate briefly here today as it relates to Bill 

No. 86, An Act respecting Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability. 

 

Certainly I can say that the principles of building out a thriving 

small business and local economy is something that this side of 

the Assembly greatly values, and listening to those 

entrepreneurs, those businesses is something that’s important to 

this side of the Assembly. 

 

That being said, we need to make sure we’re going about our 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2607 

due diligence to fully understand what the minister has put on 

the table here today — very broad, very vague language here 

today relating to regulations in this province, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly it’s fair to say that we will be supportive of reducing 

the term “red tape,” Mr. Speaker, where it’s redundant, where 

it’s not serving a purpose of protecting people or the 

environment or its expressed purposes. 

 

But it is of concern to ensure that what this minister and what 

this government’s going about isn’t simply a very 

narrow-minded agenda of deregulation, Mr. Speaker, because of 

course regulation plays a very important role in the lives of 

Saskatchewan people in protecting their interests, protecting 

their livelihoods, protecting their lives, protecting our land, air, 

and our water, Mr. Speaker. And those are all aspects that we’re 

going to be making sure we fully understand and comprehend 

as to the true intent of this legislation and the practical 

application of the legislation that’s put forward. 

 

Certainly I can say to the entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan that 

you can count on this side of the Assembly to support changes, 

as I say, to reduce red tape where it’s, as I say, redundant or 

possibly built for a different era or a different time within our 

economy and no longer having the purpose that we need to . . . 

It doesn’t have the same purpose to our current circumstance. 

 

So I recognize the words that were utilized of being effective, 

efficient, and relevant. I guess we’ll flesh out from the minister 

in the days and weeks to come from stakeholders, what he 

means by that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I think that at the end what I didn’t hear in this presentation was 

much discussion or focus around the whole purpose of 

regulation in the first place. And that’s the role of government 

to ensure that, as I say, communities and people are properly 

protected. And we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, far too often where we 

see sort of a right wing conservative agenda of deregulation be 

implemented and the costs, the consequence are sometimes felt 

in a very tragic way in the lives of people, Mr. Speaker, lives of 

communities. 

 

And we can think of circumstances, whether it’s the protection 

of our meat and meat-packing, Mr. Speaker, we can think of the 

importance around drinking water itself or our watershed, Mr. 

Speaker. I care greatly about the impact and the concerns right 

now as it relates to the Qu’Appelle chain of lakes, Mr. Speaker, 

as one example where it would seem we have a government 

dragging its heels to address the critical challenges of the 

pollution that’s going into those lakes and those chains, Mr. 

Speaker — a very critical resource in our province, and I know 

all members should certainly care about these important 

resources. 

 

So when we’re talking about, as I say, red tape, sometimes this 

discussion gets a little too simplistic. We need to make sure we 

understand who this minister has consulted with on this front, 

Mr. Speaker. Certainly very fair stakeholders that should be 

involved in this discussion are our entrepreneurs, are our 

business community. Just the same, Mr. Speaker, we should 

ensure that we have involved in this consultation those that care 

about our environment, Mr. Speaker, and all those stakeholders, 

those that care about the rights of working people, Mr. Speaker, 

and all of those that stand up in such a strong and proud way to 

do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know I’ve met down with business stakeholders in the past 

who have shared with me circumstances of redundancy of 

regulation, Mr. Speaker. And I’d certainly be more than willing 

to support the elimination of a regulation that wasn’t achieving 

its intended purpose or that by way of a change in an industry or 

a change in technology or a change in circumstance that is 

relevant to the future is no longer needed. But I think for us to 

go down this simplistic sort of right wing notion, Mr. Speaker, 

to sort of tar all regulation as something that’s somehow not 

supportive of business, Mr. Speaker, is reckless and 

unnecessary, Mr. Speaker. I believe in building out a strong 

modern economy with a thriving small business sector, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We need to make sure that we have the full protections of 

workers and people in our land, in our air, in our water, Mr. 

Speaker. And to not be willing to look at the legitimate 

evidence that exists on all of these fronts and to make decisions 

that factor in all of the circumstances, Mr. Speaker, is 

short-sighted. And so we need to make sure what’s being 

contemplated, and now what’s being pushed forward by this 

government, reflects consultation with an entire province, 

reflects consultation with all stakeholders and will provide the 

sort of regulatory regime that will of course not be a redundant 

environment for business, Mr. Speaker, but making sure that 

it’s purposeful in the lives of Saskatchewan people in 

communities and providing the kinds of protection that it must, 

Mr. Speaker. And as a secondary consideration, we need to 

make sure that it’s certainly not cumbersome in an undue way 

to business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But of course it’s in all of our interests and certainly in the 

interests of business and entrepreneurs in our economy that we 

get right that balance of proper oversight, proper protection, 

proper regulation. And we want to watch this one, Mr. Speaker, 

carefully because as I say, we’ve seen in other environments 

with right wing governments like this one, Mr. Speaker, 

pursuing legislation that, pursuing changes that pulls out the 

important role of regulation or the important role of 

government, Mr. Speaker, in serving and protecting people and 

communities not just today but for future generations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we’ll have many questions on this front. We’ll be doing a lot 

of consultations ourself, and certainly we’re going to need more 

answers than we were provided here today, with the vague and 

broad language of the minister in introducing this bill that could 

have significant intended or unintended consequences. 

 

But at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate for 

Bill No. 86, An Act respecting Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 86, The Regulatory Modernization and 

Accountability Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



2608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 85 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Of course a period of adjustment for us all but good to 

rise today in the debate on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. 

 

And again, you know, as is often the case with the legislation 

brought forward by this government, Mr. Speaker, a great 

number of things to be drawn to attention that I’d like to discuss 

in my remarks this afternoon, and again part of a pattern with 

this government where things not campaigned on suddenly pop 

up as unwelcome surprises for the people of Saskatchewan, and 

again, Mr. Speaker, failure to recognize the lessons from the 

past. 

 

The first term of the Sask Party government of course, a kind of 

debacle we saw with the, well various pieces of labour 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, but certainly with the essential 

services and the fact that this government made such a hash of 

the legislation that they, of course, were taken to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal where Justice Ball, again you 

know, a well-respected justice in this province but somebody 

that’s got a pretty interesting perspective on the different sides 

of the legislation . . . Anyway, Justice Ball found their 

legislation to be unconstitutional. 

 

This of course followed on the heels of the International Labour 

Organization, the labour arm of the United Nations, 

condemning this government for that piece of legislation. And 

you know, these again were things that were brought forward 

with a lot of hype about how they were “fair and balanced.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess any time you hear this government talking 

about fair and balanced and labour legislation, it’s sort of like 

Colonel Sanders talking about this lovely wellness home he’s 

putting together for the chickens, and it automatically defies 

belief that it’s going to be either fair or balanced. But with this 

piece of legislation it’s, to quote Yogi Berra, “déjà vu all over 

again,” as regards the way that these members opposite 

approach labour legislation generally but working men and 

women who have availed themselves of their constitutional 

rights to organize and bargain collectively. 

 

And where did this piece of legislation come from, Mr. 

Speaker? Well it certainly didn’t come from the Sask Party 

platform. It didn’t come from the offerings in the election. But 

what we’re told, when the first round of proposals came out, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

And I guess I might add parenthetically, at least Bill 85 in front 

of us today wasn’t as bad as the initial presentation and 

proposals that would attack the Rand formula that would’ve 

brought no end of chaos into workplaces across the province 

and that in a lot of ways amounted to a pretty . . . not just a 

frontal attack on organized men and women in this province 

and the very notion of trade unionism, but the way that it was 

fronted as having arisen is that somebody had said something to 

the now Labour minister on the doorstep. And of course there is 

some rumours back and forth about this, rumours that no less a 

person in that party than the Premier said there would be no call 

for messing around with the Rand formula or the automatic 

checkoff in the campaign. 

 

But of course when it comes to things like labour legislation, 

where we know this government isn’t approaching it in a fair 

and balanced way but approaches these matters with a fair 

amount of hostility and, you know, a pursuit of an ideology that 

isn’t grounded in common sense but owes more to the right 

wing sort of nostrums that we see their cousins like Tim Hudak 

bringing forward in Ontario or the various sort of so-called 

right-to-work campaigns that have gone in the United States 

and the different sort of hijinks that we see the federal Harper 

Conservatives getting up to as regards the federal aspect of 

labour legislation, again it’s not necessarily a surprise when 

these members come forward with legislation that attacks the 

rights of working men and women. But it should be noted for 

the public, and people should pay attention to this aspect of how 

it goes. 

 

This is something that was denied in the campaign by the 

Premier and then of course advanced after the dust had settled 

and the ballots had been counted. And I guess, you know, for 

the legislation itself, it’s sort of like you go to see a terrible 

movie, and about the best thing you can say about it is that it 

wasn’t longer. I mean in terms of this legislation, we’ll see how 

things play out, again in terms of not just the legislation itself 

and the way that that is continually being analyzed and 

questions are arising, but of course what happens in terms of the 

regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you combine these things together on the 

development of public policy, you know, where did this come 

from? Well there’s certainly not a mandate for it from the 

campaign. There wasn’t a request made of the people to say, 

you know, here is something that we are running on. Here is our 

plan in terms of employment legislation, in terms of labour 

legislation in this province. And you know, people of 

Saskatchewan, what do you think? They didn’t have that 

courtesy or that forthrightness, Mr. Speaker, in the campaign, 

but of course it comes forward after the campaign. 

 

It builds upon past experience, where you’ve seen again, 

particularly with Bills 5 and 6, where the government 

stubbornly bowls ahead. And I think the member from 

Lakeview had talked about sometimes it’s like watching 

someone with not the best driving skills in the world rumble 

around on a bulldozer. And again a bulldozer’s a pretty good 

piece of equipment if you’re using it for the right thing, but if 

you’re just sort of tearing around smashing into things, not so 

much. And again, a government has a mandate to introduce 

legislation, but when it comes to labour legislation, you know, it 

seems to be the bulldozer approach more often than not, Mr. 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2609 

Speaker. 

 

In terms of the consultation process, once they’d put out their 

discussion paper, the 90-day consultation period where they 

were accepting written submissions or fax submissions or email 

submissions, not having the fortitude to go out and talk to 

people face to face throughout the province, again that draws a 

pretty bold relief in terms of whether or not legislation of this 

magnitude is being properly done. 

 

One of the great examples I recall from this, Mr. Speaker, is 

there’s simultaneously a consultation going forward on 

branding for livestock, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 12 pieces 

of labour legislation and literally hundreds of pages of labour 

law and a greater magnitude than that of regulation as well to be 

considered, you know, in 90 days, and branding I think was up 

for six, I believe it was six months. So again, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important to get the brand right. You know, I receive the point. 

But surely to goodness labour legislation deserves at least the 

same kind of consideration in terms of having an adequate 

period of time to really do that analysis and to talk to the folks 

that have expertise. 

 

And again in terms of . . . This is the legislation that governs the 

workplace. This is about people’s livelihoods. This is about 

their conditions of work, their conditions of employment. And 

if you’re going to approach that, Mr. Speaker, you’d better get 

it right. You’ve got to take the time, and you’ve got to ask the 

right questions, and you’ve got to make sure that it’s not about 

ramming something home. 

 

And again, the conclusion that is inescapable when it comes to 

the different ways that this government has approached this 

legislation is, again, not bringing it forward in the campaign, 

having a totally inadequate consultation period and process, Mr. 

Speaker. And now of course that we have the legislation in 

place, one of the sops that was thrown to try and again placate 

and to try and at least keep people at the table was the 

appointment of an advisory council and with advisors from both 

the management side of the equation, business side of the 

equation, and labour side of the equation. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And you know, again, Mr. Speaker, there was an opportunity to 

get something right. And the first thing we see with what could 

have been a vehicle to correct some of the rumbling around in 

the bulldozer that’s gone on, some of the wrongheadedness, 

some of the goodwill that has been squandered, some of the 

good faith that has been drawn into question, you know, the 

offer went out to different folks in the labour community to 

participate in the advisory council. And one of the first things 

we see as regards that body, Mr. Speaker, is when that council 

brings forward advice, it’s being completely ignored by this 

government. 

 

And of course, you know, one of the things that . . . And it’s 

well represented by a labour leader, Hugh Wagner. And again 

to speak a bit about Mr. Wagner’s credentials, Mr. Speaker, 

here’s an individual that’s Saskatchewan born and bred, well 

respected, well-educated, with a lifetime of hard work in the 

labour sector, and an individual whose voice has been sought 

out, whose opinion has been sought out by not just NDP 

governments in past, Mr. Speaker, but I would point out that 

Mr. Wagner served as the labour representative on Enterprise 

Saskatchewan for . . . well, from its inception to when it was 

unceremoniously shut down last budget. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, here’s somebody that is well known for 

the contribution, a lifetime of contribution to the province of 

Saskatchewan, someone whose credentials are impeccable and 

someone who is, you know, again it’s not just the NDP seeking 

out the opinion, but this government has as well. And so it is 

with, you know . . . The executive director is, or Hugh is the 

general secretary of the Grain Services Union. And the kind of 

role that he’s played in terms of the public life of this province, 

it’s led to him being again sought out for that advice in his past 

as a member of this advisory council. 

 

So what is the advice of Hugh Wagner and the advisory council 

in terms of the legislation? And there’s a really thoughtful 

opinion, editorial piece that ran in the Leader-Post on March 

6th, and I’d like to quote from that at length, Mr. Speaker. But 

the title is “New Sask. labour law: why the rush?” 

 

And if I could add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, you know, we 

heard last Thursday about how this government just wants to 

bull ahead and ram it home and make the legislation happen 

before the spring session concludes. And again, Mr. Speaker, if 

you’re going to be fair and balanced, if it’s not . . . if you’re 

going to be sensible and moderate and if you’re going to live up 

to the hype, you would think that when you do things like 

appoint advisory councils, you would listen to their actual 

advice. 

 

But again, judging by the remarks that we heard in the Chamber 

on Thursday and certainly the attitude of the minister, which 

has been one of bulling ahead, again they’re not alone in these 

things. These aren’t isolated incidences because of course the 

Premier himself has got a pretty interesting record in terms of 

saying one thing out on the hustings and then legislating 

something else when it comes to the labour law that is brought 

forward. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, with the labour law, they’ve already 

got one mess outstanding as regards essential services. I’d also 

add, Mr. Speaker, a mess that they said that there was no need 

for essential services legislation in the days leading up to the 

2007 election. And then the days after the 2007 election, it of 

course was brought forward. They could hardly bring it forward 

fast enough, which again, Mr. Speaker, goes to the kind of 

credibility or the kind of chicanery that we see being played in 

terms of what is campaigned on and then what is acted on in 

terms of the legislative agenda. But that piece of legislation of 

course has been fought to the Court of Appeal and is now due to 

be off to the Supreme Court. 

 

And again if past is indeed prologue, you’d think that they 

would try and fix their mess before they embarked upon 

something of this magnitude. But they haven’t, Mr. Speaker. 

And instead of fixing the mess, we see them repeating some of 

the patterns of behaviour that were evident in the labour 

legislation file from last . . . from the previous government 

session from 2007 to 2011. 

 

Anyway, it’s a good letter, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to quote 



2610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

from it at length. And again, this is somebody that’s not just . . . 

It’s not just my opinion that Hugh Wagner is somebody that 

should be listened to but it’s certainly been the opinion of past 

governments, if you can judge by appointments, as to the worth 

of the opinion of Mr. Wagner, again something that was 

reaffirmed in his appointment to this advisory council to 

oversee what’s happening with labour legislation. So March 

6th, Leader-Post, title “New Sask. labour law: why the rush?” 

 

As labour leaders, business leaders and government, we 

have a responsibility to work together to maintain a stable, 

balanced and fair work environment for all people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Not exactly . . . You’d think those were reasonable statements, 

Mr. Speaker, and certainly I think we on this side do. And it’s 

unfortunate that it’s not reflected in the actions of the 

government opposite. But fairly good counsel. To carry on in 

the quote: 

 

We have been charged to preserve the rights and freedoms 

of choice we all enjoy resulting from the solid foundation 

of labour legislation we have built together over the past 

70 years. 

 

We challenge ourselves to be thorough in our review of 

any major legislative changes so that we may reduce the 

risk of unexpected and unintended outcomes that could 

harm the livelihoods of the people we serve and the 

community we seek to enhance. 

 

Saskatchewan stands at the precipice of labour instability 

with the introduction of a sweeping and rushed overhaul of 

the province’s labour laws in Bill 85 — the new 

Saskatchewan employment Act. 

 

Bill 85 combines 12 previous workplace-related laws — 

among them, The Labour Standards Act, The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, The Health Labour 

Relations Reorganization Act, The Construction Industry 

Labour Relations Act, and The Trade Union Act. The new 

bill repeals nearly 1,000 pages of current provincial 

legislation and consolidates it into 184. In total, 33 pieces 

of legislation are repealed and/or amended — a substantial 

undertaking that, logically, should require far more public, 

labour and business input then what has been provided for 

to date. 

 

An advisory committee, comprising both business and 

organized labour representatives, was established by 

Labour Relations Minister Don Morgan to provide input 

on the changes being contemplated. What may come as a 

surprise to many was that this committee reached relative 

consensus on most issues relating to the changes. It is 

therefore even more surprising this consensus is not 

reflected in Bill 85. 

 

It raises a question: what is driving the government’s 

rushed efforts to pass Bill 85 in the spring sitting of the 

legislature? There is always a danger that . . . [far-ranging] 

legislative changes, when driven by undue haste, can 

create unplanned consequences, as seems to be the case in 

this instance. 

What is of equal concern is if the people of Saskatchewan 

understand how these changes will impact them, their 

families and their businesses. 

 

For individual workers, the balance of current legislation 

will shift dramatically in favour of employers. 

 

Under Bill 85, employers will have the discretionary 

power to limit whether employees are able to access the 

traditional two consecutive days off in a work week. 

Scheduled lunch and rest breaks may no longer be the 

common standard as employers will be able to unilaterally 

deem breaks to be unreasonable, and eight-hour work days 

could potentially be extended to 10 hours, raising the 

overtime threshold without employee consent. This 

amounts to an unwarranted erosion of individual rights in 

the workplace. 

 

For unions, businesses and governments alike, costs could 

soar as all are forced into negotiating and administrating 

multiple contracts as a result of changes to employee and 

supervisor definitions. The same would apply for health 

care, provincial institutions and the civil service, with 

taxpayers footing the bill. 

 

There are clearly mainly unknowns and much work still to 

be done to get Bill 85 to a place where it works for 

everyone. 

 

We are all part of the “Saskatchewan advantage” and the 

biggest economic boom in our province’s history. We 

have the lowest unemployment rate in the country and 

more people are moving to our province than ever before. 

 

All of this has been achieved under the current labour 

legislation — there clearly is no crisis requiring a hasty 

fix. 

 

Modernization of laws is a good thing, but it requires 

thoughtful and inclusive review and that will take time. 

 

There is no harm in taking time, but there is a worrying 

potential for real damage if passage of this legislation is 

rushed. 

 

Close the quote, Mr. Speaker. And again, that’s from Hugh 

Wagner, general secretary of the Grain Services Union and 

someone who’s made varied and valued contribution to public 

life in this province. And again I would point out that that 

contribution has been made under governments of different 

stripes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, given that there was no advance notice of this 

legislation in the election in the campaign, given the dubious 

way that the consultation process has taken place to date, given 

the questions that are outstanding as to the implication of this 

legislation, given the sweeping scope of this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Wagner’s remarks, we, as legislators in this 

Chamber, would do well to heed them. We’d do well to listen to 

them. 

 

And if this government is not listening to what I think is the 

very level-headed and common sense advice being offered in 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2611 

this case by Mr. Wagner from the Grain Services Union — 

again someone that’s been appointed to the government’s own 

advisory committee on this labour legislation — if the 

government is going to live up to the sense of, the talk about 

how this is going to be fair and balanced labour legislation, if 

they’re concerned about both sides of that labour-management 

equation and not just an attack on labour rights and labour 

practice in this province, Mr. Speaker, if they’ve got an interest 

in something that works for everybody and not just for a few or 

for their friends and insiders on the other side of the coin, Mr. 

Speaker, they would do well to listen to the advice being 

offered in this letter from Mr. Wagner to the Leader-Post. 

 

What is also interesting, Mr. Speaker, the different sort of work 

that has been done to marshal a response. I would commend my 

colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, the Labour critic 

for the official opposition, and the work that he had done to get 

out around the province throughout the summer and into the fall 

in terms of giving people an opportunity to voice their opinion 

of the then proposals. And again I want to commend the work 

he had done, the work that staff had done to do what is essential 

for opposition or for any legislators to do, Mr. Speaker, which 

is give people that opportunity to voice their concerns, give 

people an opportunity to voice their ideas. 

 

And there wasn’t that same sort of opportunity afforded the 

people under the process put forward by members opposite. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So again, you do what you can, but we’re going to be 

wondering when it is that this government learns the lesson and, 

if they’re going to talk about being fair and balanced and 

involving both sides, when they’re going to live up to those 

words, Mr. Speaker? 

 

If they’re going to talk about seeking advice and appointing 

people to do that good work and to provide that expert opinion 

and those informed opinions, Mr. Speaker, if you’re not just 

going to waste their time, Mr. Speaker, then there is some onus 

on seeking that advice, on listening to that advice. That that is 

not being done, again, goes back to the kind of railroad that we 

fear that this piece of legislation represents. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this movie before. We’ve 

seen the kind of wrong-headed and, as it turns out, 

unconstitutional approach to labour legislation that this 

government has brought. And if they have any interest in what 

the working men and women have to think . . . And again that’s 

one thing the current minister I commend him for is, you know, 

he gets out across to speak to different labour groups. I believe 

he spoke at the CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] 

Saskatchewan convention last Thursday. And I guess if you’re 

going to go to those things, maybe listen to what people have to 

say, maybe actually take that into account. 

 

And again if it’s not just some kind of shallow charm offensive, 

if it’s more than that, Mr. Speaker, then that genuine listening, 

that genuine engagement shows up in pieces of legislation like 

Bill No. 85 or in a genuinely respectful, thoughtful process. But 

we don’t see any evidence of that, Mr. Speaker. What we see is 

a continued-on-way, a carried-on approach of ramming it home 

and driving a railroad on these particular pieces of legislation. 

And again if we’re going to bring people together, if we’re 

going to really realize the potential of this province, if we’re 

going to ensure that benefit is there for all and not just for the 

few, there is in fact that balance that needs to be brought in in 

legislation. And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we just want 

them to do what they said they were going do on the hustings. 

We want them to, if they said they’re going to be fair and 

balanced, then we want to see them live up to that. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the consultation and in 

terms of the legislation itself and in terms of the myriad of 

questions as to how this all works out that need to be not just 

asked but answered, these are things that continue to give us 

concern in terms of whether or not this is a decent piece of 

public policy or a decent piece of legislation or if it’s just the 

continuation of the same old Sask Party attack on working 

people in this province. 

 

And I guess if that’s in fact the case, Mr. Speaker, or if they’re 

going to seek to divide people, if they’re going to seek to mess 

around with the general terms that govern people’s workplaces, 

if they’re going to jack around with the basic conditions of 

employment, they should be upfront about that. If they’re not 

going to be fair and balanced, then they should say, yes, labour 

we’ve got you squarely in our sights. We don’t like unions. 

We’re going to break you at every turn and, you know, expect 

nothing less. And at least then it would have the sort of virtue of 

honesty, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you know, maybe it saves 

some of the guff that passes for public opinions but at least 

then, you know, everybody’d know where they stood. At least 

then you wouldn’t be wasting people’s time, and they could 

make their own decisions as to how they wanted to respond. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, you know, it seems to be part of this 

ongoing sideways approach to labour legislation in this 

province, this sideways attack on the rights of working men and 

women that, again, it’s almost like if you hear them saying that 

it’s going to be fair and balanced, you know, the advice is, 

check your wallet because it’s bound to be anything but. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we think this is . . . You know, not just 

the content of the legislation but the process in terms of the 

unanswered questions that remain, in terms of what may or may 

not show up in regulation, and again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

there’s no mandate for this coming from that election. 

 

And again, if they’re going to embark on something like this, 

they should go to the people and say, guess what? We hate 

labour, and we’re going to seek to break unions. You know, 

that’d be great. That’d be kind of refreshing. But we don’t get 

that. Instead we get these sideways Acts where people’s 

livelihoods are screwed around with, where the province winds 

up being taken through the different levels of court, and we’ll 

see how the Supreme Court action works out. But that’s no way 

to govern a province, Mr. Speaker, and it’s no way to bring 

forward public policy that is legitimate, that actually improves 

the lives of the great many instead of a select few of friends and 

insiders. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you’re going to, you know, 

preach fair and balanced in the temple, you should live it on the 

street. You should act it in the legislation. Would but that was 

the case, but instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you hear them 



2612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

talking about fair and balanced, and it’s almost like something 

else is coming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve got more remarks to make, but I’d 

draw your attention to my colleague from Athabasca. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As an 

Aboriginal MLA, I often speak and highlight some of these 

successful Aboriginal people we have throughout our province, 

whether they’re First Nations, Inuit, or Métis. And it’s always 

comforting to know as an MLA that there’s these highly skilled 

individuals that are out there. And there are many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to point out that I’m very proud of them and 

encourage many of the younger children and youth in our 

communities to go forward and seek an education and to 

become a very productive, proud citizen of whether it’s your 

band or whether it’s your local or whether it is your community 

and family. We have such an individual that is visiting us here 

today and sitting in your gallery. 

 

I’d like to introduce Carl Swenson. Carl is from Saskatoon. 

He’s with the Aboriginal Law Group. And he’s an in-house 

lawyer, and he’s working on residential school claims through 

the independent assessment process. But Carl grew up in Prince 

Albert and, as you can see, he has a great amount of support 

from his family. 

 

And I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome Mr. 

Swenson here today and to also indicate to him that I’m very 

proud of his accomplishments as an Aboriginal lawyer. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

So to recap from where I had left off to cede the floor to my 

colleague to allow the introduction, with Bill 85 you see a 

government, instead of learning from mistakes they had made 

in the past in course correcting or maybe thinking that, you 

know . . . Perhaps if you’re going to say it’s going to be fair and 

balanced, it should actually be fair and balanced. And it 

shouldn’t be like a Fox News sort of fair and balanced, but it 

should actually be legitimately fair and balanced. And that it 

shouldn’t seek to further divide people in this province, but 

maybe there’s a way to bring people together. 

 

And maybe there’s a way that the current legislation has been 

part of the success of the economy to date, but we don’t see 

that, Mr. Speaker. Instead we see less than a genuine request for 

consultation, inadequate process. And again the main thing to 

keep in mind here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that if it was all 

about process that would be one thing, but this is how you 

govern people’s workplaces: you govern their employment. 

You take care of how they earn the bread to put on the table and 

to keep the bills paid and keep the lights on in their homes and 

to be able to put aside the money to educate their kids and to 

live something, a good life that we think here in Saskatchewan 

should be there for the great many and not just for a lucky few. 

And again, you know, people working an honest day’s labour, 

you know, should be receiving that honest day’s wage. 

 

It’s not too much, it shouldn’t be too much to ask for this 

government to live up to its words in terms of when I say it’s 

going to be fair and balanced. It’s not too much to ask of this 

government to say that if you’re going to deal with legislation 

that is so fundamental and so sweeping and so important to 

people’s lives that the time is taken to get it right. And if those 

are seriously your intentions, if those are seriously your 

motivations in approaching labour legislation, then that would 

be the hallmark of your approach: genuine consultation, an 

adequate process, and maybe, you know, God forbid, a 

penchant to listen to what people are saying when you appoint 

them to advisory councils.  

 

But we’re not seeing that in this legislation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We’re seeing a government bull ahead in a way that is 

somewhat concerning given the seriousness of this legislation 

being involved. You know, it’s 70-odd years since The Trade 

Union Act was introduced in Saskatchewan — one of the first, 

most comprehensive pieces of labour legislation in North 

America as regards comprehensive trade union Acts. And there 

have been lots of ups and downs in terms of the labour history 

of this province, but a lot of firsts and a lot of proud things as 

well. 

 

I think of the work that was done in the ’70s around 

occupational health and safety, and again the way that 

Saskatchewan led the nation and led in North America; the 

good work of people like Bob Sass, who’s very much connected 

to the late Howard Willems who we discussed here this very 

day. And in those different pieces of legislation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and in those different initiatives, we saw 

Saskatchewan leading the nation and leading the continent in 

terms of making improvements to the working lives of men and 

women in this province. And you know, it wasn’t a government 

acting by itself; it was a government acting in consultation and 

in genuine engagement with the broader community. You 

know, would that . . . Too bad that that is not the case in this 

regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again it’s not like there isn’t the opportunity to do that 

engagement, there isn’t ample opportunity for this government 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2613 

to get it right instead of following down the same path, as I’ve 

said, has seen Saskatchewan taken to court and now, you know, 

all the way to the Supreme Court. But again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

sign of a government that doesn’t want to listen, that is 

stubborn, that refuses to admit mistakes but instead doubles 

down on them or compounds them. And we see that in this 

piece of legislation in spades. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues 

have pieces of legislation they’d like to discuss. So to wrap up 

my comments, in so many different ways you see a government 

that isn’t listening. You see a government that when they 

proclaim it to be fair and balanced, it means something entirely 

different. You see a government that is taking a lot of . . . is 

approaching hard-won labour rights and practice in the province 

of Saskatchewan in a very, at best, cavalier way and, at worst, a 

very hostile way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the province is 

poorly served by that. 

 

This province is best served when you have people coming 

together to, as the motto reads, from those many peoples 

bringing us strength. But when you see something that seeks to 

divide and seeks to pit one side of the point against the other 

and seeks to make imbalance and unfairness, it’s a 

wrong-headed approach and one that we do not agree with in 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. So with that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 85, 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s a great pleasure today to rise to speak to this bill. 

 

Information Services Corporation is a very important Crown 

corporation that was established in the early 2000s to deal with 

the electronification  of the records in our land titles registry. 

That was its primary purpose when it was first created. And as 

we know, at the time the view of the government of the day was 

not only to modernize the land titles registry but also to take the 

extra step to modernize the land surveys registry, which this 

new corporation did. And as well, they added a number of other 

important registries over the last few years to be included in this 

corporation. 

As the name suggests, information services, that’s what it 

provides, is services relating to information. Obviously land 

titles is nothing more than data and records of the history of our 

province through land titles, the same with the land surveys and 

also all the geodata that the corporation has amassed in its 

hard-to-believe 13 years of existence already, Mr. Speaker. So 

that’s a significant accomplishment, and I think this corporation 

is really an unsung hero in our stable of Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The name itself is kind of uninformative. Although it’s about 

information, when you say ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] to most people in Saskatchewan, 

they go, what? They don’t really understand what it is. And I 

think that’s one of the sad things about this corporation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is that a lot of people don’t really realize the 

important function it serves and it ties to our history. And I’m 

going to be talking about that a little bit today. 

 

Information Services Corporation is a proud Crown. I think it’s 

one that we can really hold out as an important Crown in our 

stable of Crowns. And it’s this bill, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 

is destroying what has been built over the last 13 years in terms 

of a solid, reliable, profitable, and properly public corporation. 

And this government’s attempt to privatize it is one that’s 

backwards. I think it’s ill-advised and it’s just really 

disappointing and disheartening to see the agenda of 

privatization strike out at this particular Crown corporation. It’s 

not the right time and in fact probably should never be 

privatized because of the nature of the information and the 

history that this corporation is the inheritor of. 

 

So to just go back a little bit before Information Services 

Corporation came into being, we need to take a bit of a look 

back at how the land titles system in Saskatchewan evolved, 

and the land survey system. I mean this is a very, very 

important part of our history and I would recommend for 

anyone that is interested in knowing a little bit more about the 

original land surveys when they started out in . . . I think 1871 

was the first survey in Saskatchewan. The second survey was in 

1881, I believe, and the third survey. So Saskatchewan was 

done in three waves. 

 

We have 555 rural municipalities or more, maybe 600, that 

were surveyed by these intrepid people when they came out 

back over 100 years ago. And the book I read recently about 

this is one by a Regina author whose name is Garry Wilson — 

happens to be my dad’s first cousin — but he wrote a book 

called . . . Oh, the name’s going to escape me at the moment but 

it will come to me. And in this book he really wrote about the 

history of Saskatchewan from about 1850 to around 1900. It 

was an exciting time on the prairies. And the first Dominion 

Land Survey was part of that, as was the arrival of the North 

West Mounted Police in this area which was known as the 

North-West Territories at those times. It’s also the time in our 

history when the numbered treaties were signed with the First 

Nations, all around at the same time. And I believe Treaty 1 

was signed in 1871, and that’s the year of the first Dominion 

Land Survey. 

 

So the story that he tells in the book is of these surveyors. They 

were incredibly organized and skilled people, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They had all the plans and supplies they needed to get 



2614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

them through a harsh winter in the prairies, and certainly 

through all the plagues of prairie fires and, you know, blizzards, 

all the weather hazards that were present in those days which 

continue to this day of course. 

 

And these surveyors were in fact so organized that in his book, 

Garry Wilson describes their organizational skills as that which 

actually saved the North West Mounted Police who were not 

quite as organized and, in fact, horribly organized according to 

the book, where they were short on food, short on horses, short 

on supplies. And if it wasn’t for the supplies that had been 

prepared by the Dominion Land Survey, I think the North West 

Mounted Police story would be quite a different story to this 

day. 

 

So we start out with the treaties being signed. We have a vast 

tract of land known as the North-West Territories which was 

established by I think it was King . . . It was in 1670 when the 

first charter for the Hudson’s Bay Company was established 

and that was the area that they were given the rights to treat in 

and trade in. So by the time settlement was coming, they knew 

that it was important to have these land surveys done, and the 

whole goal of the land surveys was to provide for orderly 

settlement of the dominion lands in the prairies. 

 

We had the treaties being signed because I think the 

government of the day obviously recognized that orderly 

settlement would include treating with the First Nations and so 

that’s a proud part of our history. I think when we actually had 

the treaties signed, I won’t get into the subsequent treatment of 

the treaties in the years following, but certainly at the time of 

the treaty commission in the 1870s when Treaty Commissioner 

Morris came out and entered into solemn treaties with the First 

Nations, this was an important part of our history and one that is 

still considered sacred by many First Nations. And those of us 

who are from European heritage, it also is our treaty as well. 

And the Dominion Land Survey then was in a place to take 

place. 

 

And you may hear of people talking about the Torrens system 

and that’s the system of land survey that was established in 

Saskatchewan. And there was a fellow named Mr. Torrens from 

Australia actually and it was his brainchild that we should have 

this orderly system of land as we do these surveys. So what they 

chose to do was establish townships which are 36 square miles, 

so 6 miles by 6 miles, and as the refinement from the first 

survey to the second survey took place, there was the 

establishment of road allowances which many of us are familiar 

with in the farming communities where there is a grid, a 

rectilinear grid that establishes that every quarter section in 

Saskatchewan would have access to a public road allowance, 

usually about 66 feet wide. And that, if you’ve ever driven on a 

gravel road in Saskatchewan or many of our highways as well, 

but most of our gravel road grids are based on that township 

arrangement with the road allowances. 

 

So it really was a remarkably significant time in our history. 

And part of what the dominion land surveyors did is they 

actually physically took these . . . They had hip chains, they had 

their chains and they would go out and measure the land and 

put in stakes. And many of those stakes are still in the ground. 

In fact, it’s illegal to remove a surveyor’s pin to this date. And 

one of the things I enjoyed the most in my former career as a 

Crown counsel for the federal government was I had to do a lot 

of research into those original township plans because I was 

involved with interpreting the subsequent Indian reserves that 

were surveyed at about the same time. 

 

And those maps and those records, those township plans, are an 

amazing record of history and of the geography of the day. So 

you can see all the little potholes that existed, the water. They 

would describe the hills and the type of terrain, and they’re 

actually written in text on the dominion . . . on the township 

surveys themselves. And because of Information Services 

Corporation, you or me or anyone sitting in their own homes 

can actually sign up online and order up these grants and have a 

look at them. And they really are fascinating pieces of our 

history. 

 

So we have our original township grants. Then we have the 

actual land patents that were issued to people like my 

grandfather in 1909 who came out west from Nova Scotia 

looking for a better life. And those patents were issued to him, 

and then he was able to take his land patent, and once he proved 

up his 160 acres, he could get his first homestead grant. And 

those grants are another incredibly significant part of the history 

of this province. And our family had a proud moment in 2009 

when we received the 100-year family farm certificate from 

Information Services Corporation, and we all got a copy of the 

original land grant that my grandfather received when he 

proved his homestead. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the function and purpose 

of the land titles offices is an integral part of the history of our 

province, and it also is an integral part of our function of 

government. And this is one of the things I think that’s most 

important when you look at Information Services Corporation 

is, what is its function? Although it became a Crown 

corporation, it inherited the rich history of every one of our 

dominion land offices. I believe there was at least maybe even 

16 originally. And these offices were the place where the 

original settlers went. And they came from all over North 

America, Europe, and they came to be part of our Saskatchewan 

history. 

 

And one of the things they have at Information Services 

Corporation, if you’re ever over at their offices, is they have 

Gabriel Dumont’s original land grant. And they show . . . It’s 

framed and it’s hanging there, as I think Mr. Diefenbaker’s 

original land grant. 

 

So these are, for me, important ties to the past. And we know 

what happens when people forget their past. They often say 

history repeats itself. So we want to make sure that these types 

of documents, this part of our history . . . And you could 

actually go to . . . All those paper documents are still retained, 

and they’re in storage. And they’re all here in Regina in one 

large warehouse. And as the electrification — not 

electrification, the creating of electronic records — proceeds 

with all of these documents, they eventually will be converted 

to an electronic record as well, but you don’t always get the 

same quality with the electronic record as you do with the 

original document. And quite often the scanner doesn’t pick up 

on all the nuances, for example Gabriel Dumont’s original 

survey of his township. And his patent was a river lot. 

 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2615 

And that’s another important part of our history at St. Laurent 

and at One Arrow and Batoche — all those Métis people 

received 160 acres, but those were river lots because in those 

days the river was still an incredibly important route for 

transportation. And that’s another part of our history that’s 

protected by this public institution that we now call Information 

Services Corporation. 

 

So it’s those types of things, I think, that we tend to forget when 

we rush into privatizing Crown corporations, and we see that 

with the agenda of this particular government. And I guess 

that’s something that is disheartening, as I said earlier. And it’s 

of grave concern to the people of Saskatchewan who recognize 

the importance of public registries and the important function 

and role that they play. 

 

The second piece that I think is very protected by the public 

nature of this registry is our land surveys. And again as we have 

the whole series of land titles and as you do search, you see the 

history of each parcel of land that’s been owned. You can also 

see the stories of towns and communities. And in fact the 

community that I live in, Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, was part of 

the Temperance Colony that first came when John Lake came to 

Saskatoon and met with Chief Whitecap of the Dakota Sioux. 

And Chief Whitecap assisted him in settling there. They created 

the Temperance Colony, and that is exactly where my home is 

located now in Saskatoon. 

 

And I was able to do a historical search and find every owner of 

my home back to the day when the original township plan went 

through and the 36 square miles were created. And I can see . . . 

And I have the file at home that tells me. And I could certainly 

do that online. When I first did the search, I had to do it by 

paper. 

 

So the benefits and advantages of having this done in the 

electronic format — it’s now accessible through the Internet — 

is an incredible, incredible achievement. And I think 

Information Services Corporation needs to be commended for 

all the work that was done in the beginning and certainly the 

work they’ve done over the years. Not only is that a great 

service to the public in terms of the history of our province, but 

the second piece that’s going to be missing if this bill goes 

through is that this corporation has been returning significant 

returns back to the public purse. 

 

So we know it took a lot to get it established, but over the years 

the amount of money that this company has returned back to the 

people of Saskatchewan is significant. And to just privatize that 

is something that I think is a shame and it’s short-circuiting or 

shortchanging the people of Saskatchewan because they deserve 

to benefit from this public registry. It was created by public 

dollars. And the earlier establishment of land title offices, it was 

all on public dollars. And all of a sudden the benefit of that is 

going to be sold off to shareholders. And I’m not sure it’s even 

going to be valued properly because that kind of information 

wouldn’t even be taken into account by the bean-counters when 

they’re putting a dollar value on this company. 

 

[15:30] 

 

We understand that this Crown made $17.2 million in profit, I 

think, in 2011, and of that money, a $15.5 million dividend was 

paid back to taxpayers. So it’s really giving us over $1 million a 

month right now in terms of the profits. And this is something 

that this government is turning its nose up at. They say it’s not 

necessary, and they figure that it’s more important . . . And I’ll 

look in a minute at the preamble in the new bill that outlines 

their philosophical agenda here. And they just figure that that’s 

not good enough for the people of Saskatchewan and somehow 

only private individuals should be able to benefit from that. 

 

I will speak to the bill itself right now and maybe go through a 

few of the clauses that we find in the bill. So the first thing — 

and this is something I think my colleague has also pointed out, 

from Regina Lakeview — is that the use of the preamble in 

legislation is an important flag by any government because it’s 

not used very often. So when governments do this, there’s a 

special message that they want to send out to the people. And so 

this bill has a preamble in it, which is in and of itself somewhat 

unusual. 

 

So the first statement in here is one that I’m not sure where this 

government got this idea because I don’t agree with it. It says 

it’s “. . . desirable and in the public interest that voting shares of 

Information Services Corporation be offered for sale to 

members of the public.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I would disagree 

wholeheartedly with that statement. It is not in the public 

interest to offer sale of this corporation to individual members 

of the public. It is not in the public interest to turn down over $1 

million a month to the general revenues of this province to help 

with important programs that this government should be 

focusing on. And it’s simply short-sighted, and I think an 

ideological approach to privatization that doesn’t make sense 

for this particular corporation. I don’t think it’s been thought 

through carefully. And certainly the minister’s agenda, he 

hasn’t been very vocal or articulate on it; he hasn’t been clear 

why he thinks this is in the public interest. 

 

It goes on to say that it’s desirable and in the public interest that 

the government and the corporation enter into an agreement to 

allow this corporation to continue as a provider of the functions 

of the registry. And there’s a few caveats that the preamble 

insists on which are appropriate, the integrity of the registries 

and the rights and protections be carried on, they’re not going to 

be adversely affected by the sale of the voting shares. Whether 

or not that’s possible when you privatize a company, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think remains to be seen. So certainly the 

intent of clause (a) of the preamble appears to be on the right 

track. But unfortunately, I think, we will see what history has to 

say about whether or not it’s achievable. 

 

Secondly, the decisions of ISC with respect to the registry 

activities and functions would continue to be subject to 

government policy, direction, and review — again a noble 

intent. But again, when you have privatized something, you lose 

a lot of control. And although it’s easy to say, I think it’s going 

to be harder to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And certainly we in the 

opposition will be holding the government to account to ensure 

that this information and these public registries are protected 

despite the fact that it’s being privatized. 

 

There is an interesting part in clause (c) where the government 

will continue to own the information. So I don’t understand 

how you can sell something and still own it. So there’s a little 

bit of explaining to be done there, and we’ll continue to watch 



2616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

how the government intends to own records and data when 

they’ve actually privatized the company. 

 

And finally “that the Government of Saskatchewan will 

continue to operate the vital statistics registry.” Vital statistics is 

of course one of the registries that Information Services 

Corporation has taken on, and it’s absolutely essential that these 

remain in the public. So if the Government of Saskatchewan’s 

going to continue to operate that, that makes sense. What 

doesn’t make sense is why the government would continue to 

operate one small part of this company and not all of it because 

they’re just creating more work and division, where the original 

intent of the company was that indeed it would deal with all 

these registries because on economies of scale and efficiencies 

it made sense. This does not make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the preamble goes on, and it says again — so I think the 

emphasis is trying to make us believe that this is good — again 

it’s desirable and in the public interest, that the sale of the 

shares will protect the public interest while promoting the 

successful operation of an independent company. Again the 

logic of that escapes me. I don’t know how, when you sell 

something to private people, you can protect the public interest. 

 

So we’ll look to the minister to explain that or perhaps maybe 

the head of Information Services Corporation could give us a 

little more information on how that might actually look 

because, to me, when you sell something to somebody 

privately, it’s hard to protect the public interest. It’s contrary to 

itself. 

 

The Act then goes into the first part which is some preliminary 

matters. There’s a number of definitions. One of interest of 

course is the idea of golden share. So we don’t really have a 

classic privatization here where a company is sold. And again 

this is a weird hybrid that this government is establishing here 

where they’re creating something called the golden share which 

the private purchasers won’t have any ability to share in. It’s a 

special share that would have a lot of veto powers. This is the 

share that the government’s retaining. And this golden share 

will do a number of things which I think in the terms of 

protecting the public interest are appropriate. Whether it’s 

appropriate in terms of privatizing a company again, I’m not 

sure it makes sense but they will veto. 

 

The veto that the golden share carries with it is “a transfer of 

ISC’s registered office to a jurisdiction outside of 

Saskatchewan.” So it protects the head office of ISC. The 

second thing that it does is provides a veto for the transfer of 

any of ISC’s head office operations outside of Saskatchewan, so 

none of the registered offices or their operations can be moved 

outside of Saskatchewan. And the third thing that’s prohibited 

or vetoed under the golden share is the sale or lease or exchange 

of ISC’s property. And ISC does have a substantial amount of 

property in terms of its offices here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And the fourth part, or the second part of the golden share 

clause is something that says it’s “carrying the right of the 

holder of that share to vote, by separate vote as a class, on any 

proposal: to apply for continuance in a jurisdiction outside 

Saskatchewan; or amend the articles.” So basically it makes 

sure that again the company itself won’t be moved outside of 

Saskatchewan and that the articles can’t be amended. The 

articles of the company can’t be amended without the consent 

of the golden shareholder. 

 

There’s a number of other definitions that I won’t go into today, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s a number of rules that are 

established in section 3, in section 4. And these are the rules 

about affiliates, controls, and votes. And then rule 4 is about 

associates. Pardon me, section 4 is rules regarding associates. 

And then the part II gets into the actual structure of the 

company. 

 

So what happens here is that ISC in section 5 is removed from 

The Crown Corporations Act, and it just becomes an ordinary 

business corporation. Of course this ordinary business 

corporation, which is the normal route of privatization, is not 

ordinary because there are a number of other clauses in here 

that overrule The Business Corporations Act. 

 

So despite the fact it’s been continued as a company, a regular 

company under The Business Corporations Act, there’s all 

kinds of strings attached here within the bill and that’s the way 

this government is distinguishing its sale from the ordinary 

privatization that would occur. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, these were the things that were explained 

to us in the minister’s comments when he introduced the bill, 

and we are waiting to see what kind of take-up he’s going to 

have because it’s difficult to understand what the values of 

these shares are going to be and certainly what the uptake is 

going to be by the members of the public. 

 

Now there’s just a few other points about this bill that I think 

need to be raised at this point. First of all is the record of the 

Sask Party on privatization. And we have a number of promises 

again that were made that aren’t being kept. We know that this 

government . . . Well you look at the 2003 election, when there 

was promises made regarding privatization that have now been 

broken, basically. 

 

Let’s look at what happened during the Throne Speech for 

example, Mr. Speaker. There wasn’t a single word mentioned 

about this company either in the election of 2011 or in the 

Throne Speech of 2011 or 2012. Well this bill was introduced 

already. So the problem is that this government — and we’ve 

seen it over and over again — is a government of hoisting 

surprises on the public. You would think that if there’s 

something as important as a privatization of a Crown on their 

agenda that this government would have at least given the 

public notice during the election itself or even during the 

Throne Speech. 

 

So the hidden agenda is clearly there, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

the way this government operates, is by stealth. We see the 

Premier just dangling this thought to the media, and then we 

hear through the media that the legislation was already drafted 

before any members of the public or certainly the members of 

this Assembly had any opportunity to comment on the notion 

itself. This is a surprise, and this is certainly not what the people 

of Saskatchewan voted for. 

 

We have a government that’s selling a Crown that turns in over 

$1 million a month to the public purse. This is a government 

who’s having trouble managing the money that they are 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2617 

receiving. They’re introducing — again last Friday, big surprise 

— a bunch of new fees that are being introduced to increase the 

costs for farmers and business people in this province. Another 

$8 million is being gouged out of the pockets of farmers in the 

community pastures, the Saskatchewan community pastures. 

And also the lease fees that farmers are paying are being 

increased significantly. I’m hearing already from people out in 

the rural areas about their concerns about these fees. And then 

— surprise — there’s a bunch more fees for people wanting to 

register a prospectus with the Securities Commission. We see a 

government that’s desperately looking for cash, and yet what 

are they doing? They’re selling off a Crown corporation that 

provided $15 million and more in 2011. And we’ll see what the 

dividend was, Mr. Speaker, in 2012 once it comes out. 

 

This is just not smart growth, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately 

the privatization agenda seems to be rearing its ugly head over 

and over again. And this is sort of the most egregious example 

of it since this government came into power. But as I said 

earlier, this is not something that this government was 

promising. 

 

There is a quote that I want to find; I think it’s from 2007. This 

is the current Premier of this province, in 2007 when asked by 

the media, the quote says, and this is in a media scrum, August 

21, 2007. The question to the Premier was, would you be 

willing to support the sell-off of some aspects of Crown 

ownership? And this Premier’s response was no. The Premier 

said, “We have said they’re not for sale.” That’s a quote. “We 

have said they’re not for sale, that they won’t be privatized, and 

that’s exactly what we mean.” So, Mr. Speaker, I wish 

somebody could explain to me how this quote from the Premier 

from 2007 translates into the sale of Information Services 

Corporation. It does not fit. It is not what this Premier promised 

to the people of Saskatchewan. He’s turning his back on them. 

He’s doing it by surprise, and he did not let the people of 

Saskatchewan know in the election campaign. He deliberately 

did not talk about this, and in 2007 he clearly indicated that they 

were not for sale. 

 

So what does that mean, Mr. Speaker, when we have a Premier 

who says one thing and does something else? We saw it in 

question period today where he was asked about why he was 

doing certain things he’s doing. He refused to answer the 

questions, and he chose to not take the responsibility of giving 

the people of Saskatchewan his true views. And this is just 

another example of that. And I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are starting to figure it out, and they’re 

concerned. We are hearing about that. 

 

We know that once it’s privatized, ISC . . . Now we see, I know 

the minister has often talked about what’s going on in other 

provinces. What he neglects to point out is that in BC [British 

Columbia] where there is a corporation running, independent 

corporation running the land titles, it’s a not-for-profit 

corporation, Mr. Speaker. It’s still one that’s owned by . . . Or 

it’s not a shareholder-based corporation. It’s a completely 

different entity with a different purpose, so that doesn’t equate 

when he talks about BC. 

 

In Ontario it is privatized to a certain extent, not in the same 

way as this proposal is at all, though. It’s a different beast, and I 

don’t think it’s comparable. So we just need to look about 

what’s right for the people of Saskatchewan, and I think that the 

track record that we’ve seen from the land titles systems, the 

way the land registries are set up, and even all the GIS 

[geographic information system] work that’s been done since 

Information Services Corporation came into being. 

 

[15:45] 

 

You know, I was fortunate in 2003, as part of my practice with 

the Government of Canada, to be seconded to Information 

Services Corporation as a Crown land expert. And one of the 

things I think people don’t realize with Information Services 

Corporation, not only is it the recipient and the depository for 

privately held interests. It is also, the registrar of Information 

Services Corporation is also responsible for abstract directory. 

The abstract directory is that directory where all of the 

government’s land is registered. Federal government and 

provincial government lands that have never been patented, 

there’s never been titles raised — the registrar for Information 

Services Corporation is now responsible for those lands or for 

the registration and the records relating to those lands. 

 

And this is something that I have no idea why it would be 

appropriate for a privately-owned company to manage the 

records of the Government of Canada and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. This is just not a function, I think, that a registry 

should even be privatized, and certainly this directory of 

abstract lands is something that, I think, the government needs 

to look at. The government needs to look at their own holdings, 

particularly Agriculture which has a lot of Crown land, 

Environment has a lot of Crown land, and all the northern 

administration district. All of those lands are lands that the 

government’s responsible for. And to turn the registry over, the 

directory over to a privately-held interest of Information 

Services Corporation is simply not in the best interests of the 

public lands that this government is responsible for. 

 

So that’s just another reason why I think this hasn’t been 

carefully thought through. We don’t see anything in the bill that 

identifies what’s going to happen to the abstract registry . . . 

sorry, the abstract directory. I have to get the words right. It’s 

the abstract directory, and whether or not the registrar will still 

continue to exist and serve the functions that they did. I know 

that the registrar of land titles was always a very important 

position in the public service, and again to lose that position and 

see it become corporatized, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

something that needs serious examination. And certainly I think 

once we get this bill to committee, those are the kinds of 

questions that we’re going to have to ask because it doesn’t 

appear this government has thought about them at all. 

 

So again the history that this corporation is responsible for 

maintaining, the fact that this corporation has been highly 

successful and turned a great rate of profit to the people of 

Saskatchewan, the fact that this government promised in 2007 

that it was not going to privatize, and yet we see them go back 

on that promise, we see them sneak this into the legislative 

agenda without raising it through the Throne Speech process or 

even in the election process. It should have been one of their 

planks in their platform so the people knew what was coming. 

But no, it was a surprise on us last October, and through the 

media and through a leak, I mean, the bill was already drafted 

before the review of the asset was completed. And this minister 



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

obviously had an agenda that was well under way before any of 

the things he said he was looking at. 

 

So I think people have cause to be concerned. And I think we 

have a lot of questions that we’re going to want to ask once we 

get an opportunity to sit with the minister and his staff and the 

people from ISC in committee. And I was looking forward to 

being able to do that as critic for this portfolio, but my 

colleagues will, my colleague from Regina Lakeview is now 

going to be responsible for this. So I will look forward to his 

questions that the minister will be . . . or that he will be asking 

the ministers at that time. 

 

At this point, Mr. Deputy Minister, I think we are now prepared 

to move this bill to committee, and I would propose that that’s 

what we do. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure that 

Bill No. 69, the information services Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It’s carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 

committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 48 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

on debate on Bill No. 48, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012, definitely is an 

interesting bill coming before the House. And it’s amending, I 

guess, provisions and it’s to do with the, I think, jurisdiction of 

federal-provincial boundary. 

 

And I think some of the provinces now, the federal government 

has turned over . . . Instead of having duplicate services and 

using resources in two ways, I think government’s trying to find 

a way where provinces meet the requirements or meet the 

conditions that the federal government has put out. They will 

turn the jurisdiction of monitoring, and this is what I think it is, 

of monitoring, ensuring the reduction, certain targets that the 

federal government had wanted. 

And you know, when you look at this bill, and I guess 

everything will have to come out in the end, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Clearly there is provision here — and this is what the 

provincial government is asking for in this Legislative 

Assembly — to amend the Act, to be able to take on the ruling 

and I guess the provision for monitoring greenhouse gases in 

the province where they would have the jurisdiction turning it 

over. Having said that, we see some of the targets that the Sask 

Party government said they would achieve and we’ve seen them 

reduce them. And if I’m clear, people out in the communities, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, are very concerned. 

 

Environment and protecting our lakes, our rivers, our source of 

water for human consumption, people take that very serious — 

our air, our trees. In northern Saskatchewan — I want to talk 

about that because I think it’s so important — people want to 

make sure we protect our lakes. They want to make sure the 

rivers, they want to make sure the wildlife, our trees, the 

quality, the culture of life, to make sure the animals can survive, 

our commercial fisherman. But we see concerns raised by our 

elders, by traditional people who live off the land. And they’re 

talking about their concerns around the table and you’ll have 

stories. And you hear about the concerns they’re having and 

you see some of the damage that they see. And they ask those 

questions; they’re wondering. And they say this with the most 

sincere for their next generation. They worry about for their 

grandchildren, for the next generation. What are we doing in a 

society? What are we doing? 

 

So there are so many people concerned about our environment 

and the quality of life that will be there for my grandchildren, 

and many of the members’ in here grandchildren, and the next 

generation. What are we doing? Do we know the impact? And 

are we trying clearly, are we trying clearly to take care of our 

environment for the next generation? And we’re just not talking 

about the next generation. Is it 50 years? We want to make sure 

there is a plan, there is an opportunity for our young people to 

live off the land, to hunt, fish, to go and enjoy the rivers, the 

lakes, to enjoy safe drinking water. 

 

So we see all these concerns being raised. And you know 

there’s a movement and I want to talk a little bit about the 

movement, the Idle No More movement. And if you talk about 

some of the concerns that have been raised by many groups — 

and I’ve gone to support them, whether it’s walk, whether to 

hear some of the words, some of the concern — and you know, 

it isn’t always about themselves. It’s about all of Canada, all of 

Saskatchewan, our next generation — whether they’re 

Aboriginal, non-Aboriginal — the citizens. And they care about 

everyone’s grandchildren. 

 

And to hear some of the concerns where they see the change 

from the Harper government and then you see what’s going on 

and why the Idle No More movement is moving. And you 

know, it’s the Bill C-45 that’s going on, and there’s such a 

concern from so many grassroots people — such a movement, 

such compassion from people saying, here’s what we’re 

concerned about; here’s the challenges. They understand you 

have to look at certain regulations and laws and bills, and they 

understand that. And they’re not opposed to that, from what 

I’ve heard so far and if I’m clearly understanding what I’m 

seeing. They’re concerned about the protection being taken 

away, so much being given up, so much power being taken 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2619 

away from Canadian people given to politicians, whether it’s 

the pipelines . . . So this omni bill is huge, and the impact . . . 

And they’re trying to bring the awareness to the everyday 

citizen to understand. Are you aware what can happen to the 

next generation? Are you aware about our waters, our 

environment? Are you aware about the lands, protecting our 

lands, the air? 

 

So there’s so many concerns. And I commend the Idle No More 

movement for what it’s done. You know, to see the movement 

and the groups where I’ve listened to and the individuals that 

I’ve talked to and I watch on Facebook — just amazing to 

watch. And I’ve been to some of their rallies where — it’s 

youth, whether it’s our elders, whether it’s families — you have 

so many individuals just truly wanting to make the government 

stop and look at this bill and to stop the damage that they can 

do. And that’s what individuals are asking, and there’s so many 

of them. It’s such a large movement. It’s amazing to watch. 

They’re not going away. This government cannot, cannot close 

their eyes, put their heads in the sand and say, we don’t see it, 

because the movement’s all over. It’s not only in Saskatchewan 

and our provinces, but it’s all over. It’s gone . . . So many other 

countries are involved and they’re supporting the Idle No More 

movement.  

 

And I think at the end of the day it’s the same, this bill here that 

we’re dealing with today. Bill 45, Mr. Deputy Speaker, speaks 

to some of that and the concern that people have. You can turn 

over the monitoring of it, you can turn over some of the powers 

from the federal government to a provincial government, but 

it’s about ensuring . . . And people want to trust. And I’ve said 

that many times in this House, people want to trust. They want 

to think their government looks after the lands, whether it’s 

protecting the dollars, whether it’s protecting our environment, 

whether it’s protecting the citizens, whether you’re a senior, 

whether you’re a student making sure you have a good quality 

education, making sure you have a bus route, STC 

[Saskatchewan Transportation Company], in their communities 

so that seniors can get to their medical appointments.  

 

There are so many things that governments have an opportunity 

and they have the decisions to make whether it’s going to be 

right for our citizens. Or the government makes decisions based 

on its own policies, and as a bulldozer or bullheaded, and they 

move on it. And they don’t consult. They don’t talk to anyone. 

They just go ahead and do it. People are watching and people 

are very concerned. 

 

And the Idle No More movement is not going away. It’s a 

young population of First Nations, Métis, of non-Aboriginals 

together in solid support. And there’s many young people 

getting involved. And I’m amazed to see it, the strength they 

have. And I’ve said this when I’ve talked to the youth: they 

have power. You have the strength. You have the power if they 

will make sure that they get out and vote. And I’ve said this to 

them, send a message in protest — vote. Make sure you get out 

and vote. Send a message to the governments that are telling 

you they’re going to change things without consulting you. 

Send them a message. You can do that. You have power, and 

I’m watching it. And it’s amazing to watch the movement. And 

the young people in our province and in Canada and around the 

world, they’re idle no more. And it’s amazing that word, idle no 

more. And they’re moving, and I respect. It’s peaceful. And 

watching the way they’re trying to use social media, the way 

they’re addressing the issues. 

 

And some of them it’s truly from the heart, and they want to 

make sure they do their part. And they’re not going to sit back 

and let governments jeopardize their children, their 

grandchildren’s future, or their future. They’re not going to sit 

back. They’re going to wake up. They’re going to make sure 

they have the ID [identification]. They’re going to make sure 

they have the ability to cast a vote, and they’re going to show it. 

And I encourage them, get out and vote in protest of 

governments that are passing legislation and laws and bills that 

impact you without consulting with you, with having no respect 

for you. Send them a message — a strong message. Don’t sit 

back any more. 

 

[16:00] 

 

You know, we think about a bill like this and — you know, 

clearly, Bill 48 — you watch this bill. And I know it’s going to 

work out in the end and that the government will say, well 

we’re going to amend it. And they’re going to go ahead at the 

end of the day. We’ll debate this bill, how important this bill is, 

we will. We’ll make sure we do what we can do, and as official 

opposition, we have and we will. And we’ll ask a lot of 

questions in committee. And we’ll ask the government to 

explain for the people that have asked us because the Idle No 

More movement, because of the Aboriginal people, our young 

people, our First Nations, our Métis, our non-Aboriginal 

supporters who are out there saying, this can’t happen. We can’t 

allow governments to just take us for granted, take the next 

generation. 

 

There is so much concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this bill 

that people are concerned watching it. And I tell, this is clear. 

 

You know, you talk about individuals, and there are members 

who may hold a Sask Party membership, members in this Sask 

Party that hold Conservative memberships as well with the 

Harper government. They’re a federal Conservatives and they 

carry a membership. That’s fine. The people need to find out 

who they are. Those individuals in our province, you need to 

find out. See the connection: how many Sask Party members 

hold a federal Conservative membership? Do they? They need 

to ask. And if you’re in an area, they need to find out and do a 

little bit of work. And they need to research that and say, who, 

who is it? 

 

And that’s really good . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There, 

thank you. There is a process, and I’m glad the member says 

that. They can go and look at the Conflict Of Interest 

Commissioner. It’s part of the process. We all know you have 

to disclose that. I’m glad. So a lot of them are members of the 

Conservative party. That’s good, she says, but they disclosed 

that. That’s great to know. 

 

So we now can do that, and we’ll pass that information on. I 

think that’s good. People need to know when we talk about 

individuals who are concerned about the Conservative 

government doing what they’re doing, the damage they’re 

going to do. The Idle No More movement . . . And there’s many 

people watching, to know that those members opposite are card 

carrying and they’re telling, advising them to go ahead and do 



2620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

the research to find out. Well that’s good. I hope they do. And I 

will encourage them that are watching out there — the Idle No 

More movement people, the youth, the people that are 

concerned — research that. Find out how many of them are 

card-carrying Conservative members and find out, and make 

sure you do the work. Remember who they support, and see if 

they support you and why. 

 

So let me make it very clear: this is an important bill. This is an 

important bill, Bill 48. It’s got a lot of concerns from people 

watching it, unsure what’s going to happen. It’s a trust thing. 

I’ve said earlier, it’s a trust thing. 

 

So when you have . . . Whether it’s our trappers in northern 

Saskatchewan who do an excellent job, and we have an industry 

that’s starting to see some true benefit in the price of fur, and 

they live traditional lifestyles. And you have a government, and 

for instance the Sask Party government sends out letters to them 

and, you know, to the trappers when the trappers ask to be 

consulted and be considered before you come out to their 

traditional territories whether they’re being impacted. 

 

What happens? You know, they get a response from the 

minister and from the government. Well if you’re a commercial 

trapper, we won’t, under our framework for co-operation, the 

framework that the Sask Party developed, that FSIN [Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] has rejected, the Métis nation 

has rejected their framework for duty to consult and 

accommodate has been rejected by the Aboriginal people who 

they say will trigger the mechanism. If you’re a commercial 

trapper, well it’s not going to work. 

 

Well I’ll tell you something and I’ll make it very clear. There 

are trappers who live a traditional life, and they’re out there and 

they eat the meat from the animals that they catch and they live 

the traditional life. And yes, they use the fur for themselves and 

they make their clothing, and some of them do that. It’s 

amazing to watch the traditional life. And I have respect for 

those trappers, the northern people. And there’s trappers in the 

South as well, but the northern trappers are the ones that I 

represent, I’m talking about. 

 

And when you see that . . . So they take a little bit of their fur, 

and then they’re going to go sell them to provide them for, 

whether it’s for coffee, flour, for traps, to provide them with the 

opportunity to go back to the land, their traditional land, where 

there might be generations, generations of trapping, living off 

the land. And then the government turns around, says, well if 

you’re a commercial trapper we don’t . . . The mechanism will 

not be triggered because you’re a commercial trapper. Well I 

think if that’s what they’re using, that is a terrible injustice that 

they’re doing to the northern trappers of Saskatchewan, and any 

trapper. They deserve more respect than that government’s 

giving them. And they should be ashamed of themselves. 

 

Now let me get back to this. It is clearly Bill 48. And I’ve been 

using examples of how people are watching and making it very 

clear the concern that are out there in northern Saskatchewan. 

And I’ve said, and I think we have to be very clear from the 

people back home. They want the government to know of their 

environment, their traditional lifestyle, the life they have, the 

rivers, the lakes. They want to share that with all Saskatchewan 

residents. They want to share that with Canadian residents. 

They want to share that with individuals that come to our 

province, to come and see the tourism. They want people to 

invest to come to see our lakes, to see our beautiful sceneries, to 

enjoy a good life. 

 

But you know, you have some northern communities that are 

very concerned, and I’ve had individuals tell me in their homes. 

I have someone who’s very close to me who lives in Camsell 

Portage, talks about the winds. And when these winds come 

from a certain direction, there’s a film, and this ugly film comes 

on their trees, on their house. And she said it was getting worse 

over the years, it’s been getting worse and worse. And that’s the 

concern that the elders are talking about, the pollution. And 

whether we talk about greenhouse gases or we talk about the 

forest and we talk about the fires and the damage, and we see 

the ash on the river. And I was talking to some of the 

commercial fishermen and they say, you know, even the forest 

fires, they’re allowed to burn, and when we don’t respond in a 

proper way to manage the forest, and if we don’t use the 

resources we have to extinguish fires, to put them out the way 

that it used to work to clearly . . . Those fires get so big, and 

then we see the damage it does with the ash, and the fish eat the 

ash. And I was listening to some of the fishermen saying . . . 

You know, it was amazing. Some of the elders tell me their 

concerns, that it does impact the quality and it does impact fish 

when you have a fire going on. There is damage. 

 

And I’m not an expert at it. But when I have elders telling me 

and I have the commercial fisher telling me about some of the 

concerns they have about that and why it’s so important about 

this fire . . . So when we talk about greenhouse gases and the 

impact that’s happening in northern Saskatchewan and the rest 

of the province, we have to do a better job. And we have to 

make sure we’re consulting with our traditional land users. 

They are the ones. They know. They know what’s going on in 

our environment. They have been there for years. They listened 

and they have so much wisdom. 

 

But we see a government, a Sask Party government who doesn’t 

like to consult First Nations, Métis, doesn’t like to consult the 

citizens of our province. Instead they push ahead on their 

agenda. And we see what happens when they’re bullheaded and 

they push ahead on their agenda. And we see the challenges. 

 

And for the people in our province who are suffering under the 

Sask Party, I say this. We have a leadership race. We had that 

this weekend, and one of the members opposite was there at our 

convention, being in the media, which is good, and maybe said 

some good words, and that’s great. I didn’t see the story, so I 

just assume it was all positive because there was so much 

excitement, unity. There was so much coming together. I’m 

very happy to see . . . yes, hard work done by everyone. And we 

heard some of the story. Our Leader of the Official Opposition 

said today clearly, coming together, and that’s what he’s going 

to work on. 

 

So when I say that . . . We look at the issues and the people will 

hold this government to account for the actions or the inaction 

of the Sask Party government to respect and consult with the 

people of our great province. They will hold those members to 

account, the backbenchers. They sit there and, you know, it’s 

fine. You’re here now, and I know sometimes they’re pretty 

proud of their accomplishments. I congratulate them. I’ve done 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2621 

that when they came into the House. But I tell you, when you 

turn your back on Saskatchewan people, they will send you a 

message. When you don’t fight for Prince Albert and their 

bridge, when you don’t fight for what your community is asking 

you to fight as a member of this House — and we heard today 

interesting questions at Moose Jaw and the hospital — you will 

pay a price for that. You will pay a price. 

 

So government makes its decisions, and on Bill 48, the 

government’s going to make some decisions. But I have made 

examples of how our communities will be impacted by this bill. 

We don’t know all the details. And it’s a trust thing. People 

want to know. But I want to, for the record today, make it clear 

that we want to make sure our environment is protected. We 

want to make sure for my grandchildren and all citizens of this 

province, for the next generation, their grandchildren, there is 

protection, that we are taking it, we aren’t spending today. And 

we see the way the resources have been spent, record revenues 

coming into government. And they’ve spent, spent, spent. And 

now we’ll see. 

 

You know, you have an option as a government. And you 

know, the people have entrusted, and I said that, on how 

government’s going to spend money — whether it’s $22,000 on 

hardwood flooring for the Premier’s office or it’s 92,000 public 

dollars to use out of caucus or wherever. That’s your money. 

Yes, the people have given it to you. It’s entrusted. And you 

want to run advertising telling them to get ready to tighten up, 

or whatever you’re using that for to tell them. Maybe you 

wanted to . . . well you sent the message out there so that 

people’s expectations are a little down or, oh well, it wasn’t as 

bad as . . . whatever. 

 

But I’m just saying clearly, Mr. Speaker, the people have 

entrusted the Sask Party government and those backbenchers 

and the ministers and the Premier and the government of the 

day with their resources, while many people are struggling in 

this province to make ends meet, to pay their bills, to pay their 

rent. We’ve seen individuals come here, seniors, their concerns. 

 

So when we see a government taking money . . . And Bill 48, I 

want to show the example, Bill 48. The government has the 

choices clearly to use the resources they have the way they 

want. And their priorities have been — but they never told the 

public — it will be millions for more politicians, millions for 

more politicians when our seniors are asked to pay more for 

their prescriptions. When they need to call an ambulance to get 

them to a hospital, you will be asked to pay more. People on 

fixed income having trouble to make ends meet to provide food, 

pay their rent. 

 

You know, when you listen to some of the stories . . . And I 

know they’re not the only ones struggling. We have people who 

live in poverty. We see the record, this government’s choice. 

We see the choices this government has when it comes to the 

Aboriginal population. They had a choice, just like on Bill 48 

they have a choice. They’re going to make the decisions. And I 

want to make it clear. I want to show the examples. 

Government has made their choices. We have to ask all the 

questions. 

 

And we see the struggling, the middle class, even the middle 

class who’s had a pretty good life in our province under the 

previous administration, under the previous NDP. Now we see 

the cost going up and they’re struggling. We see the hardship 

that the middle class is feeling today, and I’ve heard it. I’ve 

heard the stories and the struggles and how they’re trying to 

make ends, to keep their kids in sports, to keep the quality of 

life they’ve been used to. They’re making it hard. They’re asked 

to give and they’re asked to tighten their belt while we see the 

government making choices and spending money in ways that 

does not take care of the middle class, does not take care of 

their kids, does not take care of their future. It puts them in 

more. 

 

And you look at . . . And again, I want to go back to this. So 

here we have a government who has some choices on Bill 48, 

greenhouse gases. Will they provide the resources to make sure 

our lakes are protected, to make sure there is quality of life in 

Saskatchewan and Canada? 

 

So when we see all those concerns and we see our trappers, our 

northern people, we see our farmers and the rural areas and you 

hear from the rural farmers and, you know, I may not because 

I’m in northern Saskatchewan, but it’s nice to talk to some of 

the farmers. And this weekend I got to talk to some of the 

farmers who are struggling out there. They’re not the big 

farmers. They’re just small family farms trying to make ends 

meet and the struggles they talk about. The struggles they’re 

talking about. And we have record revenue and they’re having 

so many struggles in the rural area as well. And I do, I feel for 

those individuals and I say to them: the government, we have to 

do better for you and we will do better for you. It’s not easy. 

 

So when I see governments making decisions with the resources 

that they’re having, pushing ahead, not consulting, not 

respecting, not utilizing the good resources of our province — 

whether it’s our rural farmers, whether it’s our northern 

communities, whether it’s our urban centres — clearly this 

government has lost touch with the people of this great 

province. And they will pay a price. Mark my words. They will 

pay a price. 

 

And when I look at this bill again, I go back to it, this 

government has some options. I hope at the end of the day in 

committee we can encourage the government to do the right 

things. We’re willing to work with the government. The leader, 

our Leader of the Official Opposition, has made it very clear 

he’s willing to work with the government. And we’ve shown 

that, Mr. Speaker, time and time again. We will work with the 

members opposite to try to find the right answer, try to find . . . 

And we’ve encouraged them to consult, to talk with individuals, 

to make sure together the people of our good province benefit. 

That’s the job of all 58 of the MLAs in this House is to make 

sure we do the right things for the people of this good province. 

We owe them that, and they deserve no less than that. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now at this time I’m going to . . . and I’m prepared . . . And I 

know I had more to say, but my colleagues are telling me I’ve 

made a good point . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, now he’s 

telling me I should go on. So I’m going to go on a little more 

because I want to use some comparisons here with Bill 48. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What are you talking about? 



2622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

Mr. Vermette: — And yes, we have members over there that 

are yelling out, what are you talking about? That’s just the 

problem. That’s exactly what the people of this province are 

saying. That’s exactly it. That’s what they’re saying. What are 

you talking about? He hasn’t heard the serious things I’ve said? 

Members want to say stuff like that? These are times where 

people are truly suffering, and you have outbursts like that? Is 

that the respect, Mr. Speaker, that people deserve in this good 

province? “What are you talking about?” 

 

I’m talking about people and their feelings, and they’re 

struggling in this province. They’re not doing as good as many. 

So you have . . . You know, sometimes, Mr. Speaker, I wonder 

why, why can’t individuals just hear, hear what the people are 

saying? But no, they want to be stubborn — bullheadedness — 

and they don’t want to hear. They don’t want to admit they’re 

wrong. It’s always their way. Well just remember, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ll pay a price. Mark my words. The people of this good 

province . . . They will, they will, they will pay a price. 

 

Now all people are asking for is them to take good care of the 

resources that the people have given them, entrusted them with. 

They’ve asked them to clearly take good care. And I’ve had my 

colleague, the member from Athabasca, clearly say, the people 

have asked you one thing: just take care of the resources. Take 

care of our resources. Do right with them. Use them wisely; use 

them to benefit all. Make it fair for all Saskatchewan people — 

not just some people, all Saskatchewan people, clearly. 

 

And we have members that want to yell out because they don’t 

understand that. That’s the problem. They have lost touch with 

Saskatchewan people. And they will, they will get that message. 

Mark my words on that. We’re going to work hard in the 

official opposition to bring the concerns of citizens in this 

province, of organizations, of the business world, the small 

business that are struggling, the rural farmers that are 

struggling. There’s a lot of people out in this province that are 

struggling. 

 

And sometimes when you have a government that takes people 

for granted and thinks they own that area, the people will send a 

message. The people will send a message. And this government 

one day maybe . . . [inaudible] . . . understand, will not have the 

49 seats over there because you didn’t earn them. And the 

people gave you the trust, and they wanted you to take care of 

them. And that’s what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just like Bill 48, just like Bill 48, just like Bill 48 as I referred 

to. Clearly these concerns are of the people of our province, and 

I’m here to express the concerns that those people have. And 

they can yell and scream, and they may not like what I’m 

saying, but I’m being told by citizens who care. And they’re not 

all living in the Cumberland constituency that have shared this 

with me. They live in many of our rural areas, the cities, and the 

North, and they’re concerned about their future, their children’s 

future, and their grandchildren’s future. And those members 

over there should pay attention, should. 

 

Now I’m using examples, Mr. Speaker, to show Bill 48. And I 

want to make sure . . . The government has the right to make 

choices, and in here they’re going to make some choices. 

They’re proposing some changes that will allow them to take 

over, I guess, the federal government handing over some of the 

jurisdiction to the province. But there are conditions that the 

federal government has asked the province, you have to meet. 

And we’re going to find out what exactly are those . . . 

[inaudible] . . . And in there it says individuals have to have the 

opportunity to bring their concerns forward — individuals. 

 

You know, I wish we would pass a bill that would say the Sask 

Party has to listen to Saskatchewan citizens, whether you’re 

one, a group, or not, you have to listen. Because they don’t 

listen. That’s the problem. So maybe we should come up with a 

bill that would make them listen. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The have-to-listen bill. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes. Yes, I like that. And maybe we can 

bring that forward. But, Mr. Speaker, having a little sense of 

humour — sometimes you have to have a little sense of 

humour, and some days, you know, to be fair, on both sides. 

 

And I’ve said this: we have tried to work in co-operation. And I 

will always try to work in co-operation when I take care of the 

people back home. And their concerns are Bill 48, the 

environment. They’re concerned about the environment. 

They’re concerned about the quality of life. They’re concerned 

about where they live. 

 

And it’s not just about the environment of the air and water. 

There are so many things. We look at the environment even in 

the households, in the poor houses, if you look at the conditions 

of some of the houses in northern Saskatchewan and rural 

Saskatchewan and communities where we have people who are 

clearly saying, we need better housing from our government, a 

better plan. Enough with the summits. Let’s get down to doing 

some work to make sure there’s housing, affordable housing for 

individuals, you know. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to make it very clear, and I want to 

again give so much recognition to the young people of our 

province who have taken up the stand, the Idle No More. And 

you know, to look at the movement within our own party, with 

the membership that I’m so proud of, to see such an increase in 

young members to our party, who are listening, who are raising 

concerns, who are Idle No More, waking up, Bill 48 that they’re 

concerned. And they’re getting on board and they’re saying, 

we’re going to make sure we’re heard. We’re going to make 

sure we have a voice. You know what? And I want to give 

credit sometimes where credit is due, and the hard work of my 

colleagues on this side of the House to hold the government to 

account for the citizens around here in this beautiful province 

who bring their . . . whether it’s emails, who sign petitions, who 

bring concerns to the official opposition to raise in the House 

about the concerns and the way this government doesn’t listen. 

 

So we have heard them, and I’m going to encourage them to 

continue the movement of Idle No More, to bring their concerns 

forward so we can deal with Bill 48. And Bill 48 clearly is 

going to allow the government to have some provisions to 

manoeuvre, to make sure they meet the guidelines of the federal 

government in order for them to turn over to the provinces the 

jurisdiction or how to handle the greenhouse gases emission, 

how to monitor. So the government’s going to say before they 

turn it over to the provinces, there’s provisions you have to 

meet. And the federal government wants to see that. 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

So this bill will help to meet the federal government’s 

obligation that it can say to the province, you’ve met that; now 

we will turn this over to you. And it’s talking about using the 

resources so that you’re not duplicating services. So it’s not the 

federal government; it’s not the provincial government; you’re 

not both doing it. So co-operation, I guess, in one way, but 

people are concerned about that, very clearly. 

 

But I want to show examples. Government has the choice, and 

the government’s going to make the choice. And they’re going 

to do things their way because it’s the government. And in this 

bill the government’s got some choices. And I know we’re 

going to go in committee and we’re going to discuss this bill 

and we’re going to talk about it. And I know my colleagues are 

going to ask a lot of tough questions and they’re going to make 

sure that those questions are asked because the citizens of our 

province expect nothing less. And I’m excited for the simple 

reason, clearly, it’s to hold the government to account because 

that’s what the official opposition role is. That’s what our role 

is, and the people expect no less, and we will continue to do 

that. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve got my point across. I 

could go on longer using examples. But today, you know what? 

I feel like I’ve got a chance to talk it out and express some of 

the frustration and the concerns I’ve heard from people back 

home, how they’ve expressed it to me and their concerns about 

the future. So at this time I’m prepared to move this bill, Bill 

48, to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 48, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment 

Act, 2012 be read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — Okay. This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to enter 

debate here this afternoon as it relates to Bill No. 49, The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012. It’s always a 

pleasure to follow, Mr. Speaker, the member from Cumberland 

who . . . Anyone who would’ve been listening to the speech that 

was just provided would’ve witnessed great passion from the 

member from Cumberland, and taking forward the 

circumstances that he sees, the real circumstances that he sees 

in his community and all across the province, the voice that’s 

shared with him and then the voice that he brings to this 

Assembly. And I’m certainly proud to stand in this Assembly 

with good people, good members like the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

As it relates to Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012, Mr. Speaker, there’s a fair amount of 

changes that are being brought forward here and it’s suggested 

that the reason these changes have been brought forward are 

because of the New West Partnership, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not 

because of goals of this government that are driving this 

legislation, but in fact an agreement that’s been entered into and 

possibly an agreement that’s now bound changes to this 

legislation and to an industry here in our province which begs 

the question, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this legislation itself 

and these changes are in fact in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, or whether or not we’re having another 

jurisdiction drive our legislative agenda here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The general statements of the minister on some of these fronts 

are certainly aspects for which I would support as he lays out 

some of the objectives. That being said, we really don’t know 

the detail to what’s being suggested, potential other 

consequences as well. I do find it interesting, of course. It’s an 

honour to speak about our forestry sector in Saskatchewan and 

a proud industry that dates back many, many years in this 

province — a proud industry where you’ve had generations 

involved, Mr. Speaker, and an industry, to be frank though, that 

is not as strong as it should be, Mr. Speaker, and that often 

seems to be sort of passing concern to the current government, 

Mr. Speaker. And when I think of our forestry sector and what 

it means to our entire province and certainly to northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s incumbent of the 

current government to give more than the passing concern they 

do to its vibrancy and livelihood, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know I look at the . . . When I started reading the bill, the 

government’s talking about a reconfigured forestry sector, and I 

hope the reconfigured forestry sector that they speak of isn’t 

indicative of the really sad state that our forestry sector is in 

right now in this province. And I hope there’s not an acceptance 

that this is good enough, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan people 

or good enough for communities throughout the North, whether 

that’s Meadow Lake — certainly not at full capacity and not 

providing all of the employment and all of the opportunities that 

it could, Mr. Speaker, and not being as supported as it could by 

this government — or Big River where you have the stud mill 

that’s not being utilized at all and certainly those employment 

benefits and economic benefits aren’t being derived the way 

that it should be. 

 

So when I look at this sector, it’s a sector that has long and deep 

roots in this province and it’s a sustainable resource and one 

that needs good, solid sustainable management. But it also 

needs an active government to care about the industry and then 

to act in its interests and to be willing to take steps to make sure 

that we can redevelop and regrow the forestry sector because 

it’s an economy in Saskatchewan, a forestry economy that has 

been beleaguered under this government. And certainly many of 

those pressures I understand go beyond the boundaries of 

Saskatchewan, but our government certainly does have a 



2624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

responsibility to be working with our entire province, and 

certainly our forestry sector’s an important part of our province. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So I guess, as I say, I hope the reconfigured forestry sector 

that’s being mentioned by the government isn’t a weak forestry 

sector. What we need to do . . . Or I hope they haven’t given up 

on the forestry sector, Mr. Speaker, as I know many through the 

North seem to feel as though they have. 

 

I know I’ve heard from those in through Prince Albert and area 

who are so disappointed with the lack of foresight and vision 

for something like the bridge in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, that 

plays such an important and critical role to those communities 

but also to that northern economy and certainly to the forestry 

sector. For some I know, through Price Albert, that are wanting 

a government to be there, to work with them, to listen to the 

concerns, hear the opportunities in the forestry sector, and work 

to redevelop that industry. Many feel that a government that’s 

now saying there’s no need for that important artery in Prince 

Albert feel as though it’s a government that in many ways is 

giving up on the economy in the region. And part of that 

economy is certainly the forestry sector. 

 

And as I say, we have this incredible resource in Saskatchewan 

by way of that sustainable resource in our forest, but also our 

people. And both are being underutilized on some of these 

fronts, Mr. Speaker. And when I see a piece of legislation like 

this as well, what just concerns me — well it concerns me more 

than a bit — is that it seems that it’s being driven by an 

agreement entered into by this government to bring us into 

compliance with regulations and legislation from our Western 

provinces, and not driven by the interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And certainly through . . . What we’ll be doing is consultation. 

You can count on members of this side of the Assembly to be 

doing that consultation. You can count on the member from 

Cumberland and our northern MLAs to be doing that 

consultation. But you can count on all of us to be doing that. 

We’ll be making sure that this legislation doesn’t impact 

Saskatchewan people in a negative way. So again it seems, you 

know, in many ways, by signing on to some of these 

far-reaching agreements, it seems that this government failed to 

fully understand the consequences of doing so and is now 

letting that agreement drive the legislative agenda here in 

Saskatchewan and impact an industry that has such a rich and 

proud history dating back to the formation of our, and beyond 

the formation of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are a couple comments that I would have. A couple 

other considerations are that when we’re talking about the 

forestry workers, forestry professionals that are engaged in this 

important sector, as I say, we should have a government doing a 

better job of making sure that sector is stronger and more 

vibrant, not just giving it sort of passing concern or passing 

mention. But we should also make sure that the decisions that 

are made that impact those workers, that region, fully involve 

those very people, those that are on the ground, those that 

understand the industry. 

 

And far too often with this government we’ve seen a lack of 

willingness to listen, a set of selective hearing. They only want 

to hear from some, Mr. Speaker, and in many cases we’re 

realizing that it’s sort of friends and insiders of that 

government, Mr. Speaker, and not the people of this province, 

the communities of the province, the real stakeholders, Mr. 

Speaker. And we should be expecting better of our government 

on those fronts. 

 

We do have at play in these changes a sector that certainly has 

close contact into impacting our environment as well. And we 

have an important responsibility to make sure that the forestry 

sector is both strong but also sustainable in the way we manage 

it. And we need to make sure that what we’re doing is making 

sure that the activities and work and development is certainly 

not going to be to the detriment of our watershed, for example, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know when you think about who does that work in the 

forestry sector, we need to make sure we’re supporting those 

professionals, those hard-working individuals, those families to 

make sure they have the resources, the legislation they need to 

be able to fulfill their employment and be able to do so in a way 

that certainly protects our environment. And many of those 

working in the forestry sector of course are building roads in 

through the North. A lot of that work is movement of hazardous 

goods that if not handled properly are certainly a direct 

pollutant to watersheds and to our land, our air, our water. And 

we also deal an awful lot with water crossings and the building 

of water crossings.  

 

So these are certainly important considerations when building 

out legislation. And we should be making sure that any changes 

we’re making bring into full protection that environment, at the 

same time allowing us to harvest our resource in a sustainable 

way and build the opportunities that we must in through 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So it seems this government is more caught up in the legalese of 

the agreement they signed with the Western provinces and less 

concerned about the northern interests of the industry — our 

forestry sector, the workers, the communities. And they’re sort 

of playing a little bit of catch up here with their legislative 

agenda. And in this case, they’re bringing legislation into a 

certain standard that exists in other provinces, probably British 

Columbia that has likely set the standard on this front. What we 

have to do is make sure that those standards are in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people and communities, our 

industry, our environment. And certainly what’s been put 

forward here certainly lacks the detail for us to have any 

certainty to that. 

 

We’re also aware that these changes are resultant from the 

proposed changes and activities as it relates to the 

Saskatchewan Environmental Code or environment code, 

something that in many ways is still unclear to Saskatchewan 

people. And certainly many stakeholders have weighed in to 

highlight the fact that it lacks the mechanisms, effective 

mechanisms, to really achieve the goals that we must as it 

relates to protecting our environment. 

 

Not only that, the environment code, there’s a lot of uncertainty 

in place. A lot of it’s been driven into regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

And I know you can understand the importance of or the impact 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

of that is when you’re pulling away important aspects of 

legislation and putting it into regulation, what it does is it takes 

those important discussions, democratic discussions outside of 

this Assembly and simply leaves those changes to be made 

within the government itself, without the proper discussion that 

we certainly require for important areas such as the 

environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I look at this piece of legislation, I see a government 

that has, I see a government that has been making — is making 

— changes that are simply to come into compliance with an 

agreement that it signed with other Western provinces for an 

industry that has such proud history and great potential in this 

province. And we deserve better than that, Mr. Speaker. We 

deserve a government to in fact be working to rebuild the 

vibrancy in our forestry sector, a sector that’s been really 

beleaguered under this government. And I hope the stated 

reconfiguration and weak state of that sector or weakened state 

of that sector isn’t acceptable to this government. And I hope 

they’re not somehow now stating that this is acceptable because 

we certainly should be expecting better. 

 

And when you think of those who have harvesting rights, if you 

think of our communities in through the North, the people of 

the North, they certainly should be included in these sort of 

changes and discussions and the proper consultation that needs 

to be in place. And we need to make sure that a government’s 

considered all of the impacts, all of the . . . So first of all, what 

are they trying to achieve? And then have they set out by way 

of this legislation, in the most effective way, to achieve the 

changes that they’ve pushed forward? 

 

But certainly we need to make paramount in this discussion 

public safety and the environment at the same time as a strong, 

vibrant forestry sector, and I simply see that discussion to not 

be going on by the current government. 

 

When I look at some of the other pieces, it reflects that this here 

takes away some of the regulations that are in place. And 

regulations of course are built out with a level of purpose. We 

need to make sure that the regulations that are being changed 

are . . . making sure that they’re not going to now put the public 

at risk, put workers at risk, put the environment at risk. And 

we’ve, you know, we’ve introduced here today in the Assembly 

a bill that basically takes away many of the regulations in this 

province. We want to make sure that we’re going about these 

sorts of changes in a thoughtful way and not pursuing sort of a 

race to the bottom where we’re taking out the important 

protections that Saskatchewan people and communities deserve. 

 

And when I look at this piece of legislation, I actually see some 

of the language here. It talks about how there was a role of 

government dictating how things would be done. I guess what I 

want to know from the minister is, what was being dictated and 

what should be, what should be the certain standard that we’re 

aspiring to and what are the best mechanisms to make that 

happen? 

 

So as we go about our consideration of the bill at hand, we’ll be 

doing full consultation with the entire industry — with workers, 

with northern communities and people, environmental 

stakeholders — making sure that they’ve been heard as it 

relates to this bill. Far too often we see the government opposite 

push forward its own agenda with a set of selective hearing in 

many ways, Mr. Speaker, only listening to a few, Mr. Speaker. 

We need to make sure that any of the changes that relate to the 

forestry sector, Mr. Speaker, are made with respect for the 

industry as a whole, its proud roots in the province, and 

certainly for the important place for those workers in 

communities that are impacted. 

 

So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, we have probably more 

questions than we’ve had answers from the government on this 

piece of legislation. We look forward to further discussion on 

the floor of this Assembly but also specifically in committee 

and specifically with stakeholders to make sure that the changes 

that are being brought forward are in the best interests of our 

province as a whole and not simply being forced upon this 

government by way of being bound by the New West 

Partnership that this government signed. 

 

So we’ll be doing that sort of analysis, and we’ll be making sure 

that we’ve heard all of the voices, Mr. Speaker. And we will 

commit to bringing those forward. At this point in time as it 

relates to Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment 

Act, 2012, I don’t have any further comments, and I’ll adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise and join the debate on The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2012, Bill No. 50. 

 

To begin, just a few sort of observations off the top, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ll get to the content of the legislation itself. But 

certainly health care often is not . . . And this is a very good . . . 

[inaudible] . . . in many regards, Mr. Speaker. It’s highly 

regulated. The professional bodies and the economy that goes 

into the different organizations is jealously guarded. Sometimes 

that hierarchical dynamic is going to overtake other things that 

are attempted to be accomplished under, say, the heading of 

primary care or a more holistic approach to health care. But 

again, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that you’ve got that 

right balance between regulation and room for manoeuvre or 

room to best apply that scope of practice, that standard of care 

by the professionals themselves with — as is the fundamental 

component of health care — with the patient. 

 



2626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

So in terms of the legislation here today, I note with interest 

from the minister’s second reading speech wherein the ministry 

worked with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 

Association, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical Nurses, the 

Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists, the Registered 

Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan, and all the 

regional health authorities. So you know, good to see the work 

undertaken there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess as sort of an extension of what I’ve stated around 

that hierarchical nature of health care and the different sort of 

bodies deployed in the system, one of the great sort of hybrid 

professions or scopes of practice that has emerged over the last 

decade in particular is that of nurse practitioner. I guess we’ll 

have to wait until we get into committee to find out whether or 

not . . . what sort of involvement or what sort of implication for 

nurse practitioners this legislation holds. But again it seems to 

be fair enough. 

 

[16:45] 

 

In the minister’s second reading speech it talks about the 

self-regulating health professionals and the importance of 

patient safety. The Medical Profession Act itself had been 

brought in in 1981. The amendments here in particular having 

been “. . . requested by the College of Physicians and Surgeons 

to support safe patient care and to update its bylaw-making 

authority.” Again fairly reasonable propositions on the face of 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also referencing the fact that: 

 

The Ministry of Health supports the physician and 

registered nurse engagement in the full scope of practice 

of medicine and nursing respectively. This will also permit 

the college to respond more quickly to the anticipated 

national changes in the categories of licensure of health 

professionals. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’re glad to see the organizations 

referenced in terms of the work that has been done to, again, 

update their abilities around licensure, around the changing 

national practices and implications for Saskatchewan. We’re 

glad to see that, and again we’d be interested to hear from the 

professions themselves. 

 

Again, the scope of practice issues, those standard-of-care 

issues and how the health care team fits together, or what are 

the overlaps? What are the conflicts? And is there a way to 

better mediate them through the legislation such as that 

contained in Bill 50 or the amendments to The Medical 

Profession Act? 

 

Carrying on with discussing the minister’s speech, the 

amendments also aiming to: 

 

 . . . help keep patients’ personal health information more 

secure. [stating that] The college will now have a greater 

ability to maintain current address and contact information 

for physicians. The college will be better able to 

communicate with physicians and keep information up to 

date when physicians join or leave a practice, and the way 

that this supports proper and secure storage, disposal, and 

transfer of patient files and improve disaster planning 

processes. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, health information privacy protection is 

something that the citizens are increasingly aware of and 

interested in. Certainly this digital age that we live in opens up 

new sort of worries or concerns or opportunities for mischief in 

terms of people accessing information that should be, quite 

frankly, between an individual and their health care 

professionals. 

 

And certainly the way that things like the health information 

privacy Act, the HIPA [The Health Information Protection Act] 

regime has been introduced and evolved over the past decade, 

and then the way that these sort of circumstances . . . We 

certainly were witness to an instance where you had, a couple of 

years back, a dumpster filled with the personal records of 

patients from a particular doctor and that concern that was well 

voiced by the Privacy and Information Commissioner, Mr. 

Dickson, around whether or not (a) the radical powers of 

oversight but additionally, Mr. Speaker, the means of censure or 

the punishments that were there or the penalties that were there 

to be exacted on individuals that were negligent in a regard like 

that. 

 

So we’ll be looking to see what that does to increase the 

outcomes and increase the situation, the security of those 

documents. And again it’s at the base of the circumstance where 

they were in the dumpster, those files. I’m sure we all know 

what it’s like to go to the doctor and have your file written up 

— and that’s obviously as personal information as personal 

information gets. So that we’ve got better oversight in terms of 

the regulations, in terms of the avenues available for the 

regulatory bodies themselves, we’re glad to see that. But we’ll 

be vigilant in making certain that this stated intention of better 

privacy oversight is actually held up to. I guess some of the 

things that weren’t in the legislation or could have been more 

clearly addressed by the legislation, any reference to requiring 

physicians to have a privacy policy, it begs a whole other round 

of conversation with the College of Physicians and Surgeons 

around privacy issues generally. 

 

And again, it’s right to go on record as complimenting the work 

of the Privacy and Information Commissioner and the staff in 

that office or for the independent officers. Both the education 

work and the enforcement would be . . . well not the right word, 

but the way that people know more about the safeguards that 

should be guarding the system to guard your personal 

information and improvements that continue to audit and 

examine the system. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I know there are other of my colleagues 

that are interested in participating in the debate and, as I had 

noted, there’s some work to be done in terms of following up 

and gathering clarification on different aspects of this 

legislation in committee. But with that, I would move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession Act, 2012. Is it 



March 11, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2627 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 51 — The Public 

Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter into the debate on The Public Inquiries Act, 2012 or Bill 

No. 51. I just want to talk a little bit about the minister’s second 

reading speech and what exactly a public inquiry is and what 

the government proposes doing here. So: 

 

. . . inquiry commissions are temporary bodies that are 

created by order in council to review and investigate a 

specific incident or matter. Commissions of inquiry have 

statutory powers to conduct their proceedings. They are 

limited by any terms or conditions placed on them by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council [or Executive Council]. 

 

I think we generally think of the more judicial function of 

public inquiries. We could think about, here in Saskatchewan, 

the Milgaard Inquiry or the Stonechild Inquiry where there was 

some recommendations made particularly around policing here 

in Saskatchewan and the Saskatoon Police Service and how 

policing could be more, I think, be better, more culturally 

sensitive, more in line with the needs of people in Saskatoon 

and in Saskatchewan around First Nations and Métis people and 

how perhaps the police service was failing people in 

Saskatchewan and in Saskatoon in this particular case. 

 

And I know the city of Saskatoon, the police service there has 

worked very hard under Chief Weighill’s stewardship to ensure 

that many of those recommendations from the Stonechild 

Inquiry were in fact put into place to improve relations between 

First Nations and Métis people and the police service, which is 

in fact, as it’s not a police force, Mr. Speaker, it is a police 

service and is designed and set up to serve the people of 

Saskatoon. And I know that they’ve done lots of work 

following the Stonechild Inquiry to address some very serious 

concerns that people in Saskatchewan had about the police 

service. 

 

So we’re very familiar with the judicial functions. But in the 

minister’s second reading comments, he points out that this 

particular Act will provide for the creation of two types of 

inquiries, both “. . . study commissions to research, examine, 

and provide advice on public policy”, which personally, as a bit 

of a policy geek myself, I think that that is a really interesting 

and good idea. I’m curious to know if . . . So they’re putting 

forward . . . I know that they’re very interested. These study 

commissions are a very interesting idea. 

 

The second piece, there will still be a place for hearing 

commissions to investigate and make findings in matters where 

there’s a possibility of finding failing or misconduct. So that’s 

the second piece. That’s the judicial piece. 

 

But I’m wondering around the study commissions if the 

government — in fact they’ve put this out there — I’d be 

interested to know if they really plan on using this study 

commission piece of the Act, Mr. Speaker. Study commissions 

I think hold promise for looking at difficult policy issues that 

we face here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would say that perhaps we could have had a study commission 

on labour in Saskatchewan. Instead of reviewing 100 years of 

labour legislation in 90 days and putting forward an Act that we 

aren’t sure whether or not it will benefit people and that we 

have some questions and concerns, a study commission maybe 

could have taken, properly resourced, could have taken the time 

to really look at 100 years of labour and where we should be 

going in 2013 and forward, Mr. Speaker. So I would argue that 

this notion of having a study commission is a really great idea. 

 

Something that’s near and dear to my heart is supporting 

families in child care. And our child care system, Mr. Speaker, 

is an absolute mess. Our subsidy system is broken. Our subsidy 

system is broken. The recruitment and retention of child care 

workers — huge problems. We have far fewer child care spaces 

than we should, than we need to actually serve the people of 

Saskatchewan. So I could recommend that perhaps I would 

suggest the government perhaps think about pursuing a study 

commission on child care in particular or better supporting 

families in their work-family balance. 

 

So I think this promise of study commissions is interesting, but 

the government needs to be committed to, and tackling, some of 

these difficult policy discussions or issues that are facing people 

here in Saskatchewan. I think that we need to talk about the 

government being committed to funding these when the rubber 

hits the road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway I know I have colleagues who are interested also in 

speaking to Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, and they’ll be 

eager to enter debate on this particular bill. So with that, I 

would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being near . . . I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the attendance at the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association function this evening, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 



2628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2013 

p.m. Tuesday, March 12th. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2597 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2597 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2597 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2597 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2598 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2598 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2598 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2598 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2598 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2612 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2598 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2599 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World Plumbing Day 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2599 

 Welcome to the New Leader of the Official Opposition 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2599 

 Constituent Participates in Freedom Climb 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2599 

 Canadian Cancer Society Award to Howard Willems 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2600 

 Congratulations to Saskatchewan Curling Team 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2600 

 Sergeant Inducted into Council of Women’s Hall of Fame 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2600 

 Agricultural Safety Week 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2601 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Performance of Government and Opposition 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2601 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2601 

 IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2603 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2603 

 Hyperbaric Chamber and Health Services in Moose Jaw 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2604 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2604 

 Housing Availability 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2605 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2605 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2606 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 86 — The Regulatory Modernization and Accountability Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2606 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2606 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2608 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2613 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2618 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2618 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 2623 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2623 



 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2625 

 Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2627 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


