




















































Hansard: March 06, 2013


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 28A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 6, 2013, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2553 

 March 6, 2013 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Cypress 

Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it’s my pleasure to introduce a group of French 

grade 4 and 5 students from École Monseigneur de Laval here 

in the city of Regina. 

 

And along with the students and their chaperones from Laval, 

we also have some other representatives from the francophone 

community joining us here today. I’d like to identify in 

particular Françoise Sigur-Cloutier, the president of the 

Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise, an organization whose 

purpose is to build and strengthen the francophone community 

here in Saskatchewan. And with Françoise today are a number 

of members of the Fransaskois community. 

 

Would our honoured guests please rise today. I think we have 

this gallery full and some may be over in the west gallery as 

well. We’d like to welcome each of these guests to their 

Legislative Assembly today. Thank you very much. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to take this 

opportunity to officially proclaim March the 8th through to the 

24th as Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2013 in the province 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, during this period, which 

coincides with the International Day of La Francophonie on 

March 20th, Saskatchewan people will have the opportunity to 

join with fellow Canadians to celebrate our country’s 

francophone culture and heritage. Now here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, it provides the perfect opportunity to recognize the 

specific contributions that the Fransaskois make every day to 

support our growth and to enhance our quality of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my role as Provincial Secretary, I’ve had many 

opportunities to interact with the Fransaskois. And I have to tell 

you that no matter how many times I’m invited to attend a 

community event or to see a French artist perform or meet with 

any one of our province’s francophone organizations — on 

official government business, by the way — I’m continually 

amazed at their enthusiasm, their dedication, and their love for 

French, the language, the culture, and the life. 

 

And we’re proud to have a francophone community that helps 

shape our provincial cultural identity. I’d like to encourage all 

citizens to join us in celebrating the Francophonie in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I’d like to join with the Provincial 

Secretary in . . . 

 

Je voudrais dire un grand bienvenue á l’Assemblée législative á 

tous les personnes ici avec le ACF [l’Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise] et les étudiants avec l’École 

Monseigneur de Laval. 

 

[Translation: I would like to say a big welcome to the 

Legislative Assembly to all the people here with the ACF 

[Assembly of the French Community] and the students with 

l’École Monseigneur de Laval.] 

 

I want to say congratulations. 

 

Félicitations avec les festivités pour le Rendez-vous. 

[Translation: Congratulations with the festivities for the 

Rendez-vous.] 

 

And really, Mr. Speaker, for a province whose motto is “from 

many peoples, strength,” that strength and the pride that comes 

from the Fransaskois is something that we know well and we 

are very thankful for on this side of the Assembly. And I’m sure 

we join with all members in that pride and gratitude. 

 

But as well to Madame Sigur-Cloutier, félicitations for the 

election and as well a word of thanks to your predecessor, 

Monsieur Heppelle, and Denis Simard, all the team with the 

ACF. Good to see you here and keep up that great work in 

helping us to realize that promise of Saskatchewan in terms of 

“from many peoples, strength,” but not just strength but a lot of 

joy and celebration as well.  

 

Welcome to your legislature. Bienvenue tout le monde. 

[Translation: Welcome everyone.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 

group of five students and two teachers from Thom Collegiate. 

They’re in grades 9 to 12, and they’re part of the zone 

classroom. 

 

And the zone classroom’s an alternative model to the traditional 

approach to education. It’s using an inquiry-based approach. 

Students curriculum outcomes to their interests and passions 

through a wide range of different projects and activities, and 

students are provided with a high level of support to work 

towards the goal of attaining the regular credits of graduation. 

 

And I’ve had the opportunity to go the classroom a couple of 

times and actually did a little bit of tutoring. I’m going to 

apologize in advance if their outcomes aren’t as good as they 



2554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

should have been. But teachers Brian Gatin and Blaine Duffield 

and the five students from Thom Collegiate, I’d like to welcome 

you, and all of the members here welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the House, 

a frequent visitor to this Legislative Assembly. Gunnar 

Passmore in the east gallery is with the building trades and an 

advocate for working men and women in this province, making 

sure we have safe and fair laws. And we want to welcome him 

to our Legislative Assembly here today. Thank you so much, 

Gunnar. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Passmore to the 

House today. He is, as the member opposite indicated, a very 

frequent visitor here and a strong advocate for organized labour 

in our province, but he’s also part of the growing economy that 

builds and creates the successes of our province. So we thank 

him and we thank all working men and women for that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I also know that he lives in Indian Head-Milestone, and I know 

the member from Indian Head-Milestone stops every election to 

try and get a sign put up. And to the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone: keep trying. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all colleagues of the Legislative 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce a gentleman very important in 

my life sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Ron Naidu. Ron is my 

constituency assistant, and he makes life a lot easier for me, as 

do all CAs [constituency assistant] for all members of the 

Legislative Assembly. So welcome to your legislature, Ron, and 

glad to have you here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. [Translation: 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

I just want to very basically stand today and recognize a friend 

that spent many, many years in Ile-a-la-Crosse — shouldn’t say 

many — but it’s very nice to see him today with the 

Fransaskois group. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as people will know, being a Métis person, 

or a Métis as the French would know, half of our culture 

belongs to the French. And in fact in our home community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, all the streets are named after our French 

families. You have Desjarlais, you have Morin, you have 

Belanger, you have Daigneault. You have all these French 

names in our community. And it’s a great opportunity for me to 

stand today and say I’m very proud and that we ought to make 

as much of an effort as an Aboriginal group, or as Aboriginal 

people, to recognize that culture that we share. And certainly 

today I want to do that. 

 

So I want to welcome Yvan Lebel. Yvan has spent some time in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. He attempted to teach me to play the piano. 

That didn’t work out very well. He also attempted to coach me 

in hockey. That didn’t work out very well. But, Mr. Speaker, he 

did tell me to be proud of my French heritage, and I want to 

stand up today to say that I am and to welcome mon ami. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to welcome all our guests here today 

and to remind them not to participate on events on the floor 

including applause. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reconsideration of 

passing Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

And we know since the Act was introduced in December, 

literally hundreds of hours of studying comparisons have been 

carried out in the interests of due diligence. And there is no 

labour relations crisis to fix and no necessity to rush this 

omnibus bill through that will likely govern workplace relations 

for decades to come. And if it does become the new law in the 

province, working people, particularly young workers, 

immigrant workers, and other vulnerable workers, will suffer 

from a hasty watering down of our current labour standards. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to not pass Bill 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act in this current session before the end of 

May and to place it on a much longer legislative track to 

ensure greater understanding and support for the new 

labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition in reference to cell coverage, and the 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations along with their neighbouring 

community of Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring 

communities in each of these areas. 

 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2555 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most amazing thing about this petition is 

it being signed by the members of these communities but, more 

importantly, it’s being signed by the people all throughout the 

province. And I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 4th to 10th is 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. This 

week is spearheaded by Students Against Drinking and Driving, 

better known as SADD, with the help of SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance]. This week is important, Mr. Speaker, 

because alcohol use is one of the leading causes of fatal crashes 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

SADD and SGI work hard to address this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

First there is the report impaired drivers program or RID, a 

partnership lead by SGI, the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

authority, and law enforcement. Mr. Speaker, the goal of RID is 

to remove impaired drivers from our roads. If you suspect 

someone is driving drunk, call 911. SGI also partners with law 

enforcement on operation overdrive. This is a province-wide 

blitz targeting impaired driving. These programs help but there 

is more that can be done, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very proud and 

pleased to lead the newly formed Traffic Safety Committee to 

that effect.  

 

I’d like to remind everyone to always plan a safe ride home. 

Use a designated driver. Call a designated driving service. Take 

a cab or the bus. SGI also has a free app that can help people get 

home safely. With all the options available, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s just no excuse to drink and drive. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

La Ronge Elder Receives Diamond Jubilee Medal 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of attending 

the Charles family Christmas dinner in La Ronge this year and 

had the honour to present Elder Catherine Charles with the 

Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Medal. 

 

Catherine Charles is a respected elder of the Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band. She has a large family with many children, 

grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. Many in the 

community are part of her extended family and I am honoured 

to be one of them. We treasure her kindness, her wisdom, and 

her caring spirit. I was honoured to nominate Catherine for this 

award and to present it to her. 

 

I have personally relied on Elder Catherine for guidance and 

support on many topics and issues that affect our community. 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the greatest honour of all was the 

presentation of this award and the chance to share the moment 

with so many of Catherine’s family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to please join 

with me in congratulating Elder Catherine Charles on receiving 

the Diamond Jubilee Medal. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Rural Women’s Month 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

recognition of the vital past, present, and future contributions of 

rural women in Saskatchewan, I am pleased to rise today to 

recognize Rural Women’s Month. 

 

Rural women have been crucial to the development of 

Saskatchewan communities while playing important roles in 

their municipalities and on family farms throughout this 

province’s history. Although the makeup of rural Saskatchewan 

has changed considerably over the past century, the importance 

of rural women to the growth and development of this province 

and the agriculture industry remains as significant as ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rural women in Saskatchewan have and will 

continue to be major contributors to the success of our 

province’s economic and social development. The contributions 

of rural women are evident in the great work they do at their 

jobs, the education they provide, their contributions to 

agriculture, and the care they give to the young and the elderly. 

Additionally rural women are remarkable volunteers throughout 

our province, and Saskatchewan has prospered due to the 

pivotal role they play in our province’s success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly 

recognize the hard work, leadership, and significant 

contributions of past and present rural women to the social and 

economic growth of this great province. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Roughriders and Red Cross Anti-Bullying Campaign 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today we’d like to recognize the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders and the Canadian Red Cross in their 

continued efforts to reduce bullying in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is an issue that matters. The damage that it causes to young 

people in society is, as a whole, unacceptable. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, March is also national Red Cross awareness month. 

Since 2009 the Canadian Red Cross has been providing 

anti-bullying workshops in schools across the province, and 

Roughriders like Luc Mullinder, Weston Dressler, Chris 

Getzlaf, and Keith Shologan are among those players who have 

participated to use their image to help educate students on 

bullying prevention. 

 

Last month these organizations took another step forward in a 

new agreement which allows for the participation of more 

players in the Red Cross’s effort to stop the cycle of hurt that 

results from youth bullying. 

 

Saskatchewan Roughrider president and CEO [chief executive 

officer] Jim Hopson described their desires to become involved: 

“The Saskatchewan Roughriders share the belief that bullying is 



2556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

a community problem,” and that the team is “. . . proud to help 

the Red Cross address the issue by delivering violence- and 

abuse-prevention programs to schools and community groups 

across the province.” 

 

We’d like to ask all colleagues in this Assembly to join us in 

thanking the Saskatchewan Roughriders and the Canadian Red 

Cross for their continued efforts towards making bullying a 

thing of the past. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Students Learn About Life in Politics 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in this House today to discuss a recent activity in one of my 

constituency’s classrooms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was recently contacted by Brian Ofukany who is 

a grade 8 teacher of social studies in the Tisdale Middle and 

Secondary School. Mr. Ofukany’s students have been learning 

about the impact of a citizen’s willingness and ability to 

actively engage in the Canadian political process. As an 

assignment, Mr. Ofukany had his students select one MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and MP [Member of 

Parliament] and contact them with a series of questions relating 

to their life in politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Brian wishes to thank all those members who took 

time out of their busy schedule to respond to the students’ 

questions, saying, “The responses provided great insight into all 

the things that politicians deal with on a daily basis.” The 

students were genuinely engaged in the assignment, and they 

were excited when they received replies. Typically grade 8 

students are not overly politically minded; however the 

connection that the members provided make the political 

process more real for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the members involved for 

their participation as well as Brian and his students for all their 

great work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Loreburn Rink Wins Grand Prize 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to talk about the residents in the community of Loreburn. 

Everyone in this village loves Mars bars. How much do they 

love Mars bars, you ask? Well so much that the Loreburn rink 

was recently named one of the five grand-prize winners in the 

Mars bars Play Your Part Promotion. 

 

This contest was open to all rinks across Canada. With the 

chance of being awarded a prize of $20,000, all they had to do 

was gather as many PIN [personal identification number] 

numbers found in the wrappers of Mars bars and enter them 

online. The Loreburn Recreational Board had applied in March 

of 2012 to join the Mars bars promotion. Two months later they 

were informed they had advanced to the second round. In June 

they heard they were picked as one of the finalists. Since then, 

Mr. Speaker, the community of Loreburn has been eating Mars 

bars ever since. 

 

Vanessa Tastad, who is a Loreburn Recreation Board president 

and village councillor, was kept busy entering PIN numbers for 

residents. She credits the whole village in this effort. The rink 

sold Mars bars exclusively in their concession. The high school 

football team . . . and the Mars bars are sold at every school 

function. They faced off in the final round against rinks in 

Mission, BC [British Columbia]; London, Ontario; Warwick, 

Quebec; and Marsh Lake, Yukon. 

 

The Loreburn rink is planning to use the $20,000 prize money 

to make improvements to their new dressing rooms, which 

include painting, adding stick racks, and door closures. They’re 

planning to install new flooring as well in the 48-year-old 

building. 

 

I would ask that all members please join me in congratulating 

the community of Loreburn on their much-deserved win. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Agriculture Literacy Week 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise in this House to announce that this week marks Agriculture 

Literacy Week in Saskatchewan. Agriculture Literacy Week is a 

time to show our youth the importance and the value of 

agriculture and the role our producers play in feeding the world. 

 

Today Canadian agriculture employs over 2 million people in 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, our government supports a number of 

initiatives to help educate youth about agriculture in 

Saskatchewan, including Ag in the Classroom. The Ministry of 

Agriculture has provided $150,000 in funding over the past year 

to fund Ag in the Classroom. Mr. Speaker, Agriculture in the 

Classroom marked Ag Literacy Week by organizing a number 

of events, including Agriculture Adventure at the Saskatchewan 

Science Centre, made-in-Saskatchewan lunch at Albert Scott 

community school — and there was no Mars bars, to my 

colleague from Arm River — and having farmers and ranchers 

visit classrooms to read to students and talk about agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of this Assembly to join 

me in recognizing the excellent work of Ag in the Classroom 

for their advancement of agriculture literacy in our younger 

generation. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Release of Information Regarding IPAC-CO2 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s another 

day and another changed story from that government on its 

IPAC [International Performance Assessment Centre for 

geologic storage of CO2] cover-up. We asked yesterday whether 

contracts existed between IT [information technology] vendors 

— set up by this government with public money — and the 

government. The minister claimed there were three, in this 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2557 

House. But now that story’s changed. 

 

The news today exposes more incorrect answers from that 

minister with more contracts with that government, some even 

going untendered and without proper oversight. One contract, 

Mr. Speaker, that was almost half a million dollars, just a small 

oversight of the minister yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me be clear. A slow leak of incorrect, 

inconsistent, troubling information from that minister is no 

substitute for straight answers and real accountability. To the 

minister: when will the public get a straight answer to this 

question and the full story on the IPAC cover-up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member opposite for his question. And before he makes 

further accusations against my colleague who’s been forthright 

with her answers, he asked yesterday specifically about 

contracts within the Crowns. The Minister Responsible for CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] responded 

very specifically to his questions about Crown contracts. So for 

him to cast aspersions today, Mr. Speaker, I think is quite 

incorrect. 

 

As to the other contracts that the member has asked, through the 

Public Service Commission our agency of record subcontracted 

to ClimbIT. That process was done completely appropriately. 

Once that work was done, the PSC [Public Service 

Commission] wanted to continue with the services of ClimbIT, 

and the personnel involved believed that they could just renew 

the contract without tendering. Mr. Speaker. That was a 

mistake. 

 

I’ve voiced my concern to my deputy minister. The Chair of the 

Public Service Commission has spoken to the employees 

involved to explain to them once again what our processes and 

procedures are, and the deputy minister to the Premier has also 

alerted the deputy ministers of all ministries as to what the 

procedures are. We want to have an open, transparent process in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, and we are taking steps to correct 

the mistakes that we’ve made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — As I said yesterday, getting information 

on the Sask Party’s IPAC cover-up has been like pulling teeth, 

Mr. Speaker. We see that again here today. 

 

Let me be clear that minister has failed to provide consistent, 

correct answers; failed to provide the full facts upfront; and has 

deflected responsibility at every turn. In fact last week the 

minister sent a letter to the president of the University of Regina 

regarding the contractors in question and the PTRC [Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre], Mr. Speaker, which is 

independent of the university, and the minister should know 

that. But all while pointing her finger at the university, the 

minister failed to do her own homework in her own backyard, 

Mr. Speaker. She’s failed to fulfill her responsibility for the tax 

dollars she’s responsible for and the contracts with her 

government. 

 

When will that minister come clean and be straight with 

Saskatchewan people about that government’s IPAC cover-up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — This has been, Mr. Speaker, day after 

day after day of leadership hopeful spin, is what this has been 

all about and nothing else, Mr. Speaker. He knows full well that 

the letter that was written to the president of the U of R 

[University of Regina] pointed out that we had discovered that 

Dr. Wilson was involved with PTRC and there was a 

sole-source contract. What I requested of the president . . . And 

I also gave her a phone call that morning and just said, can you 

look across the university to find any other such contracts, as 

we will be doing in government? 

 

Yesterday the member opposite asked about what I had 

discovered in the Crown corporations, and I gave the answer for 

the three contracts that has been brought forward to me. I have 

answered his questions. He knows the answers. He’s known a 

lot of this without . . . while pretending that there is this big 

mystery. And yet when I told him I would give some 

information of people off the record, he didn’t even bother to 

come and ask me what I was talking about. Why? Because he 

knew the answer all along, and he is just pretending that there is 

a cover-up. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to caution the member on his use 

of words. The word “cover-up” in Beauchesne’s edition no. 6 is 

not a permitted term, based on the November 16th, 1977 ruling. 

So I would ask the member to not use that verbiage. I recognize 

the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let me be clear. This 

government has responsibility for this IPAC debacle from day 

one. They chose to start up and operate both CVI [Climate 

Ventures Inc.] and IPAC with taxpayer dollars. Those public 

dollars started flowing early on in their term in 2008. They 

chose as well to put three of seven board members on IPAC, 

Mr. Speaker. They chose to put some of their closest confidants 

on that board. And they chose to claim there was value for 

money and that there was a contract — statements that have 

been proven to be not true once facts were exposed by 

investigation. And we continue to receive inconsistent, incorrect 

answers, including just yesterday about IT contracts with that 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of covering up, when will that minister 

and government start owning up and call on the Provincial 

Auditor, call on the Provincial Auditor to fully investigate this 

IPAC debacle? 

 

The Speaker: — I cautioned the member on the use of that 

word and the context of that word. I would ask the member to 

now withdraw that remark and apologize. I recognize the 

member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Withdraw and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There has 



2558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

been many, many, many times these questions have been 

answered, and he knows that. He absolutely knows that. This is 

all about the theatre that he wants, to have this big play, stage 

the whole acting and the drama. And it’s for his leadership bid, 

nothing more. That is what this is about. 

 

He knows full well that the difficulties that were identified 

happened when IPAC was under the management of the 

University of Regina. He knows that. He knew who was 

involved. He knew how it started. He knew about the contract. 

He knows all of that, and he keeps pretending otherwise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when IPAC incorporated and a board was put 

together for the new incorporation, immediate steps were taken. 

The funding was suspended. A forensic audit was ordered on 

the agreement with CVI. The relationship with CVI was 

severed. The assets were secured. They hired an independent IT 

consultant to assess the services performed by CVI. The 

funding control was moved from the U of R to IPAC-CO2, and 

that member knows all of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind the Opposition Whip 

not to bring the Speaker into the debate on the floor. I recognize 

the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Repairs to School Infrastructure 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party government has a 

lot of time and resources for misadventures like standardized 

testing. But when it comes to facing the real challenges for 

students and teachers in the classroom, they’re not making the 

grade. 

 

This week there were reports about the problems caused by a 

water main break at Gard’Amis child care and educational 

centre at l’École Monseigneur de Laval. And as if that wasn’t 

problem enough, the school has been coping with a leaking roof 

for years. This roof is long past its 25-year lifespan. L’École 

Monseigneur de Laval and the Conseil scolaire fransaskois have 

spent $100,000 on patching the roof. Tests for mould and other 

problems are ongoing. The roof needs to be replaced. The 

francophone school board asked for money to replace the roof 

three years ago, but the problem with the roof continues. 

 

To the minister: why are students at l’École Monseigneur de 

Laval being told to wait for the budget to get the roof fixed? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 

government knows that investing in school infrastructure is an 

investment in our students. We want to support our students. 

We want to support our teachers. We want to support our 

schools the best way we can. Our government has made a 

record investment in school infrastructure, $500 million since 

becoming government. We inherited a $1.2 billion deficit. 

We’ve seen first-hand how these new and updated spaces help 

to create environments that are so conducive to learning, and 

we’ll continue to invest in the infrastructure of our schools as 

we go forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — It says a lot about this government’s priorities 

that they would force l’École Monseigneur de Laval to do 

expensive patching repairs over the past three years and beyond 

rather than fix the problem. When it comes to putting new 

hardwood floors in the Premier’s office, it’s all systems go. But 

for the leaking roof above students and teachers at l’École 

Monseigneur de Laval, the answer is again, not yet. It’s a 

question of priorities, Mr. Speaker, and this government is 

getting the answer wrong. 

 

The school administrators say students and teachers shouldn’t 

have to learn or work in this environment, and we in the official 

opposition agree. To the minister: will the roof be fixed on 

l’École Monseigneur de Laval, or will those students and 

teachers be forced to wait yet another year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

again, over 70 per cent of our schools are at least 40 years old 

so both replacement and new schools are needed. We realize 

that. Even with the $500 million allocated, we’re still making 

up for years and years of neglect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we inherited a $1.2 billion school deficit 

infrastructure. We’ve committed approximately $500 million 

since 2007 — major capital $369.5 million, Mr. Speaker; block 

funding $127.4 million, Mr. Speaker. There has been a 217 per 

cent increase in school infrastructure spending since forming 

government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Progress of Labour Bill 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, members of the Minister of Labour’s own advisory 

committee have asked him to slow down on Bill 85. This 

morning the Regina Leader-Post printed a plea from a member 

of the minister’s own hand-picked committee. Hugh Wagner, 

who sits on that committee, writes that the Sask Party is in a 

hurry for no reason. And I quote: 

 

The new bill repeals nearly 1,000 pages of current 

provincial legislation and consolidates it into 184. In total, 

33 pieces of legislation are repealed and/or amended — a 

substantial undertaking that, logically, should require far 

more public, labour and business input than what has been 

provided for to date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister at least slow down his plan to 

ram this bill through and listen to the concerns of the very 

people he appointed to work on this legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question, and I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the 

members of the advisory committee. These are people from 

business and within the labour movement. They provided a lot 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2559 

of advice, direction, and guidance. 

 

The makeup of the committee is such that it is not likely going 

to produce a consensus on a lot of issues. But I’m surprised, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was a consensus on a number of things. 

Those things have found their way into the bill. Over the course 

of the last few months, we’ve received 3,800 submissions. 

We’ve had an additional period of time to allow for 

submissions once the bill has been introduced. We know that, 

as a result of that, we are going to have to make a series of 

changes and, Mr. Speaker, the process is going along. We have 

a number of other meetings going on and we will make changes 

as are required and as are appropriate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, clearly the working people of 

Saskatchewan have been kept in the dark on this. And the more 

time people try to shine some light on the Sask Party’s 

workplace law rewrite, the more they’re uncovering strange 

inconsistencies. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, the old law specified Sunday would 

be a day of rest whenever possible while scheduling. Now in 

fact, the new law doesn’t, and this was not brought to the 

public’s attention in December before Christmas. Obviously 

some are very concerned that this will unfairly upset the 

work-family balance people in Saskatchewan value as core to 

our way of life here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a consequence of a rushed piece of 

legislation. Will the minister do the right thing, listen to 

members of his own advisory committee, and delay the passage 

of this bill so that these kind of problems can be sorted out? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the question again. The issue the member raises is whether 

Sunday should be enshrined as a specified day off. There have 

been court challenges with regard to Sunday being a religious 

holiday and the Act has been amended in compliance with the 

rulings of the courts in our province and elsewhere. We do 

require there to be two days a week, two days of rest per week, 

Mr. Speaker, rather than including Sunday, which is in 

compliance with the law of the land now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise that the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale asked the question on Monday, March 4th, and she 

read this section from the Act. She said, “In prescribed 

workplaces . . . an employer shall grant to employees in the 

workplace or to the category of employees two consecutive 

days off . . .” Then she goes on half a page later and says, “So 

am I correct in saying that employees will no longer be entitled 

to two days off in a week?” Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite and the member for Riversdale, if she reads her own 

question, there are two consecutive days off per week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting answer 

that the minister clearly has thought about this but did not 

highlight this particular change in December. And while he may 

talk about it as a faith issue, many people talk about it as a 

work-life balance issue. And he’s not had the time to highlight 

that kind of change with people who would like to know that 

that’s the change we’re kind of talking about. So I’ll say it 

again, Mr. Speaker: this Sask Party government just will not 

listen. 

 

We know over the last three months experts have pored over 

these changes to spot what’s been left out and what will change 

for middle-class workers and small businesses. These experts 

say they need more time to track these changes and consider the 

potential consequences of the Sask Party labour bill. And it 

begs the question, as Hugh Wagner asks in the paper today, and 

I quote: “What is driving the government’s rushed efforts to 

pass Bill 85 in the spring sitting of the legislature?” 

 

To the minister: will he commit today to listen to members of 

his own advisory committee and delay passage of Bill 85 until 

the fall sitting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, our province is bound by 

the courts. It’s not a subject that we can debate, whether we 

have Sundays as a day off or another day off. The issue is we 

are providing that employees are entitled to two consecutive 

days off. We’ve done that. This isn’t something we would want 

to delay a bill or a piece of legislation for. 

 

I am however pleased that the member opposite is reading the 

bill and is studying the bill. I went through the various 

submissions that have come in to date, Mr. Speaker. And since 

the bill has been introduced, one of the ones that I would have 

thought would have introduced or filed a submission would 

have been the members opposite. But to date, Mr. Speaker, 

there has been no submission since from the New Democratic 

Party. I was looking for that with some interest. And I would 

have thought that if they wished to speak on behalf of their 

members or their supporters . . . Now perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re caught up with other things such as the leadership 

convention or whatever else is taking place this week. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we look forward to seeing if they wish to file a late 

submission, and from them we would welcome it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Financial Management and Reporting 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re two weeks away 

from budget day and it’s clear to all the people of the province 

that this government is struggling with its finances. When given 

a chance to report its finances just a couple of weeks ago, that 

government put forth a spun set of books with a report that 

would be accepted nowhere else in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Now 

that government is unwilling to come clean with alleged wasted 

money and that government even won the Pinocchio Award for 

its financial management and reporting. Mr. Speaker, how does 

that cut it for Saskatchewan people who deserve nothing less 

than sound financial management and the true full state of our 

books? 

 



2560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has raised a number of 

issues in his question, and I want to thank the member. 

 

First of all, the member is making a comment about summary 

financial statements and the General Revenue Fund. Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] in 2004, when the 

member from Athabasca was part of that government, they 

introduced, for the very first time, summary financial 

statements — in 2004, Mr. Speaker, after the opposition and the 

auditor said, you can’t just do General Revenue Fund. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that system has been in place since 2004. We provide 

the summary financial statements at mid-year, Mr. Speaker, 

which is what the member opposite had an opportunity to read 

back at mid-year. And, Mr. Speaker, we will provide the 

summary financials at the time of the budget, which will be 

March 20th. And I ask the member to stay tuned. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re just two weeks away 

from budget with a government that’s clearly scrambling, a 

government that’s hiding alleged waste and being called out by 

the Provincial Auditor for reporting our finances in a way that 

she said is “misleading and wrong.” So what did the Sask Party 

government do when they were confronted with that, Mr. 

Speaker? They attacked the messenger, the auditor, leaving our 

Provincial Auditor to say: 

 

I just hope the discussion around here — and with all due 

respect — is not a message to me and to my staff that we 

should not be operating independently and performing the 

work that we think is appropriate in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of heeding the advice of the auditor, or at 

least respecting her role, they attacked the Provincial Auditor at 

the first opportunity in the Public Accounts. My question to the 

minister: why would he choose this approach? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

every government, including this government, appreciates the 

work of the Provincial Auditor. Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 

we have had many auditors who have commented on, first of 

all, up until 2004 the Saskatchewan position, which was only a 

General Revenue Fund. Mr. Speaker, that was reality until 

2004. In 2004, the NDP, and I’ve given them credit for that, 

introduced summary financials as well as the General Revenue 

Fund and they made the changes to The Financial 

Administration Act. Mr. Speaker, that is the Act that is in place; 

that is the Act that directs Treasury Board; and that is what we 

do. We prepare, with the advice of the Provincial Comptroller, 

we prepare a General Revenue Fund statement and we prepare a 

summary financial fund statement. We have at this point a 

disagreement with the auditor as to whether or not her 

comments about the General Revenue Fund are indeed accurate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re just two weeks from 

budget and that government’s clearly scrambling financially. 

They’ve been selling assets, hiding alleged waste. They’ve 

stripped our Crowns of another $120 million. They’re 

increasing our debt by $950 million this year alone. And if you 

can fathom, they’re actually running expensive ads to tell us 

they’ll be cutting, Mr. Speaker. It’s simply more spin. And their 

books, in the words of the auditor, are misleading and wrong. 

Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, why should anyone trust the 

upcoming budget from this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we want to say 

to the people of Saskatchewan, that Saskatchewan . . . to the 

people, that Saskatchewan has a unique position. Saskatchewan 

was the only province to have a balanced budget last year, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while we understand, we understand that 

the times that are facing other provinces . . . We just saw 

yesterday and the day before, Mr. Speaker, the actual 

acceptance of the BC budget that proposes increases; it 

proposes cuts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We in the province of Saskatchewan are taking a different 

approach, and we have done that, Mr. Speaker. We have taken 

an approach that deals with expenditure, Mr. Speaker, unlike 

the opposite members, Mr. Speaker. And the member who is 

asking the questions is proposing $5 billion worth of spending, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s who’s going to drive up the 

debt. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Community Pastures 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year the federal 

government abandoned rural Canadians and farm families when 

they walked away from managing Saskatchewan’s PFRA 

[Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration] community 

pastures. In January several hundred concerned patrons formed 

the Community Pasture Patrons Association to represent the 

interests of more than 2,600 pasture patrons who have been 

using the pastures for decades. 

 

The association has now met with and signed up almost half of 

the patron groups, and they’re working hard to meet with the 

rest of the groups and need more time. They’re very concerned 

with the aggressive timeline this government has set out for 

off-loading the individual pastures. To the minister: will he stop 

rushing the process, listen to the Community Pasture Patrons 

Association, and give them the time they need to organize? 

What’s the rush? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for her question. Ministry of Agriculture staff have 

been meeting with patrons throughout this process. Meetings 

have been held with the first 10 patrons groups around the 

province. The regional patron information meetings were held 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2561 

across the province in the month of February, in which every 

patron had an invitation to attend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the patrons are becoming quite well informed of 

what’s happening with the previous PFRA community pastures. 

The group the member speaks about is led by Ian McCreary, a 

former Wheat Board director back in the grim days when the 

Wheat Board was compulsory and directors were appointed. 

 

But he has this to say, he has this to say, Mr. Speaker, and he 

says it in The Commonwealth. He says that: 

 

There are many reasons why progressive people in rural 

Saskatchewan no longer support the NDP . . . the 

Romanow administration made cuts which 

disproportionately affected rural people. Over fifty rural 

hospitals were closed. We withdrew from the national 

farm income support program during the lowest farm . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question, please. I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The province should 

be focused on protecting these pastures as important parts of 

our ecosystem and of our rural economy. Those are the interests 

that the patrons have at heart. 

 

The president of the Community Pastures Patrons Association 

referred to by the minister says that the proposal the Sask Party 

government put forward will drive up costs for patrons and is 

simply unworkable. The minister’s proposal will increase the 

patrons’ costs by between 67 per cent and 117 per cent. The 

offer is unaffordable and will drive most of these producer 

patrons out of the cattle business. 

 

A key factor is that over the past eight decades these producers 

have paid significant fees to build the wells, fences, and corrals 

in the pastures. As part of the minister’s proposal, producers are 

now being forced to buy back their own improvements. That’s 

not fair for these farm families. Why can’t the minister do the 

math and realize he’s forcing the patrons into defeat by putting 

an unaffordable offer on the table? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — You know, Mr. Speaker, costs will vary 

from pasture to pasture and if the patrons want to run exactly 

the same service that the PFRA provided, with a massive 

subsidy, it’ll cost more. If they want to use their inherent 

efficiencies that they’ve learned through a life in agriculture, 

it’ll cost less. 

 

I don’t know where Mr. McCreary gets his numbers but you’d 

think he could draw on some of the lessons he learned as a 

director of the compulsory Wheat Board wherein he said the 

rural road network, taxed by a rapidly centralized elevator 

system, began a rapid process of decline during the Romanow 

years. He said the end result was that rural people felt 

abandoned by the NDP government. In subsequent elections, 

rural areas were not represented in government and rural people 

watched, often in disbelief, as rural policy was generated in 

urban areas. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 85 — The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join in the debate 

on Bill 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. I guess opening 

up . . . And I know with a conversation a lot of questions are 

being asked, and there are a lot of people, individuals that are 

very concerned about the timing of this bill and the way this bill 

is being handled and legislation and the way that we’re looking 

at it. And I mean I’m going to go over it point by point, and 

we’re going to have some discussions on some of the concerns 

in areas that are being faced. So I think we’re going to spend 

some time today discussing this bill because it’s so important. 

 

There’s so many areas and so many areas in this legislation that 

will impact men and women of our province, our young people 

that are hard-working. There’s protections in legislation that are 

being affected, and I think people are very concerned. So I want 

to just kind of start going into the lack of consultation that’s 

gone on in this bill. 

 

And I know the minister likes to refer to his time frame that 

he’s used. Well 90 days clearly has not been enough time, and I 

think we see that by the response that we’re having from 

individuals. And the minister can say he’s had time to allow 

people to bring forward their concerns, and clearly that has not 

happened. And he refers to about 38 actual submissions that 

he’s received — 3,800 is what he’s saying. I’m not sure of 

those numbers, if they’re there or not. We’ll see. He says he’s 

going through them. 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that there are a 

lot of issues, and I think it’s about timing. And we’re going to 

go through this bill slowly. We’re going to make sure. We’re 

going to take the time to discuss it. And I think that’s what 

people are asking.  

 

They want to make it very clear: this bill is going to impact I 

guess many families in this province, many workers in this 

province, not only the immigration individuals that come to our 

province — the foreign workers that come in — but clearly 

Saskatchewan residents. Whether they’re young, old, whether 

they’re students, whether they’re post-secondary, they have to 

work sometimes to cover off their living expenses, to cover off 

some of the tuition costs that are being forced on them, so they 

are working. 

 

So some of these changes in here . . . We don’t know how they 

will be impacted. And I don’t think they’ve had the opportunity, 

and I don’t think, to be fair, that students have had a chance to 



2562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

look at this legislation. It’s such a large piece of legislation. 

And when you talk about whether it’s 33, we’re hearing, pieces 

of legislation that will be impacted by the changes that the Sask 

Party government’s proposing . . . And you know, you look at 

all those challenges. 

 

And I want to put out a little bit of a thank you to the critic for 

his role of Labour from the official opposition. And to watch as 

he went around and he consulted with individuals . . . And he 

held meetings all over the province, trying to find out and trying 

to do his best to talk about some of the issues facing our 

workforce in this province. 

 

And we have a very proud and we have a long history of 

legislation, years and years. And a lot of time and effort went 

into pieces of legislation that we use, whether that legislation 

has developed into regulations and allowed those regulations to 

happen. Within those, I guess, legislation that’s been passed and 

the bills that have passed, organizations, whether they’re the 

employer, they set the tone on how people will work together, 

how companies will hire individuals, how companies will work. 

 

So the area where we’re talking about consultation is . . . And I 

mean we’re going to go on some time here discussing that 

because that has been raised time and time again, not only by 

the official opposition, by many individuals, organizations, the 

unions. And I mean we’ve looked at a lot of it. 

 

And I know in the record my colleagues have expressed 

concern that have spoke before me, about that process, about 

the time. And they’re very concerned about the manner and the 

timeline that this government is pushing ahead on these bills. 

There is obviously concern that this government is pushing 

ahead without respecting the workers, the unions, and their 

issues. And whether you’re talking about individuals who are, I 

guess, truly going through the bills, they’re identifying that 

there has to be more time. And we talked about, I guess in 

question period, some of the questions that were asked. 

 

And it’s interesting. There was an individual, Hugh Wagner, 

who’s raised concerns about the handling of this. And a part of 

a committee or an individual, he’s raising concerns. And 

looking at an article in the Leader-Post from that individual and 

the concerns that he’s raised, and it’s about the time. And he 

raises one area about the time and pushing ahead with this and 

asking and I think clearly suggesting to the government, it’s 

okay to take a break, take a pause, and slow down and not to 

ram this bill through.  

 

But unfortunately we see that that’s not going to happen. The 

government’s going to go ahead. They’re going to push this 

bill. And we’re hoping that they will slow it down. The minister 

will see his error. The government will say, okay, we made a 

mistake. We don’t have this right. We need to slow down. We 

need to make sure that individuals understand the process. It’s a 

clear message. 

 

We heard the minister today sharing some light that he’s looked 

at it. Well, I think that’s exactly what . . . Our critic for Labour 

has made it very clear. That’s what the public wants, that duty 

to consult and accommodate, the duty to make sure people are 

informed, that there’s ongoing discussions and that those 

discussions that are happening are happening with the labour 

movement. 

 

And I want to talk about, and I guess, the union movement. And 

I’ve had an opportunity to meet with some of the individuals 

over the times that I’ve been elected, some of the unions. 

They’re very strong. And I say they work hard for the 

membership, for the people they represent. And when you look 

at that, and they have a different type of I guess an organization, 

and I look at it, and it’s respected. And they have very strong 

ties to one another that hold up together, and it’s a brother and 

sister. And you look at the way they support one another 

through some rough times, and you look at how they work 

together and how they communicate together. And I mean it’s 

impressive to watch how they come together and they organize. 

 

And when it’s, I guess, not only . . . You look at the unions and 

you look at the movement, and I want to be clear about the role 

that they have and what unions have done. And I look at some 

of the strength that they have had, and over time, when times 

weren’t good for individuals. And when individuals first come 

out and there wasn’t a lot of legislation in here to protect 

individuals, something happened, and clearly individuals came 

forward with concerns. And from there legislation was passed 

to protect workers, to make sure that those workers’ rights were 

protected. And it didn’t happen in 90 days. It took years to get 

and develop and to actually find the legislation and regulations 

that would protect workers. It took many years, many hours, 

many days, many months. 

 

So when we look at that, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear. There was 

time involved over years and years of hard work by not only 

government, by industry, by the unions, by working families to 

clearly bring legislation that would protect our workers of this 

province. And we needed those protections over time. 

 

But now we see this government coming forward with such a 

move. And it isn’t that people are saying it’s not time to review 

legislation. It’s good. There’s no problem. People are saying it’s 

fine. Let’s look at some of them if you have to change. We want 

to improve things. If there’s legislation that needs to be 

removed, repealed, that’s fine. People are saying, we understand 

that the work of government has to happen. And sometimes 

there might be house cleaning items that have to be . . . But the 

point they’re making, it’s the time frame that they’re trying to 

do this in. It’s such a large bill. There’s so many, I guess, areas 

of Saskatchewan, working people in this province that will be 

impacted. 

 

And I don’t think truly the government has thought this 

through. They have an agenda, and that’s what we’re hearing 

some people are concerned about. They have their own agenda, 

and they’re going to ram it through. It doesn’t matter who it 

impacts and what it takes away from the working students, from 

our seniors, from working families. It doesn’t seem to matter 

what’s going to affect them. Somehow somebody’s got a hold 

of their ear and said, this is what we want; this is what’s good. 

And they’re pushing ahead, and that’s the concern. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Why not slow this down? Why not make sure we are consulting 

with individuals, with the working men and women of this 

province, the working families who are struggling in areas, who 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2563 

can shed light and who have had an opportunity over the years 

to deal with some of those challenges. And I know a lot of my 

colleagues have expressed their concern when it came down to 

the timeline of this bill. And if you look at that, and I think 

people are saying very clearly slow down, you know. 

 

And the Sask Party government doesn’t have to be so 

bullheaded about this. They could slow down, take a breather, 

take a break and say, maybe we are pushing this. Maybe we 

need to slow down and have a good look at this, make sure the 

changes we are going to make are going to improve the 

economy, going to improve opportunities for working men and 

women of this province, to make sure that it’s going to improve 

better working conditions, safer working conditions, to make 

sure how it will impact men and women who go to work, many 

of them just about every day, to provide for their families. 

 

Now we talk about safety. And we have to look at and go 

through the bill to see how will that impact safety. We look at 

worker safety, and we’ve seen some of the challenges that 

families have to face. They lose their loved ones because of a 

work-related incident. So we want to make sure safety in there 

is crucial, that’s it’s looked . . . and the time and the discussions 

have gone on with probably individuals who have experienced 

that. I guess as far as the employers who have had to deal with 

that as well, it can’t be easy for them. 

 

So there’s a lot of challenge, and I think one of the biggest ones 

is the process on consulting, talking with, you know, 

stakeholders, talking with the individuals that will be impacted. 

And I don’t think this government has done it and has not got it 

right by the way they’ve handled this. They’re pushing ahead 

with it. They’re not listening, and they don’t want to listen. And 

that’s unfortunate. 

 

This government doesn’t have I think, clearly, the interests of 

the working women if they’re not willing to slow down when 

they’re asked, when individuals come forward and they’re 

being asked, slow this down. And the government says, no, 

we’re not slowing down. We’re going to push ahead with it. 

And they can spin it how they want. And that’s sad, in that area. 

 

Now I’m going to come back to that area a little bit, but I want 

to . . . You know, it’s very clear, people are wondering why. 

Why the rush? Why the rush job? Why the rush job? And they 

will sit there and say, when you have years . . . And that’s what 

I said in my earlier comments, and I know my colleagues have 

talked about this. And I know individuals are bringing this 

information forward to our caucus, to the critic for Labour, and 

clearly have said, why the rush to get this done, to put this 

legislation through? And that’s really a concern. 

 

But we see the different challenges that are going on in this 

province right now when it comes to working families. They’re 

having struggles out there. They’re having a tough time to make 

ends meet. And I guess at the end of the day, how will this 

legislation impact, and how will it make their life any better? 

Will it make it affordable? 

 

And we’ve seen some of the challenges. I want to show some 

examples of that and some of the comments that come out. We 

talk about rent controls to protect families who are working. 

You know what? Why don’t we have legislation that protects 

renters? And those renters are either on fixed income or they’re 

working. And some of them are working three jobs to make 

ends meet. Why should that be happening in a province that 

brags?  

 

But we can spend our time in rushing certain bills through this 

House — for what reason? — when we have a crisis going on 

with rents, 77 per cent increase on rents. And we’re not rushing 

to help those individuals. Why is that? Why is the Sask Party 

not rushing off to help individuals with rent controls? 

 

But here they have legislation where they want to push. And 

they have individuals and lots of individuals — lots of 

organizations, lots of groups, and lots of I guess working men 

and women — asking them to slow down and think this thing 

through. Well no, they want to push ahead with it. So it’s 

amazing to watch the difference: their priorities, and they’re 

picking them. And that’s a sad day because it’s individuals, it’s 

individuals that suffer. It’s our students. It’s our seniors. It’s our 

middle-class families out there trying to make ends meet, and 

they’re being impacted in so many different ways, whether it’s 

rents, whether it’s the working conditions. And all they’re 

asking for is, clearly, take the time. Do this right. 

 

But again we go back to a Sask Party government that doesn’t 

care once they’re there. They don’t listen to the people. Oh, 

they might say that. And we talk about dollars. And you know, I 

want to get into that in a little bit about the dollars that they’re 

spending. And the minister said there would be no money spent 

on this, but we see already . . . And I think my colleague has 

made it very clear, the critic for Labour has made it very clear 

that the cost, the money that’s being spent, I think there’s over 

$700,000 being spent and it could be more. 

 

Now if you’re going to put this kind of money into it, then why 

not do it right? Why not make sure at the end of the day, if 

you’re going to spend this money on this bill, why don’t you 

make sure that individuals feel like they’ve had the input, 

they’ve been consulted, that they’ve had their chance to be 

heard, and that they’ve had their ideas and their suggestions 

adopted by the government. Sometimes you can’t just say, oh 

we’ve heard you and walk away. Individuals want the changes 

too, when they come with ideas and improvements to 

legislation, when they come in improvement to the quality of 

life for working families in this province. 

 

So when I look at Bill 85, I want to make it very clear. We have 

a lot of concerns, but we have a lot of individuals saying, 

maybe it’s time to look at this legislation. But they are 

concerned about the dollars. And when you look at dollars right 

now and you see the ads being run, I think about $92,000, 

they’re running some ads telling people to be prepared — you 

know, the budget may not be as good, you know. But yet you 

see some of my colleagues and the questions we’ve been asking 

about the mismanagement of dollars, about the accountability, 

the people want to hold the government to account. These are 

the dollars that belong to individuals. They’re taxpayers. They 

work hard and they want to make sure at the end of the day the 

government of the day looks after — and the ministers — and is 

accountable for their dollars.  

 

And we see where the government is spending 700,000 here to 

look at this legislation and Bill 85. And I think some of those 



2564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

individuals are not . . . And I mean, some will be boisterous. 

Some will talk about it in the coffee shops and you hear some of 

the discussion. They’re listening. They’re paying attention. 

More and more, I think, individuals are paying attention to 

what’s going on and they are concerned about stuff coming out 

and the questions and about the accountability of the Sask Party 

government. And I’ve said this yesterday and I’m going to say 

it again, the people will one day hold this government to 

account for the actions you’ve done. 

 

And you know, you have individuals within the government 

and you have the backbenchers and you have individuals out 

there, they’ve got to go home and deal with this. They’ve got to 

sell what’s going on, and they’ve got to face the music. It’s 

your government. You’re on that side of it; you have to. You 

can’t just always be about the photo ops and all the great times. 

When times get tough, people look at the government and they 

want to hold the government to account for the challenges that 

they’re being faced. But when they find out that money’s being 

wasted and not taken care of when they’ve asked and they’ve 

given you that trust to look after their hard-earned dollars and 

you don’t respect that trust that they’ve given you, they will 

send you a message. Mark my words, they will send a message. 

 

So we look at the cost and we look at the spending. And you 

know, we’re not sure yet, too — with the piece of legislation 

that’s going on and the proposed changes — we’re not sure how 

northern Saskatchewan will be impacted. We have a mining 

industry. We have forestry — for what there is out there, there’s 

forestry. We have, you know, a lot of different areas where, you 

know, we have mining. And truly we have, probably the largest 

employer would be Cameco in northern Saskatchewan. And 

then we have gold mines. We have a lot of opportunity in 

northern Saskatchewan when it comes to the mines. 

 

So how will that impact and what changes will impact those 

workers? And what changes are coming ahead that the 

government’s going to ram without consulting those workers 

and those companies? The individuals who live in northern 

Saskatchewan, those individuals who live in the rest of this 

beautiful province who work in northern Saskatchewan in the 

mining industry and work at the gold mines, uranium mines, 

how are they? And you know, there’s so many of them — 

whether they work in the janitorial or the housekeeping, the 

kitchen, the catering area, whether it’s working in the actual 

mine working underground, working for one of the different 

companies — that are working in the area that have contracts 

with the mining industry with Cameco, Areva. 

 

When we see those individuals . . . And I don’t think . . . And 

that’s what we’re asking. They’re asking and they’ve made —

very clearly from my side — employees, they want to know. 

For those individuals that work for those companies, they want 

to make sure that their rights are going to be protected by this 

legislation. And yes, we have unions and then there are certain 

agreements, but not all of them are covered by union 

agreements. So there are challenges. What they have to go by is 

labour standards. They have to go by what legislation is passed 

to protect workers. So when we look at this type of a situation, 

people are very concerned, and what will impact them? How 

will this impact them?  

 

And I think the government has an obligation because it’s so 

huge, this bill. It could impact so many rights of working people 

of this province. I think the government doesn’t just . . . should 

do it. I think they have an obligation, and they owe the citizens 

of this province the due diligence to go through this legislation 

properly to take the time, have a well thought-out plan, make 

sure you’re going out and you’re talking with the individuals. 

Take the time. To rush this like we’re hearing, that is where 

alarm bells are ringing off about the push and the push and the 

rush and the rush. And I think that’s where we’re hearing 

individuals say — concern. 

 

So it’s about the middle class. They will be impacted, and 

they’re not sure exactly how they will. But when you start 

talking about some of the changes, I’m saying this to all 

individuals who work in this province: be paying attention. 

Send letters. Send emails. Phone your MLAs. Tell them, what 

are you guys doing with all these changes to legislation? 

 

We have taken years and years to develop, I guess, legislation 

— rules, regulations to protect workers, men and women. So 

I’m going to say to those individuals, make sure you get a hold 

of Sask Party MLAs. Make sure you send them emails on 

Facebook, any way you can message. Phone, letters, any way 

you can send the message to them to ask them to truly either 

explain it and how you’re going to be impacted, or to slow 

down and let that process happen to make sure that stakeholders 

are at the table explaining this. So I think that’s clear. I ask that, 

and I know there’s people listening. And I’m going to say that. 

And I know they’re trying to do what they can to get the 

attention of the Minister of Labour on this. But having said that, 

we will encourage that, to continue bringing that forward. 

 

Now I’ve talked about the lack of consultation, the lack of 

reaching out and getting information. We’ve talked about the 

rush. We’ve talked, you know, about how will the legislation 

impact northern Saskatchewan. And there’s many areas of 

northern Saskatchewan could be impacted, whether it’s 

individuals working in our hospitals, working at our . . . 

whether it’s on our highways, whether it’s individuals working 

with the fire services protection, whether it’s individuals 

working in any capacity with government, with any 

organization in northern Saskatchewan, whether it’s small 

business, whether it’s large business, whether it’s a 

mom-and-pop business, whether mom and dad own a business. 

And you know, you look at all those challenges. How will this 

impact companies? Is this going to make it better for them and 

their employees? Are some of the changes that the 

government’s going to introduce, are they going to affect the 

little, you know, the little jobs and the little companies? And 

you know, how will it impact the big companies? 

 

So there’s a lot of questions people have. And they’re asking 

clearly for the government to slow down. Let’s think this thing 

through. Like I mean, when I talk about it and you hear some of 

my colleagues talk about the time and the length that it has 

taken us to develop this legislation to protect our workers in our 

province, we have to be clear that that part of it has to happen 

and isn’t happening under this government. 

 

So when we look at their rush . . . Now I want to go back to 

some examples to this Bill 85. We’ve seen some of the 

legislation here before. Sometimes legislation comes before the 

legislature and this House, and we actually go through it and we 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2565 

have the debates. We have the discussions. But at the end of the 

day, we have sometimes co-operated and worked together to 

pass legislation on certain bills since I’ve been here, the short 

period of time I’ve been here. 

 

[14:45] 

 

We have worked together on, I guess, finding common ground 

and co-operating and finding answers and solutions to some of 

the problems of individuals in our province, and to some of the 

challenges people face. And sometimes it’s not easy; we have 

our differences as opposition and government. We understand 

that and I understand that. Individuals. 

 

Here’s a piece of legislation where I’m saying could we not 

slow down, work together, and find some answers? We’re not 

saying that, no we don’t have to review this legislation. We 

have to. We know that and I understand that. And sometimes 

I’ve said there are housekeeping items that need to be taken 

care of. But unfortunately some of these we don’t know how 

they will impact. 

 

And I don’t believe the government has truly thought this 

through. And I don’t think they realize how they will be 

impacted. Men and women that are working in this province are 

going to be impacted. Students, how they will be impacted. I 

don’t think they’ve thought this through. For some reason, 

they’re ramming it, ramming it. 

 

And when you get so many people saying, let’s slow down. 

Let’s talk about it; let’s make sure we understand how it will 

impact individuals. I don’t believe this government truly is 

taking that to heart. And I don’t think they’re hearing. And I 

don’t know why they’re ramming it down. And again, we’ve 

said this — why? Why the push, push, push? 

 

And those are the concerns. And my colleagues have talked 

about this bill, some of them for quite a length on some of the 

challenges that they’re facing and some of the concerns that the 

unions have raised — men and women out there, working hard 

trying to make ends meet. They’re worried about what’s going 

on. And when you tell them, well no, they’re reviewing that, 

some people are shocked because they don’t understand it. 

They say, well what are they doing? Why are they doing this? 

Well we don’t know. They’re pushing ahead on it for whatever 

reason. So people are starting to wake up, and they’re 

wondering what’s going on. 

 

So I’m hoping the government will slow down, put the brakes 

on. The minister will say, okay, maybe we’ve rushed this. But I 

know this government doesn’t like to admit it’s made a mistake. 

It doesn’t like to admit it has errors. It just wants to push ahead. 

It’s bullheaded. It wants to push ahead on it. We’re going to 

bulldoze this through, and we’re going to make sure that we 

push this legislation through. And that’s pretty sad when it 

impacts so many people in our province. 

 

And we know, we can talk about the film tax credit. You look 

what they did there. You look at the chamber and you look at 

all the different areas that came out and said it was wrong what 

this government was doing — wrong. Wrong, you’ve got it 

wrong. And there’s no way they would admit it. They did 

everything they could to put their head in the sand and say, 

we’re not going to admit it. We’re not going to see it. We’re 

going to look away. And that’s pretty sad when you have an 

industry and all the people that we’ve lost and have left. And I 

mean they did such a fine job in the film industry. You know, 

we heard of all the success and how much money was brought 

into this province. And now we see what’s happened. 

 

And here’s another situation where we have that: the 

government just will not listen. They will not listen to the 

people. I hope in 2015 when the next election comes on, the 

people of this province send a message to the government, you 

know. And it’s not a young government any more. They’ve 

been here for just about six years running things. I think people 

are going to start having a look at that. They’re not new any 

more. And some of the mistakes they’re making constantly, 

they are going to pay a price. And humble or not, I think the 

people will finally get the message, and they will speak. And 

once they’re frustrated . . . 

 

And I’ve said this before: it’s about trust. We are trusted, and 

we are asked to serve. And the people say, take care. We give 

you our trust. Take care. And as we’re all elected in here, the 

people put their trust and they put the trust in the government 

and in the 58 MLAs that you will take care of business. 

 

The official opposition has a role to do, and it has to be 

effective to bring the challenges that Saskatchewan people are 

facing. It shouldn’t have to always be that way, but 

unfortunately with this Sask Party government the opposition 

has to speak for the people because that government will not 

listen to the people. And that’s why you have to have an 

official, an effective opposition to raise the concerns, the 

challenges that people are facing out there. 

 

And you talk about a province that has so-called . . . Well they 

talk about all the different things that they want to sell, but 

when they take the assets out of our Crowns to balance off their 

so-called books and you see the way they attack anyone who 

puts up a fight forwards them, whether it’s our Provincial 

Auditor who is independent . . . So we see that. So I want to use 

that example to show this bill being rushed through, pushed 

through, Bill 85 being pushed through the way it is. 

 

We look at other examples of the way they conduct the business 

of the day and the way they’ve dealt with other legislation and 

the way they’ve pushed ahead. And when somebody does raise 

concerns to them and stands up to them, well they bully them. 

And there is many ways that they can bully. And we’ve seen 

that here in this House. We’ve seen that in the province. 

 

Bullies are bullies, and yet we pass legislation that protects 

from being bullied in schools. We talk about it. We say how 

important it is. But some people out there feel like that. They 

feel like they can’t raise their concerns to a government because 

they’re worried about what will come back onto them, whether 

they’re in business . . . 

 

So why is it that way? It’s wrong. The government needs to 

hear what the people have to say, and it shouldn’t be just 

insiders within the government that get to tell them whatever 

they want or special considerations. Here, this is what I want as 

an insider or a friend. Here’s what I would like. It shouldn’t be 

that way. It should make sure that everyone has a right to bring 



2566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

concerns to government. And this government has truly lost 

touch, has lost touch, has lost touch with a lot of working men 

and women of this province, clearly, the taxpayers. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, referring to Bill 85 and some 

of the challenges that we see coming forward, clearly there are a 

lot of concerns. And my colleagues have raised it, and I know 

there are other organizations, groups who have raised concerns 

about the rush job and about some of the money being spent on 

this project. And if they’re willing to spend this type of dollars 

on this project and on this legislation, then why don’t they do it 

right? Let’s get it right. Let’s not say later . . . 

 

And then, you know, I want to go back into this because I think 

it’s important. We talk about the challenges that will go before 

the courts because we know that for sure, for sure, some of this 

legislation, I think there has been rulings on it. And I think 

some of the legislation that the courts have ruled . . . And the 

government may have appealed that court ruling, and that’s 

fine. We’ll see where it goes at the end of the day and how the 

courts rule on it. 

 

I hope the courts will look at cases, and I think individuals will, 

whether it’s individuals, organizations, the unions, working 

men and women of this province that will challenge legislation. 

And maybe it goes before the courts. And if the courts already 

have ruled on the essential services legislation . . . The courts 

ruled on that. And how did the minister handle that? That’s 

going to be his file to deal with. So he knows this. 

 

So let’s get it right. Why waste money, hard-earned money? 

And when you want to spend 92,000 on ads to tell the people of 

the province to tighten up their belts and that, you know, they 

spend money on flooring — 22,000 on flooring. Why don’t we 

get it right? Let’s not waste hard-earned money that the 

government has in its coffer that’s been entrusted by going to 

court and having individuals challenge legislation. Let’s make 

sure we get it right. 

 

And I think people are saying that for a reason. Slow down. 

Take the time. Let’s get it right. Let’s make sure people agree 

with it so that we don’t have more money spent on fighting and 

back and forth on a decision that if government would have just 

slowed down, would have taken the time to consult with 

working men and women, with the middle class, with our 

unions, with business whether they’re small or big, with the 

industry, they could have had an opportunity. With the 

opposition, they could have worked through this thing very 

effectively. But unfortunately, who knows where this is going 

to go? Because we don’t know all the details, and I think my 

colleagues have made it very clear and you know, you know, 

the devil’s in the details. 

 

And I think some people are wondering. There’s so much being 

rammed down them and at one time and at such a short period 

of time. They’re asking one simple thing — slow down. Why 

do we have to push this bill so fast? Slow down. Let’s work 

through it. Let’s make sure that it’s right for the men and 

women of this province who are proud to work in this province 

and who do an excellent job. 

 

So when I talk about the issues that are facing our working men 

and women . . . and those protection. This legislation has been 

developed over years to protect rights. And they may not have 

all come out in certain time frames and period of time. It took 

years to develop the legislation to protect workers’ rights, 

whether it’s holidays, whether it’s working hours. There are a 

lot of pieces that will need to be discussed and have to be 

discussed, and it should be working men and women of this 

province that are the biggest individuals giving advice to 

government. They’re the ones that are being impacted, truly are 

going to be impacted at the end of the day. So we see the 

protection. 

 

There’s a lot of work to be done. There’s more work to be done, 

but again, I’m going to say this clearly — I’m asking the 

minister and the government, on behalf of the individuals that 

have raised concern and asked the official opposition the 

concerns we’ve had and our concerns about this, to slow down 

and take the time to do it right. Slow down and take the time to 

do it right. Consult stakeholders. Make sure you’ve got it right. 

And if you’ll do that, again, that’s all the people are asking a 

government to do. Take the time. Do it right. Don’t waste our 

dollars. We entrust you with that, and that is an honour to be 

entrusted with that. 

 

And I say this clearly to the members opposite. I said this 

earlier and I’ll say it again. They will, election time, they’ll do 

their review. And your record will come out and if you’ve done 

a good job, good for you. On behalf of the people, we’re 

supposed to work together in co-operation. I say that to you. We 

need to work together. But we have to do a better job of 

consulting, the way this government has not done with many 

different groups. And I think about the First Nations, the Métis. 

I think about citizens that are being impacted, individuals that 

are being impacted by legislation, and the way the government 

handles it. It doesn’t consult, it doesn’t talk with individuals. It 

doesn’t take input the way it should be. At one time it might 

have said we’re willing to do certain things but they haven’t 

done that. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues have a lot to 

say, and on this bill there’ll be more comments said. And at this 

time I’d be prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 85. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan Employment Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and speak about An Act respecting Information Services 

Corporation. This particular legislation relates to the Sask Party 

government’s desire to privatize what they see as one of the 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2567 

insignificant Crown corporations, to see what the public’s 

appetite is for sale of Crown corporations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House have many, 

many questions about this particular action. And they go right 

across the board from the historical important function of a land 

titles system within the Province of Saskatchewan, both in our 

history but also in our future, to all the questions that relate to 

corporate registry and the personal information that may be 

there in this particular corporation that’s being created or this is 

the way the legislation’s being dealt with. So effectively, let’s 

talk about what the legislation is first and then we’ll go into 

some of the questions that are here. 

 

The legislation itself is a bit curious because it has a preamble. 

And quite often legislation in Saskatchewan will not have a 

preamble because it’s clear in the Act itself what the legislation 

is all about. But the minister in charge of this particular 

legislation, and perhaps the Minister of Justice if he’s had a 

hand in this, have realized that the actual legislation itself is 

problematic. So let’s take a look at this preamble. It says, 

“Whereas it is desirable and in the public interest that voting 

shares of Information Services Corporation be offered for sale 

to members of the public.” 

 

[15:00] 

 

So they’re trying to say, well this is so obvious we’ll state it in 

the preamble. We have not heard any reason for this to be 

desirable and in the public interest, and so the initial premise in 

their very first paragraph in their preamble is one that most 

people in Saskatchewan would have a great deal of difficulty 

with. And so I want to remind the public that when the Sask 

Party states in the preamble, the first paragraph, that it’s 

desirable, it appears to be desirable to an agenda of the Premier 

and the Sask Party government on a bigger issue of 

privatization of Crown corporations. 

 

And I want to provide a few quotes from some of our illustrious 

members of this House. And I will go back a few years but I 

think it’s important that we take a look at this. We know that in 

The Outlook news, the member for Arm River-Watrous on 

February 17th, 2003 said that the Treasury Board Crowns 

would be sold off when the selling price would reap the best 

back for the buck. The member for Cypress Hills told The 

StarPhoenix on November 9, 2004 — this is about 

Saskatchewan transportation corporation — “If we could find a 

private sector bus operation that would undertake the passenger 

and freight service that is provided by STC, we would 

recommend that would happen.” 

 

The former member for Melfort, Mr. Rod Gantefoer, told the 

Leader-Post on April 4th, 1998, “They would privatize some 

Crown corporations.” He personally said that they would 

privatize STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] and 

SaskTel. The former member for Rosetown, Elwin Hermanson, 

he said on April 4th, 1999, “I definitely support the sale of 

STC,” and “I think there would be support to sell some more of 

the Crowns.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2008 the former minister responsible for 

Crowns wrote in ISC’s [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] annual report — this is now the present Minister 

of the Environment — he wrote in his ISC’s annual report that 

his priority was “to ensure that Saskatchewan’s Crown 

corporations remain publicly owned.” Then he goes on: “This is 

a promise our government made to the people of Saskatchewan, 

and it is a promise we will keep.” And we note that that was in 

2008, just after the provincial election of November 2007. 

 

We also go back into 2003 and we have our former member for 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, Brenda Bakken . . . Brenda Lackey, who 

told the Radville Star, September 10th, 2003, “The other 

80-some Crowns will be sold.” 

 

Now I raised this and I mentioned the comment made by the 

present Minister of Environment back in 2008 in the 

Information Services Corporation’s annual report, because the 

issue of the sale of the Crowns was clearly a point of contention 

in the upcoming election in the fall of 2007. And so the 

Premier, our present Premier at that time was the leader of the 

opposition, was asked by Mr. Mandryk and he said, would you 

be willing to support the sell-off of some aspects of Crown 

ownership? And the premier said then, no. And then he 

subsequently said, “We have said they’re not for sale, that they 

won’t be privatized, and that’s exactly what we mean.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they ran an election in 2007 on this particular 

issue. In 2011 they also made sure that they downplayed any 

discussion of this particular issue. And now in, you know, a 

couple years, well a year and a half later, they are starting this 

activity to see what the public tolerance is around selling off the 

Crowns, and they’re doing it in kind of a strange way. 

 

And so they put in their preamble that, according to them, “it is 

desirable and in the public interest that . . . shares . . . be offered 

for sale to members of the public.” So that’s that first paragraph 

in this preamble, and it’s directly a breach of the promise of the 

leader of the opposition — who’s now the Premier — prior to 

the 2007 election, and a breach of a promise as it relates to the 

2011 election. 

 

Now the next paragraph in this preamble says: 

 

And whereas it is desirable and in the public interest that 

the Government of Saskatchewan and Information 

Services Corporation enter into an agreement to allow 

Information Services Corporation to continue to act as the 

service provider for registry activities and functions of the 

Government of Saskatchewan in accordance with the 

following principles: 

 

And the first principle: 

 

(a) that the integrity of the registries and the rights and 

protections currently afforded the public, including the 

existing government assurance of land titles, will not be 

adversely affected by the sale of voting shares. 

 

So that’s the first paragraph, and I’d like to talk a little bit about 

that. 

 

While the integrity of the registries and the rights and 

protections that the public have come to expect are an 

absolutely crucial part of this province, we know from the 

information provided in lots of difference places — it’s the kind 



2568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

of thing you learn in some of your law classes in high school 

and in more detail when you go to law school — but ISC, what 

we’re talking about here as it relates to land titles, is an 

organization that has been built on a long heritage of protecting 

the rights of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we know that virtually everything that we have developed 

as newcomers to this land and basically as the immigrants 

coming onto First Nations land as treaty people, as people who 

are welcomed because we respect the treaties, much of that is 

protected and preserved in the land registry system that we 

have. 

 

And so what we know is that in the late 1800s the Dominion 

Land Survey was put into place as the railways came across and 

opened up land on the prairies. And we ended up having a long 

heritage . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member from 

Indian Head, the minister who I think has got some 

responsibility for carriage of this legislation, is yelling from his 

seat about how this kind of long-term history and concern of the 

province is going to be protected. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

hear him say that in very detailed explanations of what the 

government is going to do, what the government is going to do 

to make sure that the rights of the Saskatchewan people are 

protected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we get flim-flam. We get sales kinds of 

things. We get all kinds of things. But the whole purpose of 

Crowns is to protect the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, our job as the opposition is to make sure that the 

yellers and the bullies that we see across the way are put to 

account to make sure that all of the things that they are doing 

are done in a fashion which protects the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And unfortunately, as a long-time member of this legislature, I 

have grave concerns about the interests of the Premier in this 

legislation, in the interests of that minister, and that’s what I 

have the right to talk about in here. Now what I don’t appreciate 

is when a member tries to quell my arguments by yelling at me. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s totally inappropriate and I want 

to continue to talk about this. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Currently the Leader of the 

Opposition is on his feet debating this bill. Other members will 

have an opportunity to enter into the debate if they so wish. But 

this House is a House for debate, and I recognize the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — So, Mr. Speaker, what we have is legislation 

that builds on the long tradition of the opening up of the West, 

is one term that’s used. You look at the historians about how 

land was developed. And so what we have here in 

Saskatchewan is a place where our ancestors came from all over 

the world to join the First Nations people who were already 

here, to basically start farming or start businesses and do 

various things. 

 

Now one of the precursors or the prerequisites of going and 

investing money and time and years and decades of our 

family’s history was that you would have security of title, that 

you would have the security of title in that property. And one of 

the great characteristics of the opening of the West in Canada 

was that that security of title was provided by the government. 

 

Now we all know that the government in Saskatchewan at the 

time that our land title system was put into place, around some 

of the initial surveys, was run out of the little stone building 

over on Dewdney Avenue. And that place basically controlled 

the North-West Territories, which included northern Quebec, 

northern Ontario, all the way up to the Arctic Ocean and to 

Alaska. And those people had the foresight to look around the 

world and find the best system possible to make sure that 

security of title could be dealt with in a straightforward fashion. 

 

Not a lot of people in Saskatchewan or Western Canada know 

that the old methods of transferring title or dealing with title 

were built on rituals around how you exchanged money for title. 

And I mean some of them are quite interesting, things like if 

you wanted to buy a particular piece of land, you would go to 

the person who said they own it. They’d look at all of the 

information that they had in their possession because it was 

their deeds and titles. You’d walk around the boundary of the 

land and one of the . . . Sometimes they would pick up a sack of 

dirt from the land and hand it to you as a symbol that this is 

what we were doing. Often then you would get a deed signed by 

them saying, yes, I assure you that I have title to this land. I’m 

transferring it to you and I am giving it to you. 

 

What happened in Saskatchewan is we adopted a system that 

had been developed in South Australia by Mr. Torrens which 

said the registry is the guarantee of your title, not that your title 

is registered. And it’s important to note that distinction, because 

what it meant then was you could be given a number or a 

description which we all . . . People who’ve lived in 

Saskatchewan a long time know, you know, the northeast 

quarter of section 3 township and range. All of those kinds of 

numbers are crucial. But what it meant was, it referred back to 

the land registry which is the subject of our legislation now. 

And that land registry was guaranteed to all of the people as 

being run by the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the preamble of this particular bill sets out, in a clear 

fashion, that that’s the goal — to maintain that integrity. But it’s 

one where all of a sudden we don’t know where that registry 

might be or who’s going to own that registry. There’s some, 

some . . . And so there’s questions. And that’s why I’m 

discussing or raising these issues about the history of how our 

land has been developed. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now what we know is that the federal government, who was 

responsible for the North-West Territories, hired great teams of 

surveyors to come out and survey the land. And they started just 

west of Winnipeg because they figured everything west of that 

first or prime meridian just west of Winnipeg was unoccupied 

land. Now that’s not accurate, because clearly it was treaty land 

and there were First Nations people who were living in various 

parts of it. 

 

But there were vast tracts of land that were . . . where it would 

be possible to use that for agriculture. And so then these survey 

teams went out, and using the Torrens method, which had also 

been used south of the border in the States, set out our present 

system that we have, which basically provides four things. 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2569 

Conclusive evidence of ownership, so in other words, the 

government’s going to guarantee your title based on the 

description. It also guarantees that there’ll be a simple way to 

transfer ownership if you want to sell this asset that you’ve 

acquired. For many of the new people who moved to the West, 

this was an adventure. They weren’t certain whether this was 

the kind of place or the kind of opportunity that they wanted, so 

they wanted to know that if they invested time and effort in 

homesteading — which took a lot of effort — that they could, 

once they got title, transfer that to somebody else. And then 

basically be repaid for the years of work that they’d spent trying 

to prove up the homestead. So the facility transfer, the 

guarantee or the ability to transfer was absolutely important. 

 

There was also part of this system which said every title, every 

piece of land needed to be registered. And that also then meant 

that there weren’t all the side deals or you couldn’t . . . You 

knew that if somebody was coming to you under the old method 

of showing you the deeds and doing all that kind of system like 

they still had in Ontario or other parts of Canada, you knew that 

something was wrong because they weren’t following the rules 

that were under this new land titles system. 

 

And then the final important part of this was that there was an 

assurance fund. And effectively I don’t think it had any money 

in it, but it was a guarantee that the province, or before that the 

Territory, the federal government would compensate you if in 

some way there was an error in the system. Now we know for 

130 years of history around the assurance fund that there 

weren’t that many errors that occurred that required 

compensation, and that’s, I think, still the case because people 

were careful in how they did this. 

 

So you had a system that would encourage settlers to come to 

the West and settle on this land. You assured them that there 

was a system, and this was a new, modern system brought in 

from Australia and then spread around the world, and it gave 

you the ability to work hard, buy land, or prove up your 

homestead or your land. And then if something happened and 

you had to get out, you could have a way to transfer it on to 

somebody else. And so we had this system of providing that. 

And so what this particular legislation then has done is built on 

that long history and that long part of the trust as it relates to the 

land titles system. 

 

Now when the surveys were completed on the prairies, we 

know that they used the best technology that they had available 

at the time. And a lot of the first surveys were done, people on 

horses, and they carried the chains around and they measured. 

And anybody who’s had farm land in Saskatchewan knows that 

when they started doing the digital maps from the satellites and 

looked at the fencelines and looked at other boundaries and 

property that there were some discrepancies that those old 

systems had, but there’s an agreement or there’s a method of 

dealing with those discrepancies within the system that we 

have. And nowadays, as I say, the satellite imaging and others, 

GPS [global positioning system] systems, have just changed the 

whole world. 

 

So what happened . . . And the reason I think that I could 

probably speak on this one for a few days if necessary is that 

when I became the minister of Justice and Attorney General in 

1995, this was a challenge that was there for us because we had 

a huge paper-based system that was very accurate because of 

the diligence of the employees within the system in the offices 

spread across the province. And it was complemented with the 

legal survey, the surveyor’s office. So you had the land titles 

and the surveyor’s offices that checked everything that every 

lawyer did, or if individuals might have dealt with their own 

land that they did, so that there were very few errors following 

that old system. But it was very cumbersome, and it took lots of 

time and there was delay. 

 

And so in 1995, we started a land project which the goal was to 

spend some time effectively automating the whole land titles 

system. The acronym was LAND, L-A-N-D, and it was Land 

Titles Automated Network Development. And it was exciting in 

some ways, but also we knew that there was a challenge 

because there were so many hundreds of thousands of 

documents that needed to be put into a format that could be part 

of a digital system, and over the years, the work was done to get 

that process in place. It wasn’t totally completed in 2000 when 

the Information Services Corporation was created to 

specifically deal with land titles issues, but the goal at that point 

was that the conversion, as we called it, the transfer of the paper 

documents into electronic form would continue and that there 

would also be a whole effort to look at the old processes, which 

we just automated, and see whether there could be some other 

ways to do things. 

 

In that time, there were lots of difficulties. I don’t think there’s 

any question about that. But there was some very good advice 

given from the legal profession, from the surveyors, from 

people who use the system. The realtors were very much 

watching this. And after, you know, a few years, this system 

became better at doing what it did, which was to provide the 

security for title, and the speed of doing it was increased 

dramatically. 

 

And now I don’t think there are complaints about how long it 

takes in the transfer of title. I don’t think there are complaints 

about the fact that you can look and review Saskatchewan 

transactions from anywhere in the world where you have access 

to a computer. And that’s made a big difference for businesses 

that are located in the province but also ones from outside of the 

province. 

 

So there’s a whole legacy of important activity that relates to 

the security of title for Saskatchewan people, and I would say 

maybe in even a grander way for security of title for those 

people who are involved with resource extraction whether it’s 

oil and gas or mining or whatever. 

 

Now I know when I started practising law in Saskatchewan in 

1978, that one of the more interesting but also more challenging 

jobs was to provide opinions on title. And the number one 

group that wanted opinions on titles were the banks that were 

lending monies to pipeline companies because they said it quite 

simply, if we lend money to build a pipeline that’s 300 or 500 

miles — it goes right across Saskatchewan — we don’t want to 

find out that that money that we’ve lent to that company, that 

they haven’t done their proper work and in fact don’t have the 

right to put the pipeline through one lot or one quarter on the 

300 miles because a pipeline’s useless if it’s stopped 

somewhere in the middle. 

 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

And so we would spend a lot of time going through the records 

right back to the original field notes sometimes to make sure 

that the titles were all appropriate. Now you would keep doing 

that, and you develop methods. But a lot of younger lawyers 

would end up in places in land titles offices across the province 

as they were at that point. I know in the ’40s and ’50s, with the 

initial oil boom, that many young lawyers spent months in the 

Arcola Court House. 

 

And so what we have, Mr. Speaker, in this legislation is this 

accumulation of information and historical tradition but also 

trust. It’s trust around how this system works. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when in the preamble to this legislation — which, as I 

said before, is a bit unusual — they have to try to go and talk 

about these things as it relates to these protections that we 

already know that we have, they know, they know that people 

are concerned that they are selling off a part of something 

which is important to Saskatchewan people, that we want 

control of it here in Saskatchewan. And so what we know is that 

they have this concern that we will continue to ask about. 

 

And that’s why I’m spending some time talking about this. 

Because I don’t know if all of the members opposite totally 

understand what the minister and the Premier are up to with this 

particular legislation. 

 

Because then when you go to . . . They want to set out all of 

these things. Now it says in the preamble “that the Government 

of Saskatchewan will continue to own all information, records 

and other data now or hereafter stored in the registries.” 

 

Now where will these registries be located? Now I’m not sure 

that . . . Like what if this information for commercial purposes 

is stored in North Dakota or in India or some other part of the 

world? What effect is this law or this preamble going to have on 

the concern that we have about where this information is? This 

is a question that needs some better answers than what we have 

here. 

 

And what they also knew . . . Because what happened when the 

Information Services Corporation got the electronic information 

from land titles mostly done in the sense of the conversion, it 

also then went around and looked at other things that the 

governments were responsible for. That included lots of 

documents that were, some of them, quite old. And so the 

conversions took place in some other areas, which are things 

like corporate registries, things like personal property security 

registries, other registries like that. And those now, since 2001 

when the ISC was created, have become more and more a part 

of this information company. 

 

But the planned rollover of information from vital statistics has 

gone over now from the Department of Health to this Crown 

corporation. In the preamble they say is, well we know that 

you’re worried about that private information, so we’re going to 

roll it back again, even though when we rolled it forward, rolled 

it the other way, we did it because we thought it made most 

sense for the public of Saskatchewan and that it was an efficient 

way to manage that information. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now I think the most efficient way to manage all of the 

information that is of concern to Saskatchewan people is to 

withdraw this bill and keep ISC as a corporation owned by the 

citizens of Saskatchewan through the provincial government. 

And these particular items that they put in their preamble are 

the ones that they know are the places where people have 

concern. And so what’s happened is that in the preamble, which 

I say is an unusual kind of a tactic to use in legislation, they are 

attempting to I guess use their normal sort of public relations 

kind of spin to start it off and say, well, oh don’t worry. This is 

all going to be okay because this is our understanding of how 

this is going to work. And so, Mr. Speaker, it raises the 

question, well what’s actually in the legislation? 

 

Now what happens in initial public offerings in companies, 

which is what we have here, is quite a number of different 

things. But one of the important parts about going to the public 

and asking them to invest money in your company is to assure 

them that they’re actually buying something or a share in 

something that will mean that you get the full value of what 

you’re buying. So when this proposal came out, it had this 40 

per cent or whatever, I think it’s 40 per cent overhang or share 

by the government on this initial round of selling this. 

 

Now this is very similar to the way that the Devine government 

privatized companies in the late ’80s. And I think if you go and 

look at how they went ahead with some of those sales, they 

ended up selling lots of shares to the Saskatchewan people who 

had the money to buy the shares, and they did it by keeping a 

share in the provincial government. Now I don’t know if it was 

quite 40 per cent. It would depend on which sale it was. But 

eventually the advice would come to the provincial government 

that that share, whether it’s 10 per cent or 25 per cent or 40 per 

cent, is an overhang on the market. It’s a cloud on the value of 

these shares. Well, Mr. Speaker, if it’s a cloud on the value of 

those shares after they’ve been issued, it’s a cloud on the value 

of the shares when they’re sold in the first place. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that goes right to the heart of the question 

of, if you’re going to sell a public asset, why would you sell it 

in a way that you’d get less than what it’s worth when you sell 

it?  

 

An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you sell 100 per cent. Is that 

what you want, John? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite, the member from Indian Head who has a lot of 

interest in this situation said, you should sell 100 per cent. Well 

that’s exactly the point. If you’re going to sell off something 

then what you do is you sell the full thing because then you’re 

going to get full value for it. But you don’t sell it off in a way 

that is conditional. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am fundamentally opposed to this sale for 

all of the reasons I’ve been talking about because of the fact that 

this information in this corporation and the services that it 

provides are one of the key parts of the province of 

Saskatchewan’s responsibility to the people of this province. It 

goes right to the heart of how the economy is supported. It goes 

right to the heart of how the people are willing to invest their 

time and their years and their effort into acquiring property in 

this province. And it goes right to the heart of who we are as 

Saskatchewan people. 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

And, Mr. Speaker, for what appear to be crass, political, and 

maybe sneaky policies by that minister and by that Premier, 

they are trying to test the waters around privatizing something 

that people don’t totally understand. But, Mr. Speaker, on this 

side of the House we understand what they’re doing. We 

understand the importance of this for the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we’re going to continue to ask questions. 

We’re going to continue to raise the concerns of the public 

about this particular legislation. 

 

Now there’s a point made by the minister and by the Premier, 

well this company can’t really go and sell its services at other 

places because it’s a Saskatchewan Crown corporation. Well we 

do it with SGI. SGI provides services. SGI Canada provides 

services across the country. SaskPower has partnerships 

working in other provinces on some of its projects. And we 

know from looking around the world that Crown corporations 

or state-owned corporations from all over the world like to 

come to Saskatchewan, like to come to Western Canada and 

participate in our economy because we have rules. We have 

local control of things like land titles and the things that make 

sure that it’s a secure, good place to make investments. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, some of the arguments that the members 

opposite have used, as it relates to the necessity of doing this for 

trying to sell this product other places, really beg the question: 

do they have some kind of a sale somewhere? I know, as a 

minister when we initially set this up, we weren’t certain what 

other provinces were going ahead with something similar to 

this. But we thought, well there may be some places that would 

be interested in this kind of information and using that. But 

when we looked over the years, we knew that every jurisdiction 

had some of its own issues that had to be dealt with locally. But 

we also knew that most smart jurisdictions, smart governments 

didn’t want to lose the control of this type of information and 

this type of service provided to their people. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we know right now, for example, that the 

federal government is working in the Ukraine, taking Canadian 

information and helping them set up a secure land titles system 

in their country to allow for appropriate local investment and 

also international investment. That’s something that our federal 

government is doing together with people who are involved in 

this type of business. I don’t think our ISC is involved in that 

project, but I know other provinces’ land title systems and the 

systems of geographical information are working on that kind 

of thing. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there are quite a number of gaps in the 

information, and that’s why we have this preamble which tries 

to gloss over all that stuff and say, oh don’t you worry. Don’t 

you worry about these things because you can trust us. We 

know what we’re doing. Well unfortunately we don’t know 

what they’re doing. We don’t trust their PR [public relations]. 

We don’t trust their press releases, and we’re having difficulty 

with their legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that our job in 

this legislature, both on the government side, in the government 

caucus and on the opposition side, is to ask questions of the 

executive — and in this case it’s the Premier and the minister in 

charge of this — about what they’re doing, why they’re doing 

it. And they need to be transparent; they need to tell the public 

what they’re doing. 

 

I don’t think what they’re doing here is in the long-term 

interests of our province. I think it’s short-sighted thinking. I 

think it’s so clouded up in their political sense of the last three 

elections. I think it’s the 2003 election that really clouds their 

judgment on this particular one because they were so convinced 

— and especially that member from Indian Head — that they 

were going to win that election and it didn’t happen. And so 

there were another four years where he developed his yelling 

skills which he’s used here this afternoon. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we need to do here in this particular 

case is to make sure that the interests of Saskatchewan people 

are protected, and it’s the interests of all of the residents of 

Saskatchewan. It’s not just homeowners. It’s not just farmers. 

It’s the interests of everybody who has a job in Saskatchewan 

because you don’t want to have something where further 

control of our space, our province, has been transferred off to 

some other part of Canada or the world. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

arguments made by the government, by the Premier, and by the 

minister as it relates to this particular legislation are suspect. 

They’re more on the line of trying to sell something. And they 

started right off with the slick brochure preamble on the front of 

it, and we’re going to be asking questions about how this 

legislation works. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned that there doesn’t appear to 

be the right reason for passing this legislation. It appears to me, 

as I said when I started, that this is an attempt to sell something 

off that’s crucial for Saskatchewan people but do it in a way 

that they’re lulled into thinking that it doesn’t matter to them. 

And nothing could be further from the truth. So at this point, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to adjourn debate on this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 69, The Information 

Services Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 48 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m glad to rise this afternoon to join in debate on Bill No. 48, 

An Act to amend The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act. 

 

Now this one’s pretty interesting, Mr. Speaker, because of 

course there’s a bit of recycling in here, which I guess is 

thematically appropriate. You know, cue the recycling joke in 

the environmental file bill. But it’s also interesting for what is 

not contained here or what has happened in the file generally, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

Now in terms of what the Act itself is calling for, bringing 

Saskatchewan legislation in line with what is put out by the feds 

and making sure that, for example, in the new provision 

62.1(1): 

 

In order to enter into an equivalency agreement, the 

Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA) 

requires a citizen’s investigation power to exist in 

provincial legislation as a legal requirement. The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

does not currently include such provisions. This 

amendment allows any Saskatchewan resident over the 

age of 18 to apply for an investigation into a matter they 

believe to have been a contravention against The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act, its 

related regulations, or the Environmental Code. 

 

And you know, lest it be said that I’m always critical and 

negative, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I actually think this is a good 

proposal in the midst of a broader piece of legislation. But 

again, it’s been demanded by the federal government to come 

into compliance in this particular sector of the regulatory 

regime when it comes to the environment. But again, having 

that ability for citizens to initiate investigations for matters 

where there’s a believed or perceived to have been a 

contravention of the Act itself, I think it is actually an 

enrichment. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I think on the face of it, 

it’s a good thing to see, so much depends on not just the 

legislation, but the regulation as well that is brought into place. 

So is this in fact just a light in the window or is it, will it be 

accessible and meaningful, and will citizens be able to avail 

themselves of these opportunities? It of course remains to be 

seen. 

 

And again one of the frustrations we have, Mr. Speaker, is 

oftentimes what is brought forward as legislation is pretty much 

the tip of the iceberg. And whether or not that iceberg is a 

slender icicle underneath the water’s surface or a more 

substantial thing depends on the regulations. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So how people are able to avail themselves with this power 

remains to be seen. But if it’s . . . You know, it sounds pretty 

good in the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again, I think 

this is actually a positive thing in terms of federal-provincial 

co-operation, and glad to see it in the package. But again, does 

the overall package fit the bill? 

 

I guess the next amendments, in terms of what’s being put 

forward in the legislation itself, the new provision 62.1(2), the 

explanation states: 

 

This amendment is necessary because it contains what 

information should be contained in the application for an 

investigation. The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act requires this provision so that 

information can be gathered about the alleged offence for 

investigation purposes. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, bringing forward the terms under 

which applicants might engage in this legislation, and again 

we’ll see how this works out around regulations. We’ll see how 

this works out in terms of actual uptake. We’ll see how this 

works out in the regime that’s currently in place. Again working 

through what is put forward by the ministry around the 

legislation, further sort of technical details around the citizen 

investigation aspect — and again, you know, all seemingly 

reasonable propositions that it remains to be seen how they’ll be 

taken up and utilized, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the proof of 

course is in the pudding. 

 

But again on some of these things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 

about as well taking it from the source and not just the current 

legislation in front of us, which I would submit is not exactly 

earth-shattering or going to shake Mother Earth too 

significantly. You know, it seems to be reasonable in terms of 

greater opportunity for citizens to hold government to account. 

But taking these things from the source, when it comes to the 

environment — and I say this full well aware and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you as a former Environment critic for the then official 

opposition would be well aware of the imperfection on the 

records of the government of the day which I was part of and 

proud to be part of, imperfections and all, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

— there were some things I think that we as government got 

right, and I think there’s some things that we needed to do a 

better job of. 

 

And one of the challenges I know that preoccupied much of the 

last decade and continues to in a certain vein to this day, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the whole file of climate change and what 

Saskatchewan is doing to manage greenhouse gas emissions 

and what is our role both on a national and international basis 

and how that all comes together. Certainly this is, we’re told, 

some of the Premier’s, some of his talking points down in 

Washington as he goes to make the ethical oil case for 

Saskatchewan. And we’ll see how that works out. And there are 

some things that are not bad to make the case for, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And certainly the Premier’s a fairly forceful, eloquent 

communicator, and I’m sure he’s doing his best there to make 

the case. 

 

But there are some other things in terms of our record and in 

terms of what’s happened in the province of Saskatchewan that 

are less than conducive to a great sell job when it comes to 

Saskatchewan as a green champion. And certainly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I remember well the 2007 election. I certainly 

remember sharing a platform with the Sask Party 

representatives at the University of Regina, and the Sask Party 

platform at the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was, you know, the 

emission reduction targets set by the NDP, you know, we’re on 

board for those. The climate change fund that has been secured 

to the tune of $300 million, we’re in favour of that as well. And, 

you know, it’s interesting to see how things are campaigned on, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then how they translate after the 

campaign is over and after a government takes charge. 

 

So the emission targets that had been signed on to by the 

members opposite and by the then new government of course 

were not met and were revised downward, downward, and 

downward. And there were games played with, you know, 

problem solving through redefinition, trying to juke the stats as 

they might say in The Wire, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But in terms 

of real action, in terms of climate change reduction, not so 



March 6, 2013 Saskatchewan Hansard 2573 

much. And when it came to the climate change fund and with 

$300 million that were in the climate change fund . . . And I 

hear my colleague from Saskatoon Silver Springs, the current 

Minister for the Environment across the way. And it’s difficult 

not to hear him, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because he’s usually got 

one, one level on the volume there, but I’m hearing him nice 

and clear. But you know, he’s an honourable person in his 

place, and I’m sure he would own up to the fact that the 

campaign in 2007 by the Sask Party said one thing and then 

after they got elected did another. 

 

And in terms of signing on to the climate change fund and 

saying that that was something they’d carry forward with, you 

know, it’s . . . I know they said a lot of things on the campaign 

trail, Mr. Speaker, but I was there at the University of Regina 

debating one of that member’s colleagues when that person said 

that, yes, this is something we’re in favour of, because of course 

it was a university audience. And maybe that member was 

reflecting a tendency on the part of the Sask Party to try and tell 

people what they wanted to hear or what they thought they 

wanted to hear. 

 

And in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it reminds me as well 

of a talk I heard from a then Conservative strategist, a fellow by 

the name Tom Flanagan, for the Johnson-Shoyama School of 

Public Policy, talking about the 2006 campaign on the part of 

the Harper Conservatives. And he said, you know, is there any 

press in the room, when it came to a question about the 

environment. And of course there wasn’t. And the member 

from Cypress Hills was there at the same time as well listening 

to this lecture. And what the member, what Mr. Flanagan had to 

say at the time was, you know, when it came to the environment 

we knew that we just really needed a light in the window. We 

needed to have something to say but, you know, did we really 

mean it? Well not so much. And I guess we see that being 

played out on the federal stage in terms of the different 

gyrations that have gone on federally in terms of, you know, do 

they even think climate change is a real problem? And you 

know, there are days where it would be an interesting question 

to ask every member of this place, whether or not they think 

that’s a real concern or if it’s something that’s just a myth or 

what the climate change deniers would like us to believe. 

 

But Flanagan said in that seminar at the Johnson-Shoyama 

School of Public Policy that the Conservatives needed to have 

something, a light in the window. They needed to have 

something to say. They didn’t necessarily need to mean it all 

that much. And you know, there was lots of snickering and 

tittering about that. But when he was saying that, Mr. Speaker, 

it was after the 2007 election. And for me that certainly 

resonated with the experience I had had debating one of the 

members opposite in terms of the Sask Party plan when it came 

to the environment. 

 

And they said, when they talked about climate change 

reduction, they’re like yes, us. When it came to the climate 

change fund, they’re like, you know, sign us up. And it didn’t 

take very long after the election for that to go by the wayside, 

Mr. Speaker, for the $300 million fund to be chopped down to 

30 million, and then for that $30 million fund to — you know, 

in the branding of Go Green and all this — to eventually be 

gone and to be eliminated from the government program 

offerings altogether. 

So that’s one part of the record of the members opposite when it 

comes to bringing forward the measures such as the one we’re 

debating today. Again this is largely in response to the federal 

regulatory regime to get in compliance. And the specific 

measure in this legislation, again I would submit, is not bad. 

But it’s, you know, you’ve got a not bad measure alongside a 

record of inaction and confusion, and it’s a lot of bafflegab and 

double-talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so what’s a voting legislator 

to do? 

 

One thing that is interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we will 

see how this plays out down the line, is the work that has been 

done on carbon capture and sequestration. And again I agree 

with the proposition that if this technology can be seized and 

harnessed for particularly a place like Saskatchewan with, you 

know, hundreds of years of lignite on hand in terms of supply, 

if you can take the emissions out of the equation when it comes 

to burning coal for producing energy, it certainly, you know, 

there’s certainly a benefit to be had there. And again if you can 

use the CO2 that is gathered from the process in terms of 

enhanced oil recovery, that’s again I think a benefit that bears 

study. 

 

And we watch with great interest what happens with SaskPower 

and the project down at Boundary, Mr. Speaker. And we’re also 

quite aware that, you know, this hasn’t been a straight line, but 

there certainly was an NDP government in power when . . . and 

worked as a helpful partner, I think, at the time in terms of the 

work that was done in the Apache field around Midale and the 

sort of pioneering work that was done around carbon capture 

and sequestration and again, as I’ve said, with the enhanced oil 

recovery. 

 

These are some of the things that we look to, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but we also register with concern the inaction when it 

comes to emissions reduction. We come to it with concern 

when we see what should be really interesting projects, 

particularly on the power generation side of things. What’s 

happening with First Nations and the First Nations power 

generation authority? Again that could be a really positive 

project. And we welcome announcements like the one that was 

made with the folks up at Fond-du-Lac — again a neck of the 

woods that I know you’re familiar with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

around Elizabeth Falls — and using smaller scale hydro to 

generate power. 

 

But you know, again, you see something like that be announced 

and the kind of hopefulness that that entails, not just for a 

cleaner, greener way of producing energy but for engaging First 

Nations people in the economy. You see something like the 

Elizabeth Falls project, and you weigh that up alongside what’s 

happening on James Smith. And of course the James Smith 

project was signed with much fanfare and ballyhoo here in this 

legislature. And what has become of the project with James 

Smith, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

And again the same sort of promise and hope of engaging First 

Nations in the economy and in power generation for a cleaner, 

greener form of hydro energy. Again you know, notionally, on 

the ideas of these things, on the principles of these things, these, 

they’re very exciting and very interesting and very hopeful. But 

it’s on the follow-through, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have 

our questions. And again for every announcement that is made, 



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2013 

it’s a debt unpaid, to crib Robert Service, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And we see the debts racking up over on the other side of the 

legislature, in terms of again the things that sound great coming 

out of the gates. But it doesn’t take too long to think, you know, 

well whatever the heck happened to that? 

 

So again the particulars of this piece of legislation, you know, 

good, bad, or indifferent — we could debate the merits of them 

— but there’s always a context to these things, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and the context doesn’t say a lot of great things about 

the record of this government when it comes to the 

environment. 

 

And I know that other of my colleagues have participated in this 

debate. I think I’ve got a few to go on this, but I’m sure they 

will have more to say on these matters. But with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

48, An Act to amend The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 48, 

The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the attendance by members of the farewell celebration 

for the Leader of the Opposition who will be vacating that 

position after this weekend, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2553 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2553 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2553 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2554 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2554 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2554 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2554 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2554 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2554 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2555 

 La Ronge Elder Receives Diamond Jubilee Medal 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2555 

 Rural Women’s Month 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2555 

 Roughriders and Red Cross Anti-Bullying Campaign 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2555 

 Students Learn About Life in Politics 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2556 

 Loreburn Rink Wins Grand Prize 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2556 

 Agriculture Literacy Week 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2556 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Release of Information Regarding IPAC-CO2 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2556 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2557 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2557 

 Repairs to School Infrastructure 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2558 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2558 

 Progress of Labour Bill 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2558 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2558 

 Financial Management and Reporting 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2559 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2560 

 Community Pastures 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2560 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2560 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2561 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2566 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2571 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


